Global Critical Minerals 
Outlook 2024


The IEA examines the full spectrum of energy 
issues including oil, gas and coal supply and 
demand, renewable energy technologies, 
electricity markets, energy efficiency, access to 
energy, demand side management and much 
more. Through its work, the IEA advocates 
policies that will enhance the reliability, 
affordability and sustainability of energy in its 31 
member countries, 13 association countries and 
beyond. 
This publication and any map included herein are 
without prejudice to the status of or sovereignty 
over any territory, to the delimitation of 
international frontiers and boundaries and to the 
name of any territory, city or area.
Source: IEA. 
International Energy Agency 
Website: www.iea.org 
IEA member countries: 
Australia 
Austria 
Belgium 
Canada 
Czech Republic  
Denmark  
Estonia 
Finland  
France  
Germany  
Greece  
Hungary  
Ireland  
Italy  
Japan  
Korea 
Lithuania
Luxembourg  
Mexico  
Netherlands  
New Zealand  
Norway  
Poland  
Portugal 
Slovak Republic  
INTERNATIONAL ENERGY AGENCY 
Spain 
Sweden  
Switzerland  
Republic of Türkiye
United Kingdom 
United States 
The European Commission 
also participates in the work 
of the IEA
IEA association countries: 
Argentina
Brazil
China
Egypt
India
Indonesia
Kenya
Morocco
Senegal
Singapore
South Africa
Thailand
Ukraine


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
PAGE | 3  
Abstract 
Abstract
Critical minerals, which are essential for a range of clean energy 
technologies, have risen up the policy agenda in recent years due to 
increasing demand, volatile price movements, supply chain 
bottlenecks and geopolitical concerns. The dynamic nature of the 
market necessitates greater transparency and reliable information to 
facilitate informed decision-making, as underscored by the request 
from Group of Seven (G7) ministers for the IEA to produce medium- 
and long-term outlooks for critical minerals. 
The Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 follows the IEA’s inaugural 
review of the market last year. It provides a snapshot of industry 
developments in 2023 and early 2024 and offers medium- and long-
term outlooks for the demand and supply of key energy transition 
minerals based on the latest technology and policy trends. 
The report also assesses key risks to the reliability, sustainability and 
diversity of critical mineral supply chains and analyses the 
consequences for policy and industry stakeholders. It will be 
accompanied by an updated version of the Critical Minerals Data 
Explorer, an interactive online tool that allows users to explore the 
latest IEA projections. 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 4  
Table of contents 
Table of contents 
Executive summary 
........................................................................................ 
5 
Introduction................................................................................................... 
11 
Market review 
............................................................................................... 
16 
Clean energy deployment trends ............................................................. 
17 
Market trends for critical minerals ............................................................ 
34 
Short-term market developments for key energy transition minerals 
....... 
45 
Investment trends 
..................................................................................... 
54 
Latest policy developments ...................................................................... 
67 
ESG performance tracking ....................................................................... 
74 
Demand and supply outlook for key materials 
............................................. 
80 
Mineral demand for clean energy technologies ....................................... 
83 
Overview of the projections for key energy transition minerals 
................ 
95 
Outlook for copper 
.................................................................................. 
107 
Outlook for lithium................................................................................... 
124 
Outlook for nickel 
.................................................................................... 
136 
Outlook for cobalt ................................................................................... 
154 
Outlook for graphite 
................................................................................ 
167 
Outlook for rare earth elements 
.............................................................. 
177 
Brief review of other key materials ......................................................... 
193 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Clean energy transition risk assessments 
..................................................202 
Implications 
.................................................................................................222 
Investment in diversified supply 
............................................................. 224 
Recycling, innovation, and behavioural change .................................... 233 
Market transparency .............................................................................. 243 
Sustainable and responsible supplies ................................................... 250 
Annex .........................................................................................................253 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 5  
Executive summary 
Executive summary 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 6  
Executive summary 
Executive summary
Fast-growing critical minerals markets remain turbulent, with 
prices falling sharply in 2023 following two years of dramatic 
increases. Battery materials saw particularly large declines with 
lithium spot prices plummeting by 75% and cobalt, nickel, and 
graphite prices dropping by 30-45%. The IEA Energy Transition 
Mineral Price Index, which tracks a basket price of copper, major 
battery metals and rare earth elements, tripled in the two years 
following January 2020, but relinquished most of the increase by the 
end of 2023 – although copper prices remained at elevated levels.  
Demand growth has remained robust. Demand for critical minerals 
experienced strong growth in 2023, with lithium demand rising by 
30%, while demand for nickel, cobalt, graphite and rare earth 
elements all saw increases ranging from 8% to 15%. Clean energy 
applications have become the main driver of demand growth for a 
range of critical minerals. Electric vehicles (EVs) consolidated their 
position as the largest-consuming segment for lithium, and increased 
their share considerably in the demand for nickel, cobalt and graphite. 
The main reason for price declines has been a strong increase 
in supply and ample inventories of technologies made with 
critical minerals. From Africa to Indonesia and the People’s 
Republic of China (hereafter “China”), the ramp-up of new supply 
outpaced demand growth over the past two years. Together with an 
inventory overhang in the downstream sector (e.g. battery cells, 
cathodes) and a correction of overly steep price rises in 2021-2022, 
this produced downward pressure on prices. 
Clean energy deployment continues to advance in all our 
scenarios for the future, including a strong growth story for EVs. 
Following the 75% growth in deployment in 2023, solar PV and wind 
account for the majority of capacity additions in every region in all IEA 
scenarios. This is accompanied by a substantial expansion of 
electricity networks, pushing up demand for copper and aluminium. 
Electric car sales neared 14 million in 2023, a 35% year-on-year 
increase, and continued growth is projected as major markets 
progress and adoption increases in emerging economies. In a 
scenario that limits global warming to 1.5 °C (the Net Zero Emissions 
by 2050 [NZE] Scenario), the sales share of electric cars rises from 
18% today to 65% in 2030, pushing up demand for batteries by a 
factor of seven to 6 TWh in 2030. Electric cars are the major source 
of demand for batteries, but battery storage for the power sector 
exhibits faster growth. 
Today’s well-supplied market may not be a good guide for the 
future, as demand for critical minerals continues to rise. Just as 
clean energy deployment expands, so too does demand for critical 
minerals. Mineral demand for clean energy technologies doubles 
between today and 2030 in a scenario that reflects today’s policy 
settings, the Stated Policies Scenario (STEPS). It is even higher in a 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 7  
Executive summary 
scenario that meets all national energy and climate goals in full, the 
Announced Pledges Scenario (APS), and it almost triples by 2030 
and quadruples by 2040 in the NZE Scenario, reaching nearly 40 Mt. 
Lithium sees the most rapid growth in demand, due to rising EV 
battery needs. In the NZE Scenario, for example, it increases by a 
factor of nine to 2040. In terms of production volume, copper – which 
connects a more electrified energy system – has by far the largest 
increase. Graphite demand almost quadruples by 2040 in the NZE 
Scenario, while demand for nickel, cobalt and rare earth elements 
doubles. 
Strong growth in demand produces a major uptick in the overall 
value of critical minerals markets. The combined market value of 
key energy transition minerals – copper, lithium, nickel, cobalt, 
graphite and rare earth elements – more than doubles to reach USD 
770 billion by 2040 in the NZE Scenario. At around USD 325 billion, 
today’s aggregate market value of key energy transition minerals 
aligns broadly with that of iron ore. By 2040, copper on its own attains 
that scale. 
The benefits of market expansion are shared across different 
regions, especially for mining. Latin America captures the largest 
amount of market value for mined output with around USD 120 billion 
by 2030. Indonesia sees the fastest growth, doubling its market value 
by 2030 due to its burgeoning nickel production. Africa witnesses a 
65% increase in market value by 2030. Nearly 50% of the market 
value from refining is concentrated in China by 2030. China also sees 
a rise in market value for mined materials with its growing copper and 
lithium production. 
The recent fall in prices has affected investments in new mineral 
supply, but they are still growing. Increases in 2023 were smaller 
than those seen in 2022, but investment in critical mineral mining 
nonetheless grew by 10%. Investment by lithium specialists saw a 
sharp rise of 60%, despite weak prices. Exploration spending also 
rose by 15%, driven by Canada and Australia. Venture capital 
spending increased by 30%, with significant growth in battery 
recycling offsetting reduced investment in mining and refining start-
ups. China’s spending on and acquisition of overseas mines has 
grown significantly in the past ten years reaching record levels of 
USD 10 billion in the first half of 2023 with a particular focus on 
battery metals such as lithium, nickel and cobalt. 
Our projections show a mixed picture for future supply-demand 
balances. Based on a detailed review of all announced projects, we 
have constructed two supply scenarios. The base case includes 
production from existing assets and those under construction, along 
with projects that have a high chance of moving ahead. The high 
production case adds in projects, which are at a reasonably 
advanced stage of development, seeking financing and/or permits. 
Using the APS as a benchmark, the situation in 2035 looks as follows: 
• 
There is a significant gap between prospective supply and 
demand for copper and lithium: Anticipated mine supply from 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 8  
Executive summary 
announced projects meets only 70% of copper and 50% of lithium 
requirements.  
• 
Balances for nickel and cobalt look tight relative to confirmed 
projects, but better if prospective projects are included (our high 
production case). 
• 
Graphite and rare earth elements may not face supply volume 
issues but are among the most problematic in terms of market 
concentration: over 90% of battery-grade graphite and 77% of 
refined rare earths in 2030 originate from China.  
The NZE Scenario necessitates further project developments across 
most minerals. 
Our analysis of announced projects shows limited progress in 
diversifying supply. The geographical concentration of mining 
operations is set to rise further or remain high over the projection 
period in the base case. The situation improves somewhat in the high 
production case, indicating that many potential projects being 
developed in geographically diverse regions are not among the front-
runners for development. For refined materials, the shares of the top 
three producing nations have all increased since 2020, with the trend 
most pronounced for nickel and cobalt. Announced projects indicate 
that refined material production is set to remain highly concentrated 
in a few countries. Between now and 2030, some 70-75% of 
projected supply growth for refined lithium, nickel, cobalt and rare 
earth elements comes from today’s top three producers. For battery-
grade spherical and synthetic graphite, almost 95% of growth comes 
from China. These high levels of supply concentration represent a 
risk for the speed of energy transitions, as it makes supply chains and 
routes more vulnerable to disruption, whether from extreme weather, 
trade disputes or geopolitics. 
Analysis based on asset ownership reveals a slightly different 
picture. The concentration in the mining sector looks different if 
viewed through the lens of asset ownership, with US and European 
companies playing a major role for copper and lithium supplies 
whereas Chinese companies have a greater role for nickel and cobalt 
production, despite these minerals being mined elsewhere (e.g. 
Indonesia for nickel and the Democratic Republic of the Congo for 
cobalt). 
High market concentration means there is a risk of significant 
shortfalls in supply if, for any reason, supply from the largest 
producing country is interrupted. This “N-1” analysis is a typical 
measure of the resilience of any system and reveals significant 
vulnerabilities. If the largest supplier and its demand is excluded, then 
available ”N-1” supply of all key energy transition minerals would fall 
significantly below material requirements. The situation is most 
pronounced for graphite where the available “N-1” supply covers only 
10% of the N-1 material requirements – significantly below the 
minimum non-single-origin threshold of 35% proposed in the EU 
Critical Raw Materials Act. This indicates that without urgent efforts 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 9  
Executive summary 
to expedite the development of projects, achieving announced 
diversification goals will be highly challenging. 
Today’s price declines are a double-edged sword – a boon for 
clean energy deployment but a bane for critical mineral 
investment and diversification. Lower prices have been good news 
for consumers and for affordability, bringing clean technology costs 
back on a downward trajectory, including the 14% reduction in battery 
prices in 2023. However, falling prices also make spending to ensure 
reliable and diversified supply less appealing to investors. This price 
effect has had the biggest consequences in new and emerging 
resource holders; in the case of nickel, three-quarters of operating or 
potential projects that are at risk are outside the top three producers. 
Our first-of-its-kind risk assessment reveals potential areas of 
weakness for each mineral in supporting energy transition 
goals. The Outlook includes a new risk assessment framework for 
key energy transition minerals, across four major dimensions – 
supply risks, geopolitical risks, barriers to respond to supply 
disruptions, and exposure to environmental, social and governance 
(ESG) and climate risks. Overall, lithium and graphite show the 
highest risk scores. Lithium and copper are more exposed to supply 
and volume risks whereas graphite, cobalt, rare earths and nickel 
face more substantial geopolitical risks. Most minerals are exposed 
to high environmental risks. For example, today’s refining operations 
occur in places where grids tend to have a higher carbon intensity, 
relying mostly on coal-based electricity. 
Some USD 800 billion of investment in mining is required to get 
on track for a 1.5 °C scenario to 2040. In the APS, approximately 
USD 590 billion is required over the same period. These increases 
need to be made in a way that fosters a more diversified array of 
supply sources in the future. Financing diversified critical mineral 
supply chains faces numerous challenges, such as cost inflation, 
long-term price uncertainty and limited value placed on diversification 
by consumers. This requires specific policy measures to reinforce the 
investment case for supply chain diversification. Enhancing market 
transparency can also help, from pricing – with benefits to be drawn 
from efficient price discovery mechanisms and financial tools to 
hedge risks – to information, with a strong need for increasing the 
availability of reliable data on consumption, supply and trade. 
Stepping up efforts to recycle, innovate and encourage 
behavioural change is vital to ease potential strains on supply. 
In the case of lithium, the combination of right sizing EV batteries, 
alternative chemistries and recycling could reduce demand by 25% 
in 2030 in the NZE Scenario, saving an amount roughly equivalent to 
today’s production. Recycling rates for many materials have exhibited 
limited growth in the past. In the NZE Scenario, however, this needs 
to change, with growing policy attention to stepping up rates of 
collection and reprocessing. Recycled quantities of copper and cobalt 
could reduce 2040 primary supply requirements by 30%, and 15% for 
lithium and nickel. Without the uptake of recycling and reuse, mining 
capital requirements would need to be one-third higher. 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 10  
Executive summary 
New supplies must not come at the cost of local communities or 
the environment. Our systematic ESG performance tracking paints 
a mixed picture. The industry is making progress on worker safety, 
gender balance, community investment and renewable energy uses, 
but the same cannot be said for waste generation, emissions and 
water consumption and discharge, suggesting ample scope for 
improvement. The benefits associated with mineral production, such 
as revenue and jobs, have to be felt by producer countries and 
communities. Voluntary sustainability standards can help actors 
improve ESG performance, but greater transparency, due dilligence, 
harmonised approaches to credibility and appropriate incentives are 
needed to tap their full potential.
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 11  
Introduction 
Introduction 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 12  
Introduction 
Introduction
After the relentless surge in prices since 2021, the critical minerals 
market underwent another tumultuous year in 2023. Prices for most 
materials experienced a significant decline, relinquishing most of the 
increases accumulated over the past two years. Prices for battery 
metals saw particularly steep reductions due to an inventory 
overhang in the downstream sector, a slight easing in the pace of 
demand growth and an increase in overall supply. 
While immediate concerns appear to have eased, the risks of market 
tightness and price volatility remain ever-present as countries pursue 
decarbonisation goals. Moreover, the geopolitical context is 
increasingly complex, highlighted by a series of trade restriction 
measures in 2023, including gallium, germanium, graphite and 
technologies related to rare earth elements. Low material prices 
helped to put the costs of clean energy technologies back on a 
downward trajectory, but they present a challenge for efforts to 
diversify supply, given the financial difficulties that they pose for new 
and emerging producers. The imperative to bolster the diversity and 
resilience of critical mineral supplies remains at the top of the policy 
agenda. 
In line with new mandates approved by the 2024 Ministerial meeting, 
the IEA has been working together with countries and industry to 
address these emerging challenges and ensure reliable and 
sustainable supplies of critical minerals. On 28 September 2023, the 
IEA hosted the first-ever Critical Minerals and Clean Energy Summit 
at the IEA headquarters in Paris. Almost 50 countries, including key 
producing and consuming nations around the world, came together 
with around 40 business leaders, investors, heads of international 
organisations and civil society organisations to share their 
experiences and discuss effective courses of action to ensure rapid 
and secure energy transitions. Chief among various desired actions 
was the need for robust market monitoring and outlooks that can help 
bring a clear understanding of today’s market situation and anticipate 
potential risks in the medium to long term. 
Earlier in 2023, the Group of Seven (G7) ministers asked the IEA to 
play a strengthened role in safeguarding minerals security in its G7 
Five-Point Plan, through producing medium- and long-term outlooks 
for critical minerals and introducing the IEA Voluntary Critical 
Minerals Security Programme. 
This report, following the inaugural Critical Minerals Market Review 
2023, responds to these growing needs for enhanced market 
transparency by reviewing latest market movements, examining the 
prospects for future mineral demand and supply, and assessing 
potential risks along the supply chain of key commodities. 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 13  
Introduction 
Prices for minerals and metals experienced a widespread decline in 2023, with battery metals 
experiencing particularly sharp reductions 
Change in selected commodity prices in 2023 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
Notes: REE = rare earth elements; Dy-Tb = dysprosium and terbium; Nd-Pr = neodymium and praseodymium. Change in prices between December 2022 and 
December 2023.  
Sources: IEA analysis based on Bloomberg and S&P Global.
-100%
-50%
50%
100%
Uranium
Iron ore
Copper
Aluminium
Lead
Zinc
Silver
Platinum
REE (Dy-Tb)
REE (Nd-Pr)
Manganese
Cobalt
Nickel
Graphite
Lithium
Base metals
Precious metals
Battery metals
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 14  
Introduction 
Scope of the analyses and scenarios
The report considers a wide range of “critical minerals” that play a 
vital role in clean energy applications, as indicated in the Annex. The 
main focus is on “key energy transition minerals” (also referred to as 
“focus minerals”) such as copper, lithium, nickel, cobalt, graphite 
and rare earth elements. However, the report also discusses trends 
for other important materials such as aluminium, manganese, 
phosphate, platinum group metals and uranium as relevant. 
Our assessment of mineral demand in the clean energy sector 
includes demand for low-emissions power generation (solar PV, 
wind, hydro, nuclear and other renewables), electric vehicle batteries 
and battery storage, grid networks (transmission, distribution and 
transformer), and hydrogen (fuel cells and electrolyser) technologies. 
Our forward-looking analysis is based on the three main IEA 
scenarios included in the World Energy Outlook 2023, updated for 
the latest data points. 
• 
The Stated Policies Scenario (STEPS) provides a sense of the 
prevailing direction of travel for the energy system, based today’s 
policy settings. The STEPS is associated with a temperature rise 
of 2.4 °C in 2100 (with a 50% probability). 
• 
The Announced Pledges Scenario (APS) assumes that 
governments will meet, in full and on time, all of the climate‐
related commitments that they have announced, including longer 
term net zero emissions targets and pledges in nationally 
determined contributions (NDCs). The APS is associated with a 
temperature rise of 1.7 °C in 2100 (with a 50% probability). 
• 
The Net Zero Emissions by 2050 (NZE) Scenario charts a 
pathway for the global energy sector to achieve net zero CO2 
emissions by 2050 and limit the global temperature rise to 1.5 °C 
above pre-industrial levels in 2100 (with at least a 50% 
probability) with limited overshoot. The NZE Scenario also meets 
the key energy‐related UN Sustainable Development Goals 
(SDGs) such as universal access to reliable modern energy 
services and major improvements in air quality. 
Alongside the main scenarios, we explore some alternative cases 
reflecting key technological and behavioural uncertainties that could 
affect future material demand (see Annex). 
Chapter 1 (Market review) offers a snapshot of industry 
developments in 2023 and early 2024. It describes the trends of 
clean energy technology deployment that drives the demand 
growth for critical minerals and reviews major production, 
investment and price trends. The chapter also discusses the 
latest policy developments and insights based on systematic 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 15  
Introduction 
tracking of the industry’s environmental, social and governance 
(ESG) performance. 
Chapter 2 (Demand and supply outlook for key energy transition 
minerals) provides an outlook for demand and supply of key 
individual minerals and related market and policy issues. 
Following a brief review of mineral demand for clean energy 
technologies, the chapter provides projections for focus minerals 
including copper, lithium, nickel, cobalt, graphite and rare earth 
elements. It also reviews key trends for other important materials.  
Chapter 3 (Clean energy transition risk assessment) contains 
structured “clean energy transition risk assessments” for the six 
focus minerals that cover supply risks, geopolitical risks, barriers 
to respond to disruptions, and exposure to ESG and climate risks.  
Chapter 4 (Implications) presents the strategic implications of the 
scenario projections for policy and industry stakeholders seeking 
to promote reliable, sustainable and diversified supplies of critical 
minerals. The chapter considers four major issues such as i) 
investment in diversified supply; ii) recycling, innovation and 
behavioural change; iii) market transparency; and iv) sustainable 
and responsible supplies. 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 16  
1. Market review 
 
1. Market review  
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 17  
1. Market review 
Clean energy deployment trends 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 18  
1. Market review 
Global clean energy deployment climbed to new heights in 2023  
Annual capacity additions for selected clean energy technologies 
 
 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
Sources: IEA (2024), Clean Energy Market Monitor – March 2024, and IEA (2024), Global EV Outlook 2024.
 100
 200
 300
 400
 500
2021
2022
2023
GW
Solar PV
34%
85%
 25
 50
 75
 100
 125
2021
2022
2023
GW
Wind
20%
60%
 3
 6
 9
 12
 15
2021
2022
2023
Million
Electric cars
60%
35%
 150
 300
 450
 600
 750
2021
2022
2023
MW
Electrolysers
360%
45%
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 19  
1. Market review 
Clean energy deployment continues to soar, with China the main driving force
Global clean energy deployment scaled new heights in 2023, with 
annual additions of solar PV growing 85% and wind turbines growing 
60%. The growth in clean energy deployment, however, remains 
concentrated in advanced economies and the People’s Republic of 
China (hereafter "China"), with most developing economies lagging 
behind. 
Solar PV 
Global solar PV capacity additions for electricity generation broke a 
new record, reaching 420 GW in 2023. Solar PV alone accounted for 
three-quarters of renewable capacity additions worldwide. China 
alone accounted for 62% of the increase in global solar PV capacity. 
Despite the phase out of central government subsidies, the country 
commissioned as much solar PV in 2023 as the entire world did in 
2022.  
In the European Union (EU), annual solar PV additions rose by a 
quarter and reached a record level 52 GW in 2023. Following the 
Russian Federation’s (hereafter “Russia”) invasion of Ukraine, the EU 
member states improved the policy environment to accelerate 
renewables deployment, in part to help bring down natural gas 
consumption. This has led annual solar PV additions to double since 
2021. In the United States (US), solar PV capacity additions 
increased 50% year-on-year following the easing of supply chain 
issues that slowed deployment in 2022. Federal tax incentives and 
state-level support have continued to drive both utility-scale and 
rooftop solar PV applications. India added only 12 GW of solar PV in 
2023, one-third lower than in 2022. Nevertheless, in 2023 the 
government unveiled an objective to conduct annual auctions for 50 
GW of renewable energy capacity that promises to accelerate 
deployment significantly. 
Wind 
Global wind capacity additions jumped by 60% in 2023 to break the 
record seen in 2020. Onshore wind projects accounted for over 85% 
of global wind deployment in 2023. China accounted for more than 
60% of global wind expansion as the country almost doubled its 
additions compared with 2022.  
In the European Union, wind additions increased by less than 10% in 
2023, with onshore wind deployment slowing down. Developers have 
been facing multiple challenges, including rising equipment costs, 
inflation, and supply chain constraints, which have made them less 
eager to participate in competitive auctions. Most countries in Europe 
have introduced policies to address the challenges posed by slow 
and complex permitting procedures for wind projects. However, the 
impact of these policies will take time to be visible in deployment 
trends. In the United States, wind additions declined by more than a 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 20  
1. Market review 
quarter in 2023. This was mainly due to prior uncertainty over the 
future of tax credits, prior to the adoption of the Inflation Reduction 
Act (IRA). Wind capacity additions are expected to increase 
significantly in the coming years thanks to the policy visibility provided 
by the IRA. In India, a larger number of projects awarded in previous 
years led annual deployment to increase by almost 50% in 2023. 
Offshore wind growth has recovered from a major drop seen in 
annual additions in 2022. However, the offshore industry outside of 
China is facing challenges with investment costs today more than 
20% higher than a few years ago. In 2023, developers cancelled or 
postponed 15 GW of offshore wind projects in the United States and 
the United Kingdom because pricing for previously awarded capacity 
no longer reflected prevailing project development costs. 
Overall, the world is poised for a signficant acceleration in renewable 
capacity in the coming years driven by supportive policies in more 
than 130 countries. Renewables are expected to surpass coal to 
become the largest source of electricity generation by the mid-2020s. 
Substantial demand for materials such as copper, silicon and rare 
earth elements will be required to support the rapid deployment of 
renewable generation capacity. However, challenges such as high 
interest rates and low profitability persist. Policymakers need to 
address issues related to permitting and grid expansion to achieve 
the target of tripling global renewable capacity by 2030 that was 
agreed at the 28th Conference of the Parties (COP28). 
Electrolysers 
The growing markets for eletrolysers could push up demand for nickel, 
platinum group metals, zirconium and other minerals depending on 
the specific technology deployed. In 2023, global installed capacity of 
electrolysers for hydrogen production reached 1.3 GW, underpinned 
by a surge in annual additions to 600 MW. However, this is still far 
from the annual multi-gigawatt additions required to keep global 
climate goals within reach.  
From less than 10% of global installed capacity in 2020, China has 
emerged as the leading region since 2021, reaching an installed 
capacity of more than 650 MW by the end of 2023. China now 
represents close to half of the global installed capacity. This 
transformation has been fuelled by the scaling up of project sizes by 
Chinese developers, with several projects now exceeding 100 MW in 
capacity. Consequently, China now hosts six of the world's largest 
operational electrolysis projects. The European Union accounted for 
around a third of global installed capacity in 2020, but has now ceded 
its leading position, with additions of around 70 MW in 2023. The 
United States emerged as the third-largest market, with additions 
exceeding 30 MW.  
Demand uncertainty and lack of regulatory clarity, coupled with 
recent challenges such as inflation and slow implementation of 
support mechanisms are hindering faster adoption of electrolysers in 
other regions.
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 21  
1. Market review 
The growth story continued in 2023 for EVs 
Electric car sales by mode and region  
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
Note: BEV = Battery electric vehicle; PHEV = Plug-in hybrid electric vehicle. 
Source: IEA (2024), Global EV Outlook 2024.
5%
10%
15%
20%
 5
 10
 15
 20
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
Million
Others PHEV
Others BEV
United States PHEV
United States BEV
Europe PHEV
Europe BEV
China PHEV
China BEV
Global sales share
(right axis)
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 22  
1. Market review 
Growth in electric car sales remains robust as major markets progress and emerging 
economies ramp up 
Electric car sales neared 14 million in 2023, a 35% year-on-year 
increase, and more than six times higher than five years earlier in 
2018. Electric cars accounted for 18% of all car sales in 2023 up from 
14% in 2022 and only 2% five years earlier, and nearly 95% of all 
sales were in China, Europe and the United States. These trends 
demonstrate robust growth in electric car markets as they become 
more mature, even if the growth in global electric car sales slowed 
somewhat compared with the 60% seen in 2022. 
China is the world's largest electric car market with 8.1 million electric 
car sales and 60% of the global total in 2023, a share that has been 
increasing, up from 50% five years earlier in 2018. In 2023 more than 
one in three new car registrations in China was electric. The growth 
rate of electric car sales in China more than halved in 2023 to 35% 
from 80% in 2022. One of the critical reasons for this is that 2023 was 
the first year that the government provided no purchase subsidies for 
electric cars, with their phase-out in 2022. Therefore, a slowdown of 
electric car sales was expected. This is also coupled with relatively 
weak consumer sentiment. As the Chinese market matures, the 
industry is entering a phase of price competition and consolidation. 
To mitigate lower domestic demand, China exported 1.2 million 
electric vehicles (EVs) in 2023, an 80% increase from the previous 
year, with primary export markets being Europe and the Asia Pacific 
region including Thailand and Australia. In April, China removed 
down payment requirements for new car loans in an effort to stimulate 
consumer demand. In the first quarter of 2024 the year-on-year 
electric car sales growth rate in China increased to 36% compared 
with 27% in the same period last year. It is estimated that around 45% 
of all cars sold in China in 2024 could be electric. 
Europe is the second-largest electric car market with almost 25% of 
global sales in 2023, reaching 3.2 million electric car sales. This year 
more than one in five cars sold in Europe was electric. Unlike China, 
Europe did not experience a slowdown as the growth rate of electric 
car sales slightly accelerated in 2023 to 20%, up from 15% in 2022. 
However, sales trends differed by country. In Germany the electric 
car sales share fell from 30% in 2022 to 25% in 2023 due to the 
sudden end of all EV subsidies in 2023, which were originally 
intended to apply until the end of 2024. Nevertheless, in the rest of 
Europe electric car sales shares increased, with the Netherlands 
reaching 30%, the United Kingdom and France 25%, and Sweden 
60%. 
In the United States electric car sales grew to 1.4 million in 2023, 
increasing by 40% compared with 2022, the fastest growth rate of the 
three largest regions, though the sales share of electric cars reached 
only 10%. The United States experienced a slight slowdown 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 23  
1. Market review 
compared with the 55% rise in 2022, but growth in sales remained 
strong, with the IRA having supported sales despite some concerns 
about domestic component requirements hindering deployment. The 
revision of eligibility criteria for IRA tax credits in 2023 meant several 
popular vehicles were covered, and the Tesla Model Y increased its 
sales by 50% year-on-year. In 2024 new guidance significantly 
reduced the number of eligible vehicles for tax credits. 
In the rest of the world, total electric car sales grew by 70% and sales 
almost reached 1 million electric cars. India experienced 70% year-
on-year growth, with sales of 80 000 vehicles, compared with just 
10% growth for total car sales. In Thailand electric car sales 
increased more than fourfold, reaching 90 000 vehicles and a 10% 
market share, a particularly impressive achievement given that total 
car sales decreased from 2022 to 2023. Subsidies in both regions 
have facilitated demand growth though India is anticipated to reduce 
subsidy levels in 2024. 
In both China and the United States, sales of plug-in hybrid electric 
vehicles (PHEVs) grew significantly faster than battery electric 
vehicles (BEVs) (55% against 40% for the United States and a 
remarkable 80% against 20% in China). As a result, the share of 
PHEVs in EV sales reached 33% in China, up from 25% in 2022, and 
20% in the United States. Concerns about driving range and lack of 
sufficient charging infrastructure for BEVs appear to be the driving 
force. In China, this surge in PHEV demand suggest that the growing 
middle-class appear to be more concerned about range going 
forward, marking a break from the past where relatively low-range 
BEVs were popular. The average battery size for PHEVs in China is 
around 50% higher than in Europe. A recent trend in China has been 
towards extended-range EVs (EREVs), which have an electric 
powertrain but also have a combustion engine able to recharge the 
battery. EREVs have a battery around twice the size of a typical 
PHEV, enabling real-world electric range of around 150 km, more 
than double that of conventional PHEVs. In 2023 EREVs accounted 
for a quarter of Chinese PHEV sales, a 10% increase from 2022, 
although EREVs have a negligible sale share outside of China. 
Europe, however, saw significantly higher growth in BEV sales with 
over 30% growth year-on-year compared with a small drop in PHEV 
sales in 2023.  
Although growth rates in EV sales are slowing, early signs from 2024 
indicated that sales remain generally strong. As the market matures 
and subsidies are phased out, growth rates may decrease somewhat. 
However, robust growth in EV sales is still expected to continue in 
the near and long term, supported by ongoing policy momentum, 
major increases in manufacturing capacity, cost declines and 
expanded adoption in developing economies.
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 24  
1. Market review 
Battery demand is dominated by electric cars, although storage is the fastest growing source of 
demand 
EV and storage battery demand by mode and region, 2018-2023  
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
Note: LDVs = light-duty vehicles. 
Source: IEA analysis based on EV Volumes.
 200
 400
 600
 800
1 000
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
GWh/year
LDVs
Two/three-wheeler
Bus
Trucks
Storage
 200
 400
 600
 800
1 000
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
China
Europe
United States
Other
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 25  
1. Market review 
The market share of LFP chemistries rose to 40% of electric car sales while silicon is gaining 
ground in graphite anodes 
Electric car battery cathode and anode chemistries sales share, 2018-2023 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
Notes: NMC = lithium nickel manganese cobalt oxide. Low-nickel includes: NMC333 and NMC532. High-nickel includes: NMC622, NMC721, NMC811, NCA and 
NMCA. LFP = lithium iron phosphate; Si-Gr = Silicon-doped graphite with % of silicon content. Sales share is based on capacity. 
Source: IEA analysis based on EV Volumes and BloombergNEF.
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
Low-nickel
High-nickel
LFP
Other
Cathode
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
Graphite
Si-Gr 5%
Si-Gr 10%
Anode
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 26  
1. Market review 
Battery pack prices have dropped with falling critical minerals prices 
Average lithium-ion battery pack price and share of cathode raw material cost, 2013-2023 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
Notes: Cathode material costs include lithium, nickel, cobalt and manganese. Other cell costs include costs for anode, electrolytes, separator and other components 
as well as costs associated with labour, manufacturing and capital depreciation. Percentages on bars show year-on-year total pack price change. Analysis includes 
all cathode chemistries and global chemistry sales shares. 
Source: IEA analysis based on BloombergNEF (2024).
10%
20%
30%
40%
 200
 400
 600
 800
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
USD/kWh
Cathode material
Other cell cost
Pack cost
Share of cathode raw materials (right axis)
-11%
-35%
+7%
-14%
-23%
-25%
-18%
-13%
-13%
-6%
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 27  
1. Market review 
Batteries: The rise and rise of LFP
In 2023, global battery demand from EVs and storage reached 
865 GWh in 2023, a 45% year-on-year increase. This was primarily 
driven by sales of electric cars, which were responsible for 85% of 
global demand. The annual growth rate for battery demand from 
electric cars, buses and trucks slowed in 2023 to 40%, compared with 
75% in 2022, in line with broader sales trends, although annual 
demand growth from two- or three-wheelers increased. Battery 
storage demand experienced the most impressive rise, more than 
doubling from the 2022 level, bringing its share in total EV and 
storage demand up to 10%. Given that growth rates for battery 
storage had almost doubled in 2021, this represents a remarkable 
surge in utility-scale and behind-the-metre storage deployment. 
China was the largest source of battery demand in 2023 with 55% of 
the global total, followed by Europe with around a quarter and the 
United States with 15%, in each case dominated by EV sales. Battery 
demand in China grew by over 40% in 2023; this was half the rate 
seen in 2023 despite a threefold rise in demand for storage 
deployment. Battery demand in Europe and the United States both 
grew by 45%, a higher rate than for electric car sales due to a 
combination of larger vehicle and battery sizes and higher rates of 
storage deployment. 
Average passenger BEV battery size, 2017-2023  
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
Alongside sales, the rise in battery sizes for EVs is a critical driver of 
growth in demand for batteries and for critical minerals. In most regions 
the average battery size for passenger BEVs has been increasing 
year-on-year, with the global average increasing more than 60% since 
2017. The trend towards an increasing share of sport utility vehicles 
(SUVs) found in conventional car markets is being replicated in the EV 
market. Automakers are focusing on larger vehicles, which are 
typically more profitable, and consumers appear to have a strong 
 20
 40
 60
 80
 100
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
kWh per vehicle
Global
China
United States
Europe
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 28  
1. Market review 
appetite for larger vehicles and ranges, even if they are often beyond 
their requirements. All regions follow the same overall trend for 
increased battery sizes, but there are significant regional variations in 
absolute values. The average battery size in the United States is 30% 
larger than the global average, Europe is 10% larger while China is 
10% smaller. This mirrors size trends in conventional vehicle sectors, 
and also shows the greater preference from consumers in the United 
States and Europe for higher range EVs.  
Battery pack price trends 
In 2023 average battery pack prices dropped 14% to a record low of 
USD 139/kWh. This was the largest price decrease since 2018, driven 
primarily by the fall in critical minerals prices, in combination with a 
surge in battery production capacity and slightly weaker demand than 
expected. This reinstates the trend of declining battery prices that was 
temporarily reversed in 2022 due to the exceptionally high prices of 
battery critical minerals. Cells now account for 80% of the total pack 
price, an increasing ratio partly due to the cell-to-pack (CTP) design 
innovation reducing dead weight in the pack and pack costs.  
With decreasing manufacturing costs from economies of scale and 
innovation, critical minerals have been a growing share of the battery 
pack cost, leaving the battery pack price more susceptible to mineral 
price volatility. This was seen clearly in 2022 when cathode raw 
materials peaked at 30% of the total pack price before falling back to 
to 25% in 2023.  
Battery chemistry trends 
One of the most remarkable developments in the global battery 
sector in the last five years has been the resurgence of the lithium 
iron phosphate (LFP) cathode chemistry. With a lower energy density 
but more stable and lower-cost chemistry compared to the nickel-
based chemistries, LFP was being phased out in favour of the 
significantly higher energy density nickel-based cathode chemistries. 
However, there has been a remarkable reversal of fortune since 
2019. The fact that LFP contains no nickel or cobalt became an 
important asset that helped reduced exposure to high commodity 
prices. In addition, the emergence of CTP technology eliminated 
dead weight in the battery pack and enhanced the energy density of 
LFP. CTP was pioneered by BYD with the Blade battery. LFP has 
now become a major chemistry in 2023 with around 40% of electric 
car battery sales by capacity. Due to favourable patent agreements 
China had been the only country producing LFP batteries after 2010. 
However, the patents expired in 2022, which kick-started production 
plans outside China. Nevertheless, there are still major regional 
differences, less than 10% of total EV sales by capacity in the United 
States and Europe are LFP while two-thirds are LFP in China.  
Another major recent innovation was the first fast charging LFP 
battery, Shenxing developed by CATL, capable of delivering 400km 
of range from a ten-minute charge. This is achieved through a new 
electrolyte and graded anode porosities among other innovations. 
The novel fast charging LFP battery will be utilised in EV vehicles this 
year, significantly increasing the attractiveness of LFP chemistries. 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 29  
1. Market review 
The other significant recent LFP innovation is the development and 
commercialisation of lithium manganese iron phosphate (LMFP), the 
upgraded version of LFP including manganese which increases its 
energy density. With CATL’s M3P battery confirmed for use in six 
Chinese EV models and undergoing validation by Tesla for its 
Chinese Model 3, it is anticipated that LMFP will continue to take 
market share from nickel-based chemistries due to its increased 
range. 
In terms of the anode, silicon-doped graphite anodes are increasing 
in market share with almost a third of electric car anode capacity 
market share. Higher fractions of silicon are also being used with 10% 
silicon graphite anodes doubling in market share in 2023 to 12%. 
Silicon doping increases the energy density of the graphite anode, 
and increased doping and higher quantities of silicon are expected in 
the near future.  
Looking beyond lithium-ion chemistries, sodium-ion (Na-ion) 
batteries have experenced a surge of development in recent years, 
especially while lithium prices were high. As the name suggests, this 
chemistry contains no lithium and also requires less critical minerals 
than lithium-ion batteries. Leading batterymakers including CATL, 
Northvolt and many others announced their sodium-ion cells. 
However, the fall in lithium prices has diminished the advantage of 
sodium-ion chemistries and major ramping up plans have stalled or 
been delayed. The progress of sodium-ion batteries hinges on their 
price advantage over lithium-ion, with major influence of the lithium 
price. 
All solid-state batteries (ASSBs) are the anticipated step-change 
technology for battery energy density and safety. There has been 
widespread industrial research and development in recent years, yet 
major technical challenges remain such as the typically high 
pressures required to ensure good electrode contact or relying on 
difficult-to-scale, expensive production processes. Progress has 
been made utilising hybrid solid-liquid electrolyte batteries, for 
instance from CATL and Quantumscape; however, the use of an 
organic liquid electrolyte diminishes any safety advantage and may 
even have higher risks than conventional lithium-ion batteries due to 
the use of lithium metal. Progress is also being made with ASSBs, 
with Samsung, an industry leader in solid-state, recently announcing 
plans for mass production in 2027. CATL also expects to produce 
small-scale production in the same year. Though ASSBs hold 
potential in the future, they are not expected to have significant 
impact until after 2030.
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 30  
1. Market review 
China dominates the downstream and midstream global EV battery supply chain 
Geographical distribution of the global EV battery supply chain, 2023 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
Notes: Li = lithium; Ni = nickel; Co = cobalt; Gr = graphite; DRC = Democratic Republic of the Congo. Geographical breakdown refers to the country where the 
production occurs. Mining is based on production data. Material processing is based on refining production data. Cell component production is based on cathode and 
anode material production capacity data. Battery cells are based on battery cell production capacity data. EVs is based on electric cars production data. For all 
minerals mining and refining shows total production not only that used in EVs. Graphite refining refers to spherical graphite production only.  
Sources: IEA analysis based on EV Volumes; Benchmark Mineral Intelligence; BloombergNEF.
China
Europe
United States
Japan
Korea
DRC
Australia
Chile
Indonesia
Russia
Other
EVs
EVs
0%
25%
50%
75%
100%
Li
Ni
Co
Gr
Mining
Cathode Anode
Cell components
Li
Ni
Co
Gr
Material processing
Batteries
Battery cells
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 31  
1. Market review 
Growth in China’s manufacturing capacity has strong implications for EV battery supply chains
One of the most critical considerations in the global battery outlook is 
the strength of manufacturing capacity in China. China dominates the 
downstream battery supply chain, including processing of the battery 
minerals, cathode and anode material production, and battery cell 
and EV production. China holds 85% of battery cell production 
capacity and 90% of cathode and 98% of anode material production 
capacity globally. Over half of global processing for lithium and cobalt 
occurs in China. The country dominates the entire graphite anode 
supply chain end-to-end. China also produces two-thirds of the 
world's EVs. In almost all stages of the midstream and downstream 
supply chain, China has increased its market share since 2021. 
China has been building battery plants and cathode and anode 
production capacity at a speed that exceeds projected demand. In 
2023 China’s maximum cell production capacity was more than 
double the amount needed to meet the country’s battery cell demand. 
For cathode active materials, the manufacturing capacity anticipated 
in 2030 is about two times greater than the projected battery cell 
manufacturing capacity in the same year. In the case of anode active 
materials, this ratio increases to five times greater, raising doubts 
about whether all cathode and anode material manufacturers will be 
able to remain competitive in the face of such a surplus. There are 
several reasons for China’s strong manufacturing position. The fruits 
of China’s industrial strategy have been seen already in many sectors 
including solar, aluminium and steel. Years of government support, 
alongside a large and growing domestic market, have meant that the 
EV and battery industries in China have thrived and gained global 
market share. This has now set the stage for considerable price 
competition and consolidation. High-technology manufacturing is 
now a pivotal element of China’s strategy for growth. 
Ample manufacturing capacity across the battery supply chain is a 
double-edged sword. If excess production is pushed on to export 
markets, battery prices and EV prices may fall, which may be good 
for consumers and thus support progress towards climate goals. 
However, it could make difficult for producers globally to compete, 
increasing the level of supply concentration and exposing the supply 
chains to various physical and geopolitical risks.  
For manufacturers in China in the coming years, the primary 
challenge will be to identify a sufficiently large export market to 
absorb their output and to improve low margins. Conversely, there is 
strong pressure on manufacturers in other regions such as the 
European Union and the United States to improve their cost 
competitiveness. The quality, cost and characteristics of cells and 
components provided by various suppliers, alongside local regulatory 
requirements and environmental, social and governance standards, 
will be crucial in determining how these markets develop. 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 32  
1. Market review 
The battery storage market is continuing its upward march
The battery storage market continued its remarkable growth in 2023, 
with installed capacity reaching over 85 GW. Almost half of this 
capacity, over 40 GW, was added in 2023 alone, another record year 
that saw additions doubling from 2022. A large part of the capacity 
growth has come from utility-scale systems, with behind-the-metre 
(BTM) battery storage responsible for about 35% of the annual 
additions on average. The strong increase in capacity additions over 
the last few years has been driven almost entirely by China, the 
European Union and the United States, which collectively accounted 
for nearly 90% of the capacity added in 2023.  
The past two years have seen China rise above the United States to 
become the leading market for battery storage, with its share in 
annual global additions rising from around 20% in 2019 to 55% in 
2023. In China, about two-thirds of the additional capacity was utility-
scale, driven mainly by province-level mandates that encourage the 
pairing of new solar PV or wind projects with energy storage. BTM 
storage capacity grew strongly as well, with larger-scale commercial 
rather than residential users driving the uptake, underpinned by 
subsidies and a rising proliferation of time-of-use electricity tariffs. 
The United States remains the second-largest battery storage 
market. Utility-scale projects accounted for nearly 90% of the 
additional capacity, with California, Texas and other states in the 
Southwest leading deployments. Falling costs have allowed batteries 
to make inroads into ancillary service markets and they are 
increasingly tapped to provide balancing services and secure 
capacity in states with high shares of variable renewables.  
Installed battery storage capacity in the European Union grew 1.7 
times in 2023, with annual additions rising to nearly 6 GW. Nearly 
90% of the capacity growth was associated with BTM storage, mostly 
in Germany and Italy, where incentives such as tax breaks and low-
interest loans, as well as high retail electricity prices support the 
pairing of rooftop solar with storage. In 2023, around 80% of the 
rooftop solar installed in Germany and Italy came with storage. 
Capacity additions in Australia jumped to 1.3 GW in 2023, more than 
doubling last year’s deployment levels, thanks in part to financial 
incentives that encourage the pairing of residential PV systems with 
batteries. Utility-scale battery storage capacity additions in Japan and 
Korea increased substantially in 2023, jumping to 400 MW in Japan 
and 300 MW in Korea. Chile, meanwhile, added nearly 250 MW of 
utility-scale storage in 2023, making it the first country in Latin 
America to deploy battery storage at scale. 
In other regions, capacity additions have so far been limited. 
However, in addition to further rapid acceleration in today’s core 
markets, capacity growth is expected to broaden over the next few 
years. Energy storage targets and financial support mean that India 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 33  
1. Market review 
in particular has significant potential to emerge as another large 
market for battery storage. 
Lithium-ion batteries dominate the battery storage market today, 
accounting for more than 90% of the market. The chemistries 
available for lithium-ion batteries used in storage applications are the 
same as the ones available for the EV market. However, storage 
applications have different technical needs than EVs, and 
characteristics such as cost, capacity to charge/discharge frequently, 
and lifetime are prioritised over energy density. This has led to a shift 
towards LFP batteries, which accounted for about 80% of the total 
battery storage market in 2023, up from about 65% in 2022. The 
growing battery market, together with the resurgence of LFP batteries 
for EV applications, is leading non-Chinese battery manufacturers to 
develop their own LFP batteries, which today are almost exclusively 
produced in China. Lithium-ion battery technology is set to remain a 
key part of short-duration (eight hours or less) storage, but alternative 
technologies (such as vanadium flow batteries) are being developed 
either to compete or to complement it.
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 34  
1. Market review 
Market trends for critical minerals 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 35  
1. Market review 
Demand for key energy transition minerals continued to grow strongly in 2023, propelled by the 
expansion of clean energy technologies 
Demand outlook for selected minerals, 2021-2023 
 
 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
Notes: Rare earths include the four magnet elements: neodymium, praseodymium, dysprosium and terbium. Demand for clean energy applications includes 
consumption for low-emissions power generation, EV and battery storage, grid networks and hydrogen technologies.
14%
22%
28%
 1
 2
 3
 4
 5
2021 2022 2023
Graphite (Mt)
+11%
19%
17%
23%
 20
 40
 60
 80
 100
2021 2022 2023
Rare earths (kt)
+14%
20%
26%
30%
 50
 100
 150
 200
 250
2021 2022 2023
Cobalt (kt)
+8%
9%
11%
15%
 0.8
 1.6
 2.4
 3.2
 4.0
2021 2022 2023
Nickel (Mt)
+8%
39%
50%
56%
 40
 80
 120
 160
 200
2021 2022 2023
Lithium (kt Li)
+30%
22%
21%
24%
 6
 12
 18
 24
 30
2021 2022 2023
Clean energy
Other uses
Copper (Mt)
+3%
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 36  
1. Market review 
However, supply has expanded at a faster rate than demand, resulting in downward pressure 
on prices  
Annual average demand and supply growth rates between 2021 and 2023 for selected minerals 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
Notes: Supply growth rates are based on refined output. The figure for graphite includes both natural and synthetic graphite. 
10%
20%
30%
40%
Copper
Lithium
Nickel
Cobalt
Graphite
Rare earths
Demand
Supply
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 37  
1. Market review 
Prices for key minerals have returned to pre-pandemic levels 
Mineral price developments 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
Notes: IEA Energy Transition Minerals price index is a basket price of copper, lithium, nickel, cobalt, graphite, manganese and neodymium. On the right-hand chart, 
base metals include iron, aluminium, zinc and copper. Battery metals include lithium, nickel, cobalt, graphite and manganese. Rare earth elements include 
neodymium, praseodymium, dysprosium and terbium.  
Sources: IEA analysis based on Bloomberg and S&P Global.
 100
 200
 300
 400
Jan-20
Apr-20
Jul-20
Oct-20
Jan-21
Apr-21
Jul-21
Oct-21
Jan-22
Apr-22
Jul-22
Oct-22
Jan-23
Apr-23
Jul-23
Oct-23
Jan-24
Apr-24
IEA energy transition mineral price index
Indexed (Jan. 2020 = 100)
 100
 200
 300
 400
Jan-20
Apr-20
Jul-20
Oct-20
Jan-21
Apr-21
Jul-21
Oct-21
Jan-22
Apr-22
Jul-22
Oct-22
Jan-23
Apr-23
Jul-23
Oct-23
Jan-24
Apr-24
Base metals
Battery metals
Rare earth elements
Price movement by category
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 38  
1. Market review 
Battery critical minerals have seen the greatest volatility 
Critical minerals prices, 2021-2024 
 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
Notes: Graphite historical average from 2016-2020. Assessment based on the London Metal Exchange (LME) Lithium Carbonate Global Average, LME Nickel Cash, 
LME Cobalt Cash and LME Copper Grade A Cash prices and China flake graphite – 194 free on board. Nominal prices.  
Source: IEA analysis based on S&P Global and Bloomberg.
 200
 400
 600
 800
1 000
Jan
2021
Apr
2024
Index (Jan. 2021 = 100)
Prices
2015-2020 average price
Lithium
 50
 100
 150
 200
 250
Jan
2021
Apr
2024
Cobalt
 50
 100
 150
 200
 250
Jan
2021
Apr
2024
Nickel
 50
 100
 150
 200
 250
Jan
2021
Apr
2024
Copper
 50
 100
 150
 200
 250
Jan
2021
Apr
2024
Graphite
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 39  
1. Market review 
Due to falling prices, the market size for key energy transition minerals contracted by 10% to 
USD 325 billion in 2023, despite demand growth 
Market size for key energy transition minerals, 2019-2023 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
Notes: The market size for rare earth elements is based on the aggregate size of four magnet materials. In this year’s assessment, rare earth elements and refined 
copper based on secondary scrap were included in the calculation, which raised the 2022 market size to USD 360 billion (up from USD 320 billion in the Critical 
Minerals Market Review 2023).
 100
 200
 300
 400
2019
2020
2021
2022
Demand
increase
Price
impact
2023
Rare earths
Graphite
Cobalt
Lithium
Nickel
Copper
Billion USD
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 40  
1. Market review 
The widespread decline in critical mineral prices in 2023
The critical minerals market had a turbulent year in 2023 and the main 
story of the year was falling prices. Battery minerals saw particularly 
large declines with lithium spot prices plummeting by 75% and other 
key materials such as nickel, cobalt, manganese, and graphite seeing 
declines of 30-45%. The IEA Energy Transition Mineral Price Index, 
which tracks a basket price of copper, major battery metals and rare 
earth elements, tripled in just two years starting in January 2020, but 
it began to slide from the beginning of 2023, returning to pre-
pandemic levels. However, except for cobalt and graphite, prices 
remain higher than the historical averages observed in the 2010s. In 
contrast, prices for copper stayed relatively resilient. While 
expectations for a strong post-pandemic demand recovery did not 
materialise at scale, actual output fell short of anticipated supply, 
leading to tighter market conditions, particularly for copper 
concentrates. 
Several factors contributed to the drop in prices. The slowing growth 
rate of EV battery sales, coupled with large-scale cell and cathode 
production, has led to a substantial accumulation of downstream 
products in inventory. China's expansion of battery plants, as well as 
cathode and anode production capacity, has far outpaced demand. 
This expansion has been a key driver behind the considerable build-
up of inventory throughout the supply chain, resulting in reduced 
purchases of new materials. Furthermore, amid record high prices in 
2022, many downstream consumers also made efforts to secure 
ample volumes to ensure business continuity.  
The rate of demand growth remained robust in 2023, with lithium 
demand rising by 30% and demand for nickel, cobalt, graphite and 
rare earths expanding by 8-15%. Clean energy applications were one 
of the primary contributors to this demand growth. Across all key 
minerals, the share of clean energy technologies has risen 
consistently. EVs cemented their position as the largest-consuming 
segment for lithium, and increased their share considerably in the 
demand for nickel, cobalt and graphite. 
Nonetheless, the ramp-up of new supply outpaced demand growth in 
the past two years. From Africa to Indonesia, and to China, new 
projects came online relatively quickly, adding sizeable volumes to 
the supply pool. The remarkable increase in nickel supply from 
Indonesia is a notable example.  
Overall, a combination of demand and supply-side trends, alongside 
a correction of overly steep price rises in 2021-22 contributed to the 
lower price environment, which is likely to continue in 2024. As a 
result, despite demand growth, the market size for energy transition 
minerals contracted by 10% to USD 325 billion in 2023. It would have 
been 20% higher if prices had remained at 2022 levels.
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 41  
1. Market review 
Production growth has been accompanied by rising levels of geographical concentration, with 
the trends particularly pronounced for nickel and cobalt 
Share of mined or raw material production by country 
 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
Notes: DRC = Democratic Republic of the Congo. Graphite extraction is for natural flake graphite. Rare earths are magnet rare earths only.
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
2020 2023
2020 2023
2020 2023
2020 2023
2020 2023
2020 2023
Rest of world
Brazil
United States
Myanmar
Mozambique
Russia
New Caledonia
Philippines
Indonesia
China
Peru
DRC
Chile
Australia
Lithium
Copper
Nickel
Cobalt
Natural graphite
Rare earths
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 42  
1. Market review 
The level of geographical concentration for refined products has increased in recent years 
Share of refined material production by country 
 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
Note: Graphite is based on spherical graphite for battery grade. Rare earths are magnet rare earths only.
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
2020 2023
2020 2023
2020 2023
2020 2023
2020 2023
2020 2023
Rest of world
Viet Nam
Malaysia
Norway
United States
Canada
Finland
Argentina
Japan
DRC
Chile
China
Indonesia
Lithium
Copper
Nickel
Cobalt
Graphite
Rare earths
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 43  
1. Market review 
Mining concentration looks different if viewed through the lens of asset ownership, with US and 
European companies playing a greater role 
Mining concentration by geography and ownership 
 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
Notes: Ownership based on company headquarters location. For projects run by multiple companies, production is assigned to the company with the largest share. 
For copper, data are on the top 20 mining companies in 2023 representing 57% of production. For lithium, data cover 100% of production in 2023; for nickel, 93% of 
production; and for cobalt 97% of production. 
Sources: IEA analysis based on S&P Global and Wood Mackenzie.
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Rest of world
United States
Europe
Philippines
Indonesia
China
DRC
Chile
Australia
Lithium
Copper
Nickel
Cobalt
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 44  
1. Market review 
New and more diversified supply sources remain vital, especially for refined materials
Production of key energy transition minerals has expanded 
substantially over the past several years, easing concerns about 
near-term supply shortages. However, as underscored already in the 
IEA’s first Critical Minerals Market Review in 2023, this growth has 
come with increasing levels of geographical concentration. While 
high levels of supply concentration are well-known in the critical 
mineral space, the issue has been exacerbated by further production 
increases from today’s dominant suppliers.  
In the case of refined materials, the share of the top three producing 
nations have all increased since 2020, except for lithium. This trend 
is most pronounced for nickel and cobalt, where the rise of Indonesia 
has significantly boosted the level of supply concentration. Between 
2020 and 2023, Indonesia's share of mined nickel production 
increased from 34% to 52% and its share of refined nickel increased 
from 23% to 37%. Meanwhile, 2023 also witnessed a proliferation of 
trade restriction measures, including increased Chinese controls over 
exports of gallium, germanium, graphite and technologies for 
processing rare earth elements. 
For mining, however, assessing production by ownership (based on 
the leading owner company’s headquarter location) shows a very 
different picture compared with the geographical mine location. 
Companies in the United States and Europe play a much greater role 
in the supply of all critical minerals than what the geographical 
location of mines may suggest. Much of this is from some of the 
largest multi-national mining majors such as Glencore and Rio Tinto. 
Although the majority of copper production occurs in Chile, European 
companies are the leading copper producers with over 10% of 
production, with Glencore, Rio Tinto and Anglo American playing 
major roles, and US companies controlling the second-largest 
amount of production. For lithium, Australia and Chile are the primary 
locations of raw material production, whereas US companies such as 
Abermarle are a major shareholder of over 40% of producing mines. 
Both nickel and cobalt also show stark differences between the 
geographical location of mines compared with the ownership. 
Although Indonesia is the leading location of nickel mining, 
Indonesian companies hold less than 10% of production. Chinese 
companies are the major nickel mine owners, accounting for around 
40% of production. European companies also have a sizeable share 
with over 20% of supply, predominantly due to operations in 
Indonesia owned by Eramet. For cobalt, the majority of mines are 
located in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC), whereas 
European companies such as Glencore and Chinese companies 
such as CMOC own a third each of the supply. Notably, DRC-owned 
companies account for less than 5% of production.  
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 45  
1. Market review 
Short-term market developments for 
key energy transition minerals 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 46  
1. Market review 
Short-term market developments for key energy transition minerals
Copper 
Demand for refined copper increased by 2.7% in 2023, up from 0.9% 
in 2022, almost entirely driven by growing consumption in China and 
India. Demand in other regions registered a modest decline. The 
growth in China was predominantly underpinned by copper uses in 
construction and electricity networks, a trend expected to persist in 
the coming years. Indications from China's 'Two Sessions' meeting 
in March 2024 signal a continued emphasis on expanding copper 
usage, particularly in renewable energy and grid expansion.  
Mined copper output saw an increase of less than 2% in 2023, with 
notable growth in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) and 
Peru offset by declines in Chile and elsewhere. Refined copper 
supply expanded by 4% in 2023, primarily driven by increased 
production in China, with some contributions from the DRC.  
In early 2024, copper prices saw a strong increase as lower-than-
anticipated mined output tipped the concentrate market balance 
toward a slight deficit, contrary to earlier expectations of surpluses. 
The closure of the Cobre Panama mine and downgraded production 
guidance by Anglo American, Vale and Southern Copper contributed 
to this result. Several supply disruptions are continuing in 2024, for 
example, production at the Radomiro Tomic mine in Chile was halted 
due to a worker strike in March. As many smelters sought to secure 
copper concentrates, the spot treatment and refining charges 
(TC/RC) plummeted by 80% between October 2023 and February 
2024. In response, Chinese smelters agreed on several measures to 
limit the decline in TC/RCs, including replacing concentrate usage 
with scrap, bringing forward the schedule for maintenance, reducing 
utilisation rates for unprofitable facilities and postponing new projects. 
The tightness in the concentrate markets extended to the scrap 
market as many smelters sought to increase their usage of scrap to 
complement concentrates. Over recent months, there has been a 
noticeable uptick in China's scrap imports, with repercussions in the 
global scrap market. 
Limited growth in mined supply is anticipated for 2024. However, in 
2025 and 2026, several new projects and expansion plans are 
expected to ramp up, such as Tenke Fungurume (DRC), Quebrada 
Blanca Phase 2 (Chile) and Udokan (Russia). These would bring 
additional volumes to the market but risks remain if these projects fail 
to meet expected growth targets or experience slower ramp-ups. 
Possible sanctions on Russian copper may not materially affect the 
market as many European companies have already diversified their 
supplies and a large portion of Russian volumes currently flow to 
China and Türkiye. 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 47  
1. Market review 
Year-on-year change in copper consumption 
by sector and by region, 2022-2023 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
Note: Includes direct use of scrap. 
Lithium 
In 2023, lithium demand rose by around 30%, maintaining the level 
of growth seen in 2022. Raw material supply increased by 30% with 
traditional producers such as Australia and Chile being joined by new 
players such as Argentina and Zimbabwe. Lithium chemical 
production experienced even greater expansion by 40%, primarily 
driven by China. 
Lithium was a notable beneficiary during the price rally in 2021 and 
early 2022, but in 2023 it was the commodity that was most affected 
by price downturns. The substantial build-up of inventories in the 
downstream battery value chain (e.g. battery cells, cathodes) 
progressively dampened purchasing activity in 2023. Meanwhile new 
supplies from Australia, Argentina and China continued to increase 
throughout the year, further pressuring prices. Lithium prices fell by 
over 75% during the course of 2023, returning to pre-pandemic 
levels. This steep decline prompted various actions by producers to 
reduce output and scale back expansion plans. Core Lithium decided 
to suspend mining operations at its Finniss mine to focus on 
processing stockpiled ore. Albemarle outlined plans to reduce capital 
expenditures for 2024 while implementing cost-cutting measures. 
Talison announced a production reduction plan in response to market 
conditions. 
Lithium prices saw a slight uptick in March-April 2024, supported by 
production cuts and expectations for the end of the destocking cycle. 
The revival of downstream activities may provide some upside for 
prices. However, a significant price surge in the near term is difficult 
to envision. Several potential supply sources stand ready to ramp up 
production, which could cap the potential for a substantial price 
increase. For example, it is estimated that lepidolite assets in China 
currently runs at 40% utilisation rates but could return to the market 
if prices were to rise substantially in the short term. Additionally, 
spodumene assets in China, Canada, Brazil and Africa are also 
positioned for robust growth. On the chemical front, numerous lithium 
refineries are scheduled to commence operations and expand 
capacity in 2024 and 2025, primarily in Argentina, Australia and 
-1 500
-1 000
- 500
 500
1 000
1 500
2022
2023
2022
2023
2022
2023
Others
Construction
Transport
Grid networks
Net change
kt
Global
China
Ex-China
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 48  
1. Market review 
China. Most of the recently announced supply reductions or 
postponements have been associated with hard rock lithium, not 
chemicals. 
While investment and exploration activities in the lithium sector 
remained strong in 2023, the enduring low prices may dampen 
investment appetite for new greenfield projects, thereby impacting 
medium-to-long-term market balances. 
Nickel 
Nickel was another material that experienced significant price 
declines, with prices falling more than 40% in 2023. Several factors, 
including a downstream inventory overhang, the accelerated 
adoption of LFP chemistries, and subdued stainless steel demand, 
particularly in advanced economies, contributed to this downturn. 
However, the primary driver was oversupply, driven by a surge in 
output from Indonesia. 
While demand for nickel grew by 4% in 2022 and 8% in 2023, mined 
nickel supply increased by 19% in 2022 and 9% in 2023. In 2023, 
Indonesia’s production growth was greater than global output growth, 
implying reduced output from other producers. Refined nickel 
production expanded by 14% in 2022 and 2023 each, again led by 
Indonesia and China. 
The delivery of high-pressure acid leaching (HPAL) projects in 
Indonesia, aimed at producing high-purity nickel products from 
laterite resources, exceeded initial projections in terms of speed. 
Indonesia's HPAL projects yielded 180 kt of nickel in 2023, a 
significant rise from 88 kt in 2022. The development of a process to 
convert nickel pig iron (NPI) to nickel matte further contributed to 
notable output growth in the country. 
In recent years, the proliferation of methods to convert low-purity Class 
II products and intermediates has blurred the traditional boundary 
between Class I and Class II products, contributing to a decline in 
nickel prices on the London Metal Exchange (LME) where high-purity 
Class I products are traded. With the notable discounts of nickel 
sulphate and NPI to the LME price, several producers in China (and 
Tsingshan in Indonesia) have begun producing higher-grade nickel 
cathodes suitable for delivery on both the LME and Shanghai Future 
Exchange (SHFE). In July 2023, Huayou’s nickel products were 
accepted by the LME, and other nickel sulphate producers such as 
China’s GEM and CNGR are following suit. Overall, the oversupply of 
Class II and intermediates in Indonesia and China and mechanisms to 
bring the surplus of Class II products to the Class I market coincided 
with weak demand, causing a sharp correction in prices. 
These market conditions have taken a heavy toll on many higher-cost 
producers, prompting them to temporarily suspend production or, in 
some cases, cease operations. Panoramic Resources made the 
decision to halt operations at its Savannah nickel mine in West 
Australia. BHP is reassessing its Nickel West operations and planned 
investments for the West Musgrave project in Australia. This has 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 49  
1. Market review 
sparked discussions about price premiums for nickel products with 
high environmental and social performance. However, there are 
limited indications thus far that consumers favour products with lower 
environmental and social impacts (see the nickel section in Chapter 2). 
Change in nickel supply by country, 2021-2023 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
In 2023, the nickel market saw a surplus equivalent to around 8% of 
annual consumption. While the magnitude of this surplus may 
diminish in 2024 due to growing demand and production cuts, prices 
could remain suppressed given the numerous projects in the 
pipeline, particularly those slated to come online in Indonesia in 
2024 and beyond. Indonesia's share of global nickel supply has 
risen significantly, climbing from 34% in 2020 to 52% in 2023 for 
mined output and from 23% in 2020 to 37% in 2023 for refined 
output. The persistent low-price environment may further bolster 
this share in the years ahead. 
Cobalt 
Cobalt prices remained subdued throughout 2023 due to a 
combination of production growth from the DRC and Indonesia 
coinciding with weak demand. Over the past two years, demand for 
cobalt has increased by 8-10% annually, while mined cobalt supply 
expanded by an average of 16% and refined cobalt supply by 13%. 
In 2023, prices for cobalt metal performed better than those for cobalt 
sulphate, signalling weaker demand in the battery sector compared 
with demand for alloys and magnets. 
The DRC, the largest supplier with a 65% market share, delivered the 
largest increase in production in 2023. The ramp-up of CMOC’s 
Kisanfu mine in the DRC exceeded expectations from the industry, 
and the resolution of the dispute between DRC’s state-owned mining 
company Gécamines and China’s CMOC allowed the Tenke 
Fungurume mine to resume exports. Consequently, CMOC 
surpassed Glencore as the largest supplier of mined cobalt to the 
global market. Indonesia rapidly ascended to become the second-
largest producer, driven by the burgeoning production of mixed-
hydroxide precipitate (MHP) from its HPAL facilities. For refined 
cobalt, China has dominated production volume growth over the past 
few years, with virtually no growth observed in other regions. 
- 200
 200
 400
 600
 800
2021
2022
2023
2021
2022
2023
Other
Canada
Australia
Russia
Philippines
China
Indonesia
Total
kt
Mined
Refined
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 50  
1. Market review 
Price developments for cobalt, 2021-2024 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
Notes: Cobalt metal is based on China Cobalt Metal 99.8%. Cobalt sulphate is 
based on Cobalt sulphate 20.5% China. Quality adjusted. 
Sources: IEA analysis based on S&P Global and Bloomberg. 
Subdued prices prompted many producers to stockpile cobalt 
hydroxide or metal in an effort to bolster future profitability, though 
the effectiveness of these measures hinges on the evolution of near-
term market balances. Cobalt prices are expected to remain subdued 
in 2024 as supply growth continues to outpace demand growth. While 
overall battery deployment continues to increase, the trend in battery 
chemistry choices is shifting towards those using less cobalt. 
Although the pace of supply growth is anticipated to slow in 2024, 
significant price support in the near term is unlikely, although 
logistical bottlenecks or unexpected supply disruptions of large mines 
could trigger a brief price rally.  
Graphite 
In 2023, graphite consumption grew by 11% to 4.6 Mt, with battery-
related demand growing by 40% to 1.5 Mt. Mining production of 
natural graphite has been stable, while synthetic production 
continued to ramp up, allowing total graphite supply to grow by 10.5% 
and reach 5.5 Mt. 
Production is ramping up in more diversified areas, such as the Lac-
des-Îles mine coming back online in Quebec, and production starting 
in Madagscar’s Molo mine. New developments are taking place with 
more integrated models, with anode producers building increasingly 
intregrated supply chains – such as Korea’s POSCO securing supply 
of 24 kt per year from the Balama mine in Mozambique, whose owner 
is also developing anode material production in Louisiana. 
As for other key battery metals, graphite prices experienced a 
significant drop in prices over the course of 2023 with prices for 
natural flake graphite falling by 30% and spherical graphite by 45%. 
One of the most significant developments for graphite this year is that 
since December 2023, natural and refined battery-grade graphite are 
subject to export controls from China. These are not the first set of 
Chinese export controls for critical minerals, with restrictive measures 
taken for rare earth elements in the early 2010s and for gallium and 
germanium since July 2023, but it is the first time these happened for 
a critical input of the EV supply chain. In January and February 2024, 
exports to Japan and Korea – key EV anode producers outside of 
 20
 40
 60
 80
 100
2021
2022
2023
2024
LME
cobalt
Cobalt
metal
Cobalt
sulphate
USD per tonne
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 51  
1. Market review 
China – were significantly below average although they returned to 
normal levels in March. In parallel, new US IRA guidance is creating 
incentives for a number of battery manufacturers to source graphite 
from outside of China. While the market is well supplied for the 
moment, this raises an important question about the availability of 
graphite that is compliant with a range of policy measures aimed at 
promoting supply chain diversification. It remains to be seen whether 
market fragmentation creates divergent regional price dynamics 
going forward. 
China’s exports of graphite 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
Source: IEA analysis based on Wood Mackenzie. 
Rare earth elements 
The rare earth elements (REE) industry is still bearing the legacy of 
concerns around risk and volatility which emerged during the 2010-
2011 price spike. Over several decades, China has built its position in 
the REE market with the long-term goal of growing its downstream 
industry and has become the leader in refined rare earth technologies 
(see the rare earth elements section in Chapter 2). The REE market is 
fundamentally driven by developments in China, which is the single-
largest source of mined rare earths from two principal areas. The 
largest source of light rare earths (LREE) - including neodymium and 
praseodymium, is a by-product supply from the Bayan Obo iron mine 
in Inner Mongolia. But China also hosts vast quantities of heavy rare 
earths (HREE) - including dysprosium and terbium, in ionic adsorption 
clay deposits in southern China. With additional mine supply spread 
across the country, China is the largest producer of mined REEs. 
The supply chain for REEs and permanent magnets is complex, 
regionally concentrated and marked by a lack of transparent pricing. In 
2023, the REE markets saw an oversupply from China and a lower-
than-expected downstream demand. Chinese production quotas for 
LREEs increased modestly in the second half of 2023, raising the 
availability of materials in the market. Neodymium prices are estimated 
to have fallen by 45% over the course of 2023. Net profit for the China 
Northern Rare Earth Group, one of the largest global producers, was 
estimated to be in the range of CNY 2.17 billion (Yuan renminbi) 
(USD 303 million) to CNY 2.33 billion in 2023, a decline of around 60% 
from CNY 5.98 billion (USD 934 million) in 2022. 
 3
 6
 9
 12
 15
Jan-23
Mar-23
May-23
Jul-23
Sep-23
Nov-23
Jan-24
Mar-24
Spherical graphite
Synthetic graphite
kt
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 52  
1. Market review 
As China imports HREE feedstock from Myanmar and Laos for 
domestic processing, Myanmar's decision to close its borders raised 
concerns about the reliable supply of HREEs. However, the latest 
data indicates that the closures had little impact on trade flows. REE 
mining activity mainly occurs in Kachin state, which has significant 
autonomy. Meanwhile, there was an increasing volume of HREE 
feedstock from Lao PDR to China, which also contributed to 
alleviating concerns about material availability. 
While the markets appear to be well-supplied to meet near-term 
demand, the current low-price environments could delay projects 
planned outside China, further pushing back already lengthy lead 
time projects intended to boost diversification. Another area of 
concern could be tightened supply of HREEs in the medium term. 
While a lot of attention was paid in the last decade to LREEs used in 
EV motor magnets (neodymium and praseodymium), HREEs such 
as dysprosium and terbium are also key components, but their 
relative supply from the main rare earth deposits is not in sync with 
their use. Avoiding this would require all currently announced projects 
to secure funding and scale up rapidly. 
Concerns surrounding transparent reporting in rare earth markets 
also need to be addressed to avoid situations such as the recent legal 
action against major players in Viet Nam, which could put expected 
supplies at risk or create barriers for diversification. 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 53  
1. Market review 
 Will uranium be a bottleneck for a nuclear comeback? 
 
 After a decade of slow deployment, a changing policy landscape is 
creating opportunities for a nuclear comeback. Nuclear power 
capacity increases from 420 GW in 2023 to 500 GW by 2030 and 
770 GW by 2050 in the Announced Pledges Scenario (APS), with 
growth mainly in China and other developing economies, while 
advanced economies carry out lifetime extensions and look to builld 
new projects to offset retirements. Large-scale reactors remain the 
dominant form, but growing interest in small modular reactors 
increases the potential for nuclear power in the long run.  
After climbing steadily for a couple of years, spot prices for uranium 
oxide spiked in the second half of 2023, reaching over USD 100 per 
pound in February 2024, the highest price seen in over 15 years, 
before falling again to just under USD 90 in March. Amid ongoing 
uncertainty over the possibility of import restrictions from the United 
States and European countries on supplies from Russia, news in 
2023 of a coup in Niger and a sulphuric acid shortage in Kazakhstan 
put pressure on supplies of uranium oxides. While the current price 
spikes are not entirely supported by market fundamentals given that 
many countries have sizeable stockpiles for nuclear fuels and it will 
take many years for planned nuclear capacities to come online, the 
recent price rally highlights a growing concern around uranium 
supplies to support the growth of nuclear power.  
 
Following the invasion of Ukraine, Western governments have 
become increasingly concerned about Russia’s role in the nuclear 
fuel supply chain. In recent years, Russia has accounted for a third 
of all conversion and 40% of enrichment services globally. Russia 
is also the only commercial supplier of high-assay low-enriched 
uranium (HALEU) necessary for certain advanced reactor designs. 
Several governments have recently announced moves to reduce 
dependence on Russia. In January 2023, the US Department of 
Energy announced awards to the conversion industry to develop its 
strategic uranium reserve. In April 2023, Canada, France, Japan, 
the United Kingdom and the United States announced an 
agreement to support the stable supply of nuclear fuel and 
“undermine Russia’s grip” on nuclear fuel supply chains. Since then, 
the United Kingdom and the United States have announced moves 
to encourage the development of HALEU enrichment capacity.  
Nonetheless, it is too early to tell if high prices and supply supports 
seen in 2023 will be sufficient to encourage Western suppliers to 
expand production. US domestic production of uranium in 2023 
remained at historically low levels. However, some producers in 
Canada and the United States have announced that they will restart 
production in 2024 at previously mothballed facilities.  
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 54  
1. Market review 
Investment trends 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 55  
1. Market review 
Reduced material prices and increased manufacturing capacity underpinned major cost 
reductions for clean energy technologies, with solar PV and batteries reaching record lows 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
Notes: The IEA Clean Energy Equipment Price Index tracks price movements of a fixed basket of solar PV panels, wind turbines and lithium-ion batteries (for EVs 
and energy storage). Prices are weighted based on the shares of global average annual investment. 
Sources: IEA analysis based on company financial reports and BloombergNEF.
 120
 240
 360
 480
 600
 0.5
 1.0
 1.5
 2.0
 2.5
2014
2016
2018
2020
2022 2023
USD/kWh (nominal)
Million USD/MW (nominal)
EV batteries (right axis)
Storage batteries
Wind turbines
Solar panels
Average prices for selected technologies 
 50
 100
 150
 200
 250
2014
2016
2018
2020
2022 2023
Index (2019 Q4 = 100)
IEA Clean Energy Equipment Price Index
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 56  
1. Market review 
However, low prices resulted in a decline in industry profits by a third in 2023, exacerbated by 
recent increases in production costs 
 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
Notes: EBIT = earnings before interest and taxes. Production case cost is based on the weighted average value for the assets in the 75th quartile. 
Sources: IEA analysis based on company financial reports and S&P Global.
-50
50
150
250
350
- 100
 100
 300
 500
 700
2013 2015 2017 2019 2021 2023
Billion USD
Aggregate financial performance
of major mining companies
Revenue
EBIT
(right axis)
Free cash flow
(right axis)
 3
 6
 9
 12
 15
'20
'21
'22
'23
Nickel
 6
 12
 18
 24
 30
'20
'21
'22
'23
Cobalt
 1
 2
 3
 4
 5
'20
'21
'22
'23
Labour
Energy
Reagents
Other onsite
TC/RC and shipment
Royalty
USD per kilogramme (2023)
Copper
Production cash cost 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 57  
1. Market review 
Investment in critical mineral mining grew by 10% in 2023, a smaller increase than seen in 2022, 
as price declines placed pressure on producers’ financial capacity  
Capital expenditure on nonferrous metal production by major mining companies, 2011-2023 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
Notes: Co = cobalt; Cu = copper; Ni = nickel. For diversified majors, capex on the production of iron ore, gold, coal and other energy products was excluded. Nominal 
values. The results for Arcadium start from 2016.  
Source: IEA analysis based on company annual reports and S&P Global.
 10
 20
 30
 40
 50
 60
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
Billion USD
Arcadium
IGO
Tianqi Lithium
Pilbara Minerals
Mineral Resources
Ganfeng Lithium
SQM
Albemarle
Zijin Mining
Eramet
South 32
Zhejiang Huayou
CMOC Group
Norilsk Nickel
KGHM
First Quantum Minerals
Southern Copper
Codelco
Glencore
Teck Resources
Freeport-McMoRan
Vale
Anglo American
BHP
Rio Tinto
Lithium
specialists
Focused players
(Cu, Ni, Co)
Diversified
majors
30%
10%
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 58  
1. Market review 
Diversified mining majors are taking a measured approach to investment; specialist players are 
taking on more risks in pursuit of future growth, albeit with reduced new debt issuances 
Cash generation and disposition trends by major mining companies, 2015-2023 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
Notes: Excludes investment in marketable securities and others. Capital expenditure covers all commodities, including nonferrous metals. Reinvestment ratio 
investment = capital expenditure in nonferrous metal production as a percentage of operating cash flow.  
Sources: IEA analysis based on company annual reports and S&P Global.
- 50%
- 25%
 0%
 25%
 50%
 75%
 100%
- 100
- 50
0
 50
 100
 150
 200
2015
2017
2019
2021
2023
Cash flow from operations
Equity issued
Debt raised/repaid
Capital expenditure
Acquisition (net of divestment)
Dividend/share repurchases
Reinvestment ratio (right axis)
Diversified mining majors
Billion 
- 50%
- 25%
 0%
 25%
 50%
 75%
 100%
- 60
- 30
0
 30
 60
 90
 120
2015
2017
2019
2021
2023
Focused players (Cu, Ni, Co, Li)
Billion 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 59  
1. Market review 
Exploration spending increased by 15% in 2023, driven by Canada and Australia; despite 
headwinds from falling prices, lithium exploration spending continued to surge by nearly 80%  
Exploration spending for selected nonferrous mineral resources, 2019-2023 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
Notes: Excludes budgets for iron ore, coal, aluminium, gold and diamonds. Others comprise rare earth elements, potash/phosphate and many other minor metals. 
Sources: IEA analysis based on S&P Global.
 2
 4
 6
 8
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
Billion USD
Rest of world
Africa
Asia Pacific
Australia
Latin America
Canada
United States
By region
 2
 4
 6
 8
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
Others
Uranium
Platinum
Silver
Lithium
Nickel
Zinc
Copper
By commodity
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 60  
1. Market review 
Venture capital investment in the critical mineral sector continued to rise in 2023, with 
significant growth in battery recycling offsetting reductions in mining and refining start-ups 
Early- and growth-stage venture capital investment into critical mineral start-ups, 2017-2023 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
Note: The USD 450 million deal for Energy Exploration Technologies was excluded from the 2022 records as it was subject to the initial public offering process in 
2024. This adjustment resulted in a lower 2022 figure compared with the previous year's Critical Minerals Market Review 2023.  
Source: IEA analysis based on Cleantech Group i3 database.
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1.0
 1.2
 1.4
 1.6
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
Billion USD (2023)
Other
Battery reuse
Battery and waste recycling
Rare earth extraction
Copper extraction
Cobalt extraction
Lithium extraction and
refining
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 61  
1. Market review 
Two sides of price declines: A boon for clean energy deployment but a bane for investment and 
diversification?
Lower prices have contributed to cost reductions for a number of 
clean energy technologies, although they were not the only factor. 
Substantial increases in manufacturing capacity, especially in China, 
have also driven a decrease in prices of clean energy equipment in 
2023. 
Following two years of rise, IEA’s global Clean Energy Equipment 
Price Index (CEEPI) reveals that prices eased considerably during 
2023, with the fourth quarter of 2023 reaching the index’s lowest 
level. The CEEPI tracks price movements in a global basket of solar 
PV modules, wind turbines, lithium-ion batteries for EVs and battery 
storage, weighted by shares of investment. Solar PV module prices 
saw a strong decline as Chinese exports of cells and modules 
reached 255 GW in 2023, over three times the 2019 level. Price 
pressures in the wind turbine industry have somewhat eased 
although prices remain high for non-Chinese producers. After an 
increase in prices in 2022, battery pack prices also dropped by 14% 
in 2023. The main driver was a major reduction in prices of critical 
minerals, as well as an increase in production capacity. 
While the low-price environment may foster additional deployment of 
clean energy technologies in the medium term, it currently presents 
challenges for producers’ financial performance. Industry revenues 
declined by 10% in 2023 while operating profits plummeted by 34%. 
Free cash flow also decreased by over 40%, constraining the 
industry's ability to allocate significant capital for future growth. These 
challenges have been exacerbated by increases in production costs 
in recent years. Since 2020, production cash costs for copper, nickel, 
and cobalt have all trended upwards, with marginal declines in 2023. 
Between 2020 and 2023, production costs increased by 6% per year 
for copper, 11% for nickel and 13% for cobalt. Royalties were the 
largest contributor for copper and nickel, and costs related to energy 
and reagents were the main driver across the materials. 
This triggered a flurry of announcements to put capacity into 
maintenance and suspend operations (suspension does not mean a 
permanent closure). While many high-cost producers and new 
entrants are feeling the impact of the price crash, numerous 
established assets are still profitable in the current price environment. 
This suggests that, while prices may rebound as the destocking cycle 
ends, significant increases could be restrained by growing supplies 
in the near term. Consequently, this could lead to further 
geographical concentration of production, as today's dominant 
suppliers typically operate at the lower end of the cost curve. 
Against this backdrop, we have assessed the combined investment 
levels of 25 major mining companies with substantial involvement in 
developing minerals essential for the energy transition. These 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 62  
1. Market review 
companies encompass diversified mining majors and specialised 
developers focused on specific energy transition minerals such as 
copper, nickel, cobalt, and lithium.  
Our assessment suggests that investment in critical minerals mining 
grew by 10% in 2023 (6% when adjusted for inflation), a smaller 
increase compared with the 30% growth in 2022. While investment 
spending by diversified majors increased by 15%, investment by 
lithium specialists saw a sharp rise by 60%, despite headwinds from 
weak prices. 
Exploration spending grew by 15% in 2023, with Canada and 
Australia registering the largest increases, followed closely by Africa. 
Spending for lithium exhibited an impressive 80% increase despite 
challenging market conditions, followed by platinum and nickel. 
In 2023, companies allocated approximately 50% of the generated 
cash to investment, while the remainder flowed back to shareholders 
and lenders through dividends, share buybacks and debt repayment. 
Diversified mining majors appear to take a more measured approach 
to investment, whereas specialist players focusing on specific 
minerals allocated a greater portion to growth investment, although 
noticeable reductions in new debt issuances were observed.  
As venture capital (VC) investors look for new opportunities across 
EV supply chains, battery recycling and critical mineral extraction and 
refining continued to gain momentum. VC investment in the battery 
recycling space expanded significantly in 2023, notably driven by a 
USD 540 million round of growth equity funding to United States-
based Ascend Elements. Investment in mining and refining start-ups 
contracted by 12% to USD 375 million in 2023. Cobalt extraction 
attracted nearly USD 200 million in 2023. Lithium extraction and 
refining attracted USD 150 million, much higher than the dip of 2022 
but still below the record year of 2021.  
Notable critical mineral deals in 2023 included USD 50 million series 
A investment by Canada-based Summit Nanotech to scale its more 
sustainable lithium extraction technology. In the United States, 
Kobold Metals raised USD 195 million in growth equity to expand 
cobalt extraction, Energy Exploration Technologies raised USD 50 
million for direct lithium extraction from GM Ventures, and Atlas 
Materials raised USD 27 million in seed money to develop nickel 
extraction technologies.
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 63  
1. Market review 
China’s approach to mineral investment and security
China is the dominant global refiner for critical minerals, processing 
over half of all lithium, cobalt, graphite and rare earth elements. 
However, with the exception of graphite and rare earth elements, 
China is not a major mining centre for these minerals. Therefore, 
China relies on imports of concentrates and feedstock to supply its 
refining and subsequent manufacturing operations. The security of 
supply of these minerals is of a critical concern to China as well. 
The importance of these minerals has driven an acceleration of 
Chinese investment into the mining sector, both domestically and 
internationally. In 2023 Chinese investment in the metals and mining 
sector related to the Belt and Road Initiative reached USD 19.4 
billion, the highest level in a decade, and a remarkable 160% 
increase from 2022. China’s investment in and acquisition of 
overseas mines has grown significantly in the past ten years, 
reaching record levels of USD 10 billion in the first half of 2023 with 
a particular focus on battery metals such as lithium, nickel and cobalt. 
Out of the seven lithium assets in Africa that are expected to start 
production by 2027, five have at least 50% equity ownership by 
Chinese companies. One of the most significant investments was the 
Arcadia project in Zimbabwe (by Zhejiang Huayou Cobalt). In Latin 
America, a consortium led by CATL won a bid in 2023 for a USD 1.4 
billion investment to develop Bolivia's resources of lithium. In 
addition, the Chinese mining major Zijin Mining acquired Canada’s 
Neo Lithium for USD 770 million in 2021 to access the Tres 
Quebradas lithium project in Argentina. China accounted for 44% of 
global lithium M&A investments (by value) over the past three years 
and most of these deals were related to projects in the initial stage of 
development (initial exploration, feasibility, development). Chinese 
companies also dominate nickel mining in Indonesia, the largest 
global supplier of nickel, with a surge of investment over recent years 
since the complete ore export ban in 2020, including in supporting 
infrastructure from the Belt and Road initiative. In 2024, majority 
Chinese-owned producers supply over 80% of Indonesia’s battery 
nickel output. Domestically, China has also ramped up its mining 
activity, being the third-largest lithium producer. The Xiangyuan 
lepidolite project (Hunan) is expected to bring 60 kt to 70 kt of lithium 
carbonates equivalent per year to the domestic market.  
Another critical measure from China is the accumulation of national 
stockpiles, particularly during times of low commodity prices. China’s 
State Reserves Bureau took advantage of the global financial crisis 
and metal price slump to build up inventories and stockpiles of critical 
materials, acting as a buffer for the industry against short-term 
disruption which can also be used as market-balancing volumes to 
influence prices. In the current lower price and oversupply 
environment, there is anticipation that China may continue to 
increase supply, taking market share from other players.
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 64  
1. Market review 
Inventories of key energy transition minerals at major metals exchanges have been trending 
downwards 
Historical stock levels of copper and nickel at major metals exchanges, 2015-2024 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
Notes: CME = Chicago Mercantile Exchange. Copper (LME, SHFE, CME); nickel (LME, SHFE). Metals stock is an aggregate volume of deliverables and on warrant. 
Source: IEA analysis based on Bloomberg.
 200
 400
 600
 800
1 000
1 200
kt Cu
LME
SHFE
CME
Copper
 100
 200
 300
 400
 500
 600
Nickel
kt Ni
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 65  
1. Market review 
Trading volumes for copper and nickel have been declining, while those for cobalt and lithium 
rise but from much lower levels 
Daily trade volume for key battery metals at major exchanges  
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
Notes: Trading liquidity indicates monthly average of daily traded volumes in major metal exchanges. Copper (LME, SHFE, CME); nickel (LME, SHFE); cobalt (LME, 
CME); lithium (LME, CME). 
Source: IEA analysis based on Bloomberg.
 1
 2
 3
 4
 5
 6
2021
2022
2023
2024
Copper
Nickel
Copper and nickel
Mt
 100
 200
 300
 400
 500
 600
2021
2022
2023
2024
Cobalt
Lithium
Cobalt and lithium
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 66  
1. Market review 
Inventories and trading liquidity at major exchanges remain subdued
Inventories and trading volumes of critical minerals at major metals 
future exchanges provide an indicator on the liquidity. Copper and 
nickel have been traded for long and more actively in London Metal 
Exchange (LME), Shanghai Futures Exchange (SHFE), or Chicago 
Mercantile Exchange (CME) due to their longstanding consumption 
in industries. With the rising demand for clean energy technologies, 
cobalt and lithium have been making notable appearances in major 
metal exchanges in recent years. 
Stock 
With LME and CME stocks combined, copper stocks have been 
dwindling to historic lows although there has been a recent surge in 
SHFE stocks. In recent months, copper stock in the SHFE saw the 
strongest increase since 2020, reflecting China’s high imports to fill 
up the low inventory from last year and meet demand growth in 
manufacturing. This high level may subside in the near term, 
however, as consumption picks up with China’s stronger-than-
expected manufacturing activity and higher business confidence. 
While visible stocks at exchanges represent only a fraction of total 
stocks, their decline suggests a tightening market and limited 
capacity to absorb supply shocks.  
Inventories for nickel, despite the SHFE recording a four-year high in 
recent months, still dwindles from its historical high level in aggregate 
terms. The LME saw a rise earlier in 2024 due to the addition of 
Russian and Chinese nickel. However, a ban on Russian-origin metal 
introduced in April 2024 may impact this growth going forward. 
Trading volume 
Trading volumes of copper and nickel on major metals exchanges 
indicate them as the most liquid among key energy transition 
minerals due to their longer history of consumption in industries. 
Liquidity of nickel has yet to recover from the level prior to the LME’s 
contract suspension in March 2022, which created a ripple effect on 
the SHFE to also suspend nickel contract for a day. 
Cobalt and lithium have seen notable growth in trading volumes in 
the LME and CME over the last two years as their demand trends 
upwards. As expected cobalt demand rises, trading activity increased 
on the CME cobalt contract with producers and consumers 
responding to the narrative. Lithium contracts soared last year with 
growing hedging activity from traders and industry after its price 
dropped in 2023. Growing demand for lithium has led market players 
to hedge from increasing exposure to the volatile commodities 
market. However, the trading liquidity of battery metals still lags 
significantly behind that of other bulk materials, despite recent 
improvements. As it stands, daily traded volume as a percentage of 
annual production represents less than 1% for lithium and cobalt.
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 67  
1. Market review 
Latest policy developments 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 68  
1. Market review 
Producing countries intensify efforts to secure economic benefits; consumer nations enact 
significant laws and regulations to ensure an adequate and responsible supply 
Laws, regulations, and high-level policies are being reformed and 
issued globally, given the latest surge in interest for critical minerals 
projects. From policies included in the 2023 update of the Critical 
Minerals Policy Tracker, it is clear that producing countries and 
consumer countries often have different policy objectives. ESG 
regulations and co-operation agreements are more apparent in 
developed producer economies and in consumer countries, with 
some endowed with resources also focusing on financing project 
development. On the other hand, jurisdictions on the supply side 
have focused on ensuring economic benefits from their own 
resources. To boost supply resilience, countries are increasingly 
working together – both multilaterally and bilaterally – to identify 
priority projects and strengthen co-operative ties. 
Producer policies  
While some producing countries already have high-level critical 
minerals strategies, such as Australia and Canada, more critical 
minerals strategies are now under development, particularly by new 
market entrants. For example, the African Minerals Development 
Centre (ADMC) is developing an African Green Minerals Strategy 
which will aim to guide African countries as they consider how to 
exploit their raw materials. Individual countries are also in the process 
of developing strategies, such as Zambia, which is intending to 
release a critical minerals strategy in 2024. 
Some mineral-producing jurisdictions have created public strategic 
minerals investment funds. In February 2024, Brazil announced a 
USD 200 million fund to support both exploration and improvements 
in ESG practices. In October 2023, Australia expanded its Critical 
Minerals Facility with a USD 1.3 billion investment, financing 
extraction and processing projects. Canada’s CAD 1.5 billion 
(Canadian dollars) Strategic Innovation Fund, as part of the CAD 2.8 
billion Critical Minerals Strategy, aims to prioritise innovative critical 
minerals manufacturing, processing and recycling projects. 
In Latin America, both Mexico and Chile enacted policies to develop 
their domestic lithium mining industries. Mexico followed its 2022 
Mining Reform with legislative amendments in 2023 that streamlined 
the mining permitting process and strengthened environmental and 
social protections. Pertinent amendments include: (i) cancelling 
concessions for environmental and safety risks; (ii) creating new 
mining offenses; (iii) empowering the water authority to reduce the 
industrial water concession for mining operations to ensure enough 
water for local consumption; (iv) prohibiting mining operations in 
protected areas; and (v) placing the liability for mining and 
metallurgical waste on concession holders.  
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 69  
1. Market review 
Chile also followed its 2023 National Lithium Strategy with an update 
to its Mining Royalty Law in 2023. The law established a mining 
royalty for the exploitation of copper and lithium to distribute 
economic benefits across the country, along with a legal body to 
administer it. Included in the law are increases to the tax burden on 
mining activities specifically for mining operators whose annual sales 
are predominantly derived from copper and exceed an equivalent 
value of 50 000 metric tonnes of fine copper, but with a maximum 
potential tax burden of 45.5% for those with 80 000 metric tonnes and 
46.5% for the rest. Revenue from the law (estimated to be USD 450 
million) will be distributed to funds such as: (i) a fund to compensate 
mining communities that have been directly affected by the negative 
externalities of mining activities (USD 55 million); (ii) a fund for the 
most vulnerable communities in the country; and (iii) a fund to 
leverage productive infrastructure investments in the northern 
regions. 
The United States and European Union have proposed reforms to 
permitting processes to increase domestic mining production and 
reduce dependency on imports. The Permitting Action Plan outlines 
key actions, including better internal coordination, tracking of review 
progress, enhancing outreach and providing technical assistance to 
affected stakeholders. The Inflation Reduction Act provides funding 
to various government agencies to hire new personnel and develop 
tools and guidance to strengthen and accelerate environmental 
reviews.  
Separately, the proposed Critical Raw Materials Act (CRMA) would 
allow certain projects to be designated as “strategic” that would have 
a streamlined permitting process. The act lays out criteria for a project 
to be designated as “strategic,” including whether the project would 
be implemented sustainably and responsibly. Besides permitting 
processes, the CRMA would also create a monitoring mechanism to 
mitigate the risk of supply chain bottlenecks. 
In order to meet the policy goal of increasing the amount of local value 
addition, some producing countries are turning to export restrictions 
on raw or unprocessed ores. In 2020, Indonesia announced that it 
would restrict the export of unprocessed nickel. While the World 
Trade Organization (WTO) ruled against Indonesia’s restrictions 
following the European Union’s challenge, the lack of a quorum at the 
WTO Appellate Body has delayed the appeal process indefinitely. In 
the meantime, Indonesia implemented similar restrictions on bauxite 
ore in June 2023 and announced restrictions on copper ore expected 
to be in force in June 2024. Other countries have adopted or are 
considering adopting similar measures, including Namibia, which 
banned the export of lithium ore in mid-2023, and Zimbabwe, which 
banned raw lithium exports in 2023 to attempt to secure value 
addition. 
Other countries in Asia have enacted export restrictions designed to 
encourage supply and safeguard national interest. China issued 
export controls last year, such as the export control of gallium- and 
germanium-related items (in force August 2023) and the export 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 70  
1. Market review 
control for graphite-related items (in force December 2023), through 
which businesses are required to seek export licences from the 
government.  
Consumer policies 
At the same time, consumer countries have developed laws and 
regulations targeting sufficient supplies of responsible critical 
minerals. This has been particularly true in countries with large 
downstream manufacturing industries, which rely on a supply of 
these minerals. Japan announced a policy on initiatives for ensuring 
stable supply of critical minerals in 2023, which aims to secure 
supplies for its battery manufacturing goals and provides subsidies 
for exploration, feasibility studies, mine development, smelting and 
research and development to develop supplies. Korea announced a 
list of 33 critical minerals and 10 strategic critical minerals, of which 
the latter will be prioritised to stabilise the supply chain of high-tech 
industries such as semi-conductors and secondary batteries. The 
country is also seeking to deepen co-operation with 30 identified 
resource-rich countries to secure mineral deals. 
As a next step to minerals lists, strategic plans have been issued over 
the last year which focus on specific needs based on countries’ 
priority minerals. Japan released a Resource Diplomacy Guidance, 
which outlines the country’s approach to minerals and producing 
countries and specifies the priority minerals and countries from which 
it intends to source. 
Some countries also make financing support available for overseas 
projects through direct equity investments or sovereign wealth funds, 
such as in Japan, Saudi Arabia and China. The United Kingdom also 
pledged USD 1 million to identify bankable projects in processing and 
midstream value addition in 14 African countries. In the European 
Union, France set up a critical minerals and metals equity fund 
managed by InfraVia and backed by up to USD 500 million in 
government funds. The fund will function as a minority shareholder of 
industrial and mining stakeholders across the value chain, and is 
focused on securing offtake contracts to support French and 
European industries, with a commitment to adhere to high social and 
environmental standards in collaboration with various financing 
partners. 
In the last year, consumer countries have also made significant 
strides to integrate policies targeting the sourcing of responsibly 
produced minerals. In the European Union, the Corporate 
Sustainability Reporting Directive (CSRD) and the Corporate 
Sustainability Due Diligence Directive (CSDDD) enhance corporate 
accountability regarding ESG performance. The CSRD will make it 
mandatory for all large European companies and companies listed 
on EU-regulated markets to report on selected ESG metrics by 1 
January 2024. The CSRD is working to release sector-specific 
requirements, including for the mining sector. Complementary to the 
CSRD, the CSDDD imposes mandatory human rights and 
environmental due diligence requirements on large companies, 
compelling them to identify, prevent, and mitigate adverse impacts in 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 71  
1. Market review 
their operations and entire value chain. This includes obligations for 
companies to establish and update a climate transition plan aimed at 
aligning business strategies with the Paris Agreement and the 
European Union’s 2050 climate neutrality target. 
International co-operation 
A number of countries work through the Minerals Security 
Partnership (MSP) to collaboratively strengthen security of supply. In 
2024, the MSP welcomed Estonia as its newest member, bringing 
participation to 14 countries plus the European Union. This effort is 
focused on supporting the development of strategic projects. In late 
2023 and early 2024, the MSP countries announced progress in 
raising financing or securing offtake agreements for a number of 
projects including ones targeting manganese, nickel, and graphite.  
There has been a growing trend of countries announcing bilateral or 
multilateral strategic partnerships focused on critical minerals, some 
of which integrate strong ESG standards. Recent examples include 
a Statement of Intent between Australia and the United Kingdom and 
the United Kingdom and South Africa partnership on minerals for 
future clean energy technologies, Strategic Partnerships between the 
European Union and Chile, the Democratic Republic of the Congo 
and Zambia, and a memoranda of understanding between Canada 
and Korea. The specific content of these partnerships varies, but they 
generally are aimed at strengthening bilateral ties and providing 
vehicles for countries to support individual projects. That said, the 
specific impact of individual partnerships depend on how they are 
implemented, which is difficult to gauge in many cases as many 
partnership arrangements are not made public. 
In the next year, we expect to see more bilateral agreements and 
strategic partnerships emerge with a focus on either securing or 
developing critical minerals supplies. The European Union is looking 
to expand its network of Sustainable Investment Facilitation 
Agreements of Free Trade Agreements. Emerging producer 
countries are also expected to continue signing agreements to boost 
investment into critical minerals projects in their countries. In 2023, 
economic ministers from France, Germany, and Italy aligned to 
enhance the sustainable supply chain of critical raw materials by 
setting specific targets for extraction, processing, and recycling, and 
by expanding the list of strategic materials to include aluminium. They 
committed to enforcing stringent ESG criteria and established a 
dedicated working group to ensure effective implementation of these 
initiatives. 
Recycling policies 
Strategic plans have incorporated measures aimed at boosting rates 
of battery recycling, and 2023 saw a notable uptick in policies aimed 
at increasing the recycling of clean energy technologies to secure 
critical minerals from both consumer and producer countries. The 
European Union’s Critical Raw Materials Act will require member 
states to identify, adopt and implement measures to improve the 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 72  
1. Market review 
collection and recycling of critical mineral-rich waste, as well as 
investigate the potential for recovery of critical raw materials from 
extractive waste in active and historic mining sites. Norway’s Mineral 
Strategy, released in June 2023, also includes focus on a circular 
economy, requiring new mineral projects to present a circular 
business plan.  
Specific measures to increase recycling have come in the form of 
investment into research and development and waste collection, 
such as the United States’ USD 192 million of funding for increasing 
recycling rates and research and development into battery recycling 
technologies from consumer products. There has also been project-
specific funding, with the European Commission providing battery 
producer BASF with a USD 110 million grant to support a battery 
recycling project in Spain.  
 
 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 73  
1. Market review 
 Example of harmonisation of ESG standards: Consolidated Mining Standard Initiative 
 
 In recent years, there has been a growing chorus of calls for greater 
harmonisation or convergence of existing ESG standards and 
sustainability initiatives. Against this backdrop, the International 
Council on Mining and Metals (ICMM), The Copper Mark, the Mining 
Association of Canada and the World Gold Council announced in 
November 2023 that they will seek to consolidate their individual 
standards into one global responsible mining standard with a multi-
stakeholder oversight system. The collaboration aims to simplify the 
landscape of standards and sustainability initiatives and drive 
performance improvements at scale.  
The organisations have expressed their expectation that the 
consolidation process will combine the best attributes of each 
individual standard and be implementable by any mine operator at 
site-level with a commitment to mine responsibly, with substantive 
prescriptive 
performance 
requirements, 
robust 
independent 
assurance and a multi-stakeholder governance model. The 
consolidated standard will cover more than 20 performance areas 
grouped under Ethical Business Practices, Worker and Social 
Safeguards, Social Performance, and Environmental Stewardship. 
The organisations have announced that they will collect input from 
all interested stakeholders, including affected communities,  
 
Indigenous peoples, civil society organisations, industry, investors, 
downstream customers and government. 
With the proposal expected to go out for public consultation in mid-
2024, the goal is to release the standard during 2025. Once finalised 
and launched, the consolidated mining standard would be expected 
to be adopted by members of the organisations – around 80 mining 
companies with 700 operations spanning 60 countries. 
While harmonising standards provisions may facilitate practical 
application, addressing key issues remains essential. Firstly, 
ensuring credibility necessitates a robust multi-stakeholder 
governance model. Secondly, ensuring comparability requires a 
transparent, uniform reporting structure. Thirdly, harmonised 
standards must remain aligned with relevant international 
frameworks and avoid a “lowest common demoninator” outcome. 
A combined standard may also be a step towards comparable data 
that governments and civil society organisations can easily track to 
assess the mining industry’s ESG performance. However, high ESG 
performance should still be contingent on the jurisdiction of mining 
operation as well as the importing country.  
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 74  
1. Market review 
ESG performance tracking 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 75  
1. Market review 
The industry is making progress on ESG reporting 
Number of companies with a strong presence in energy transition minerals reporting selected ESG indicators 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
Note: GHG emissions considers reporting on total scope 1 and 2 greenhouse gas emissions; water use considers water consumption. Data from 25 major 
companies were reviewed, so the maximum value for each of the ten selected ESG indicators and commitments is 25, with a potential overall total of 250. 
Source: IEA analysis based on the latest sustainability reports of Albemarle, Allkem and Livent (Arcadium Lithium), Anglo American, BHP, CMOC Group, Codelco, 
Eramet, First Quantum, Freeport Mc-MoRan, Ganfeng Lithium, Glencore, IGO, KGHM, Mineral Resources, NorNickel, Pilbara Minerals, Rio Tinto, South32, 
Southern Copper, SQM, Teck Resources, Tianqi Lithium, Vale, Zhejiang Huayou, and Zijin Mining Group Co. Ltd.
 50
 100
 150
 200
 250
2019
2020
2021
2022
Community investment
Female share of workers
Injury rate
Waste generation
Land rehabilitated
Land disturbed
Water discharge
Water consumption
Renewable energy use
GHG emissions
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 76  
1. Market review 
Current company reporting does not allow for an industry-wide assessment of progress 
towards sustainable and responsible supply, but ESG performance is slowly becoming clearer
Critical mineral supply chains cannot be truly secure, reliable and 
resilient unless they are also sustainable and responsible. The mining 
industry does not have the best track record managing ESG impacts, 
but many players are aiming to change that. Our assessment of 
company progress across various ESG dimensions – based on the 
public sustainability reports and commitments published by 25 major 
companies that have a strong presence in critical minerals supply 
chains – shows progress in reporting and growing commitments.  
All of these companies report efforts to improve their ESG 
performance, but goals vary starkly. About 20 have pledged to 
achieve net zero emissions by or before 2050, with the remaining yet 
to establish a firm long-term emissions target. Most net zero targets 
apply only to emissions from direct operations (scope 1) or purchased 
energy and heat (scope 2), leaving out other emissions from the 
industry’s value chains (scope 3). Around five companies have 
established targets to reduce absolute emissions by 35% or more by 
2030 or earlier. Many companies refer to a reduction in emissions 
intensities to 2030 or have established reduction targets only for 
2035. Several industry players have also committed to other ESG 
goals, such as causing no net loss of biodiversity or limiting the 
amount of freshwater used in mining. 
These commitments are being followed by better reporting of ESG 
practices. Our assessment revealed an increase in the availability of 
data for the latest years, indicating the industry is putting more effort 
into tracking its performance. The number of companies reporting 
investment in communities, female share of workers and water 
discharge increased by 40% or more during this period. All players 
now report GHG emissions and nearly 90% report share of female 
workers, injury rates and community investment.  
Nevertheless, an industry-wide assessment of progress on ESG still 
faces many challenges. Only around ten companies published data 
on land area disturbed and rehabilitated, and less than five reported 
on involuntary resettlement. Few operators detail risks related to their 
supply chains, such as potential child labour, or provide clear 
information on contract disclosure. 
ESG reporting varies substantially in both consistency and breadth. 
Most companies aggregate their reported data in some form or 
another, often at the company level, making it difficult to compare 
performance for specific minerals or regions. Less than five 
companies disclosed site-level data consistently in their reports; 
positive examples include Aracdium Lithium, Codelco, and First 
Quantum. Units and scope of reporting also vary, sometimes even 
within the same report (e.g. for different operational units).
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 77  
1. Market review 
Climate pledges are driving decarbonisation measures, particularly in copper supply, but 
overall performance on emissions is still far from showing robust reductions  
Annual changes in GHG intensities for selected minerals 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
Notes: 2023e = estimated values for 2023. Mining covers scope 1 and 2 greenhouse gas emissions intensity (measured in tonnes of CO2-equivalent per tonne of 
mineral). Processing covers scope 1, 2 and 3 greenhouse gas emissions intensities, usually up to refined metal or first saleable product. No data available for cobalt 
processing. 
Source: Data provided by Skarn Associates.
-10%
-5%
0%
5%
10%
15%
2020
2021
2022 2023e
2020
2021
2022 2023e
2020
2021
2022 2023e
2020
2021
2022 2023e
Mining
Processing
Copper
Nickel
Lithium
Cobalt
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 78  
1. Market review 
Sustainability reporting paints a mixed ESG picture, with substantial room for improvement 
Selected ESG indicators, 2019-2022 
  
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
Notes: Aggregated data for 25 major companies that have a strong presence in critical minerals supply chain. Considers reported data for all operations. Indicators 
are calculated per tonne of mineral produced – except for injury rate, water recycling and female share of workers – which reflect the weighted average by 
production. 
Source: IEA analysis based on the latest sustainability reports of Albemarle, Allkem and Livent (Arcadium Lithium), Anglo American, BHP, CMOC Group, Codelco, 
Eramet, First Quantum, Freeport-McMoRan, Ganfeng Lithium, Glencore, IGO, KGHM, Mineral Resources, NorNickel, Pilbara Minerals, Rio Tinto, South32, Southern 
Copper, SQM, Teck Resources, Tianqi Lithium, Vale, Zhejiang Huayou, and Zijin Mining Group Co. Ltd.
 0.5
 1.0
 1.5
 2.0
2019
2020
2021
2022
Areas of attention
Indexed (2019 = 1)
2019
2020
2021
2022
Positive trends
Waste generation
Water consumption
Land rehabilitated
GHG emissions
Water discharge
Community 
investment
Female share of 
workers
Renewable energy 
use
Land disturbed
Injury rate
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 79  
1. Market review 
Key ESG challenges and trends 
The sustainable and responsible supply of critical minerals depends 
on a myriad of interrelated practices, from water stewardship to 
emissions management, engaging with communities and ensuring 
safe labour standards, a fair share of benefits, protecting biodiversity, 
reducing waste, and much more. The industry is making progress on 
several of these fronts. From 2019 to 2022, reported injury rates 
decreased by nearly 30%, investments in communities surged from 
USD 0.3 billion to USD 1 billion, and the average share of female 
workers went from just over 15% to 20%. Data are more sparse for 
other indicators, but available information suggests improvements in 
the amount of waste being recovered through reprocessing and 
reuse and the share of water that is being recycled or re-used in 
industry facilities. These positive trends do not hold for all companies, 
but reflect widespread industry efforts. 
On the other hand, there are many areas where progress has been 
limited and some even show negative trends. The amount of waste 
generated per unit of mineral produced increased by over 20% from 
2019 to 2022, potentially due to the development of lower-grade 
resources. Reported water consumption increased by around 25% 
during this period even in the face of high supply risks related to 
droughts for copper and other minerals. Similarly, indicators related 
to land rehabilitation, effluent discharge and GHG emissions did not 
exhibit visible improvements despite growing ESG commitments.  
Voluntary sustainability standards can help actors improve 
performance and earn ESG credentials. These include the ICMM‘s 
Mining Principles and performance expectations, the Initiative for 
Responsible Mining Assurance‘s Standard for Responsible Mining, 
Canada’s Towards Sustainable Mining, the Responsible Minerals 
Initiative and the Copper Mark’s Risk Readiness Assessment Criteria 
Guide. While these standards can all lead to increased transparency 
and sustainability performance, there are major differences between 
the overall stringency of requirements, the scope of their application, 
the approach to compliance and reporting, uptake, and in oversight 
and assurance systems. Greater transparency, due diligence, 
harmonised approaches to credibility and appropriate incentives are 
needed to untap their full potential. 
Material traceability services are also on the rise. This involves 
working with suppliers to track sources and related impacts up to the 
point of incorporation into an end product. It can allow an assessment 
of risks and ESG performance along the supply chain, contributing to 
increased mineral security. Policymakers and companies, however, 
should be aware of the limitations of end-to-end product traceability. 
Due to the nature of both aggregation and blending in mineral supply 
chains, particularly at the smelting and refinery stage, traceability is 
not always possible or practical. Traceability mechanisms can be 
paired with a risk mitigation approach for better ESG due diligence.
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 80  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
2. Demand and supply 
outlook for critical minerals 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 81  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
Introduction
The world is on a journey towards achieving net zero emissions, and 
has declared its ambition to limit global warming to 1.5 °C, which 
would mean completing this journey already by 2050. Whichever 
pathway this journey eventually takes, it will require a massive 
expansion of clean energy technology deployment, along with 
reliable supplies of critical minerals. While short-term market 
dynamics are crucial, medium- to long-term perspectives on critical 
minerals demand and supply are equally important to ensure that 
clean energy transitions are not hindered by supply chain 
bottlenecks. There are numerous questions that need to be 
addressed. How fast might demand for critical minerals grow under 
different assumptions about the strength of climate action? Can we 
ensure sufficient volumes of critical minerals to support the 
acceleration of energy transitions? What are the key risk areas that 
policymakers need to monitor, and how do prospects vary by 
mineral? Where are today's project developments leading us in 2030 
and beyond, in terms of diversified supplies? What role do 
environmental, social, and governance (ESG) considerations play in 
shaping future market developments? 
This chapter addresses these crucial questions by providing a 
comprehensive outlook for demand and supply for key energy 
transition minerals, namely copper, lithium, nickel, cobalt, graphite 
and rare earth elements. Additionally, we also briefly discuss key 
issues around aluminium, manganese, silicon, phosphate and 
platinum group metals (PGMs). 
Demand projections encompass both clean energy applications and 
other uses, focusing on the three IEA scenarios – the Stated Policies 
Scenario (STEPS), the Announced Pledges Scenario (APS) and the 
Net Zero Emissions by 2050 (NZE) Scenario – with a particular focus 
on the latter two climate-driven scenarios in which national and/or 
global climate goals are achieved (see “Introduction” for scenario 
descriptions). More details on the methodology can be found in the 
Annex. 
Supply projections are based on a detailed review of all announced 
projects. We have constructed two supply scenarios – a base case 
and a high production case. The base case includes production from 
existing assets and those under construction, along with projects that 
have a high chance of moving ahead as they have obtained all 
necessary permits, secured financing, and/or established offtake 
contracts. The high production case additionally considers projects 
at a reasonably advanced stage of development, seeking financing 
and/or permits. In many instances, these projects are in the process 
of conducting feasibility studies, and in some cases these 
assessments are already complete. 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 82  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
Neither case considers projects that are in very early stages of 
development, or includes theoretical projects for which resources 
might be adequate but which have not been proposed. For these 
reasons, our focus on the supply side is on the period to 2040. 
Based on these two supply scenarios, we assess how today's 
geographical concentration evolves over time, for both mining and 
refining, and how expected supply compares with primary supply 
requirements in climate-driven scenarios (total demand net of 
expected contributions from secondary supply and reuse). In some 
cases, we highlight potential gaps between expected supplies and 
material requirements in climate-driven scenarios.  
We do not attempt to close these gaps by introducing additional 
projects beyond those already underway or being considered. 
Climate-driven scenarios, the NZE Scenario in particular, reflect 
many demand-side measures such as higher recycling rates, some 
behavioural changes (e.g. wider use of public transport in relation to 
private transport, policies to promote optimal sizing of cars), but we 
recognise that there is a possibility of additional demand-side 
measures or technological innovation which could contribute to 
reducing demand further. 
The aim of the exercise is to provide a framework for assessing 
progress towards achieving global energy security and climate goals 
and risks that may arise along the way.  
There remain considerable uncertainties over how market balances 
evolve in practice. On the demand side, it should be noted that the 
world is not yet on track for the outcomes in the APS or the NZE 
Scenario; doing so will require significant additional efforts by 
policymakers and industries alike. 
Where gaps are identified between future demand and supply, these 
may potentially be closed by developing additional projects, scaling 
up recycling further, and promoting a range of material efficiency 
measures beyond what are already assumed. The results should not 
be interpreted to mean that energy transition goals are unattainable 
due to material constraints. 
This chapter starts a brief review of projected mineral demand in the 
clean energy sector and presents overall findings of the detailed 
outlook for key energy transition minerals. Each mineral section then 
presents demand and supply projection results and discusses key 
issues underpinning long-term market developments.  
The analysis in this chapter is complemented by the assessment in 
Chapter 3, which provides structured “clean energy transitions risk 
assessments” across four major dimensions – supply risks, 
geopolitical risks, barriers to respond to supply disruptions, and 
exposure to ESG and climate risks. These assessments aim to help 
policymakers identify potential areas of weakness for each material 
in supporting their energy transition goals. 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 83  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
Mineral demand  
for clean energy technologies 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 84  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
Solar PV and wind capacity surge ahead, moving well beyond any other source; renewables 
account for the majority of capacity additions in every region in all scenarios 
Global installed electricity capacity by source and scenario 
 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
 
Note: CCUS = carbon capture, utilisation and storage. 
4 000
8 000
12 000
16 000
20 000
2010
2023
2050 2023
2050 2023
2050
GW
Unabated coal
Solar PV
Nuclear
Unabated natural gas
Wind
Hydrogen and ammonia
Oil
Hydro
Battery
Fossil fuels with CCUS
Other renewables
STEPS
APS
NZE
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 85  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
The acceleration of renewable energy deployment necessitates a substantial expansion of 
transmission and distribution networks, pushing up demand for copper and aluminium 
Average annual grid line additions by scenario 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
Note: Includes both new additions and replacements. 
 
  
 
2 000
4 000
6 000
8 000
2015-
2022
2023-
2035
2036-
2050
2023-
2035
2036-
2050
2023-
2035
2036-
2050
STEPS
APS
NZE
Thousand km
Distribution
Transmission
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 86  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
Rising deployment of renewables and grids is set to raise demand for critical minerals
The growth of power generation capacity from low-emissions sources 
accelerates in all three scenarios. Renewables account for the 
majority of capacity additions in every region over the outlook period. 
By far, wind and solar PV are the largest contributors to this 
development, and total installed solar PV capacity in particular far 
outstrips that of any other source in all scenarios. 
By 2026, solar PV becomes the largest contributor to installed 
electrical capacity in the STEPS, followed by wind. This growth 
trajectory would see global renewable capacity increase to 2.5 times 
its current level by 2030, a major expansion but one that falls short of 
the tripling goal agreed at COP28. Government actions to facilitate 
grid connections, and resolve permitting, policy and financing issues, 
are needed to accelerate growth. In the APS, low-emissions power 
sources account for almost 80% of total power capacity additions in 
2030, with solar PV making up 55% and wind 20%. Annual solar PV 
and wind capacity additions grow by two times to 2050 in the APS 
and by over two and a half times in the NZE Scenario. 
The acceleration of renewable energy deployment calls for 
modernising distribution grids and establishing new transmission 
corridors to connect renewable resources that are far from demand 
centres such as cities and industrial areas. Around 3 000 GW of 
renewable power projects are waiting in grid connection queues – 
equivalent to five times the amount of solar PV and wind capacity 
added in 2022. Due to aged infrastructure and a high share of 
variable renewables in the system across the globe, reaching 
national goals also means adding or refurbishing a total of over 
80 million km of grids by 2040, the equivalent of the entire existing 
global grid. This would underpin significant growth of copper and 
aluminium demand for cables. Grid investment growth in the past 
decade has occurred mainly in the People’s Republic of China 
(hereafter “China”) and advanced economies. China alone accounted 
for over one-third of the world’s transmission grid expansion in the 
past decade, connecting, among other places, the eastern load 
centres to the renewable energy-rich provinces. 
Share of cumulative power capacity addition by source 
in the APS, 2024-2030 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
Note: Other include batteries, hydrogen and ammonia.
56%
21%
4%
2%
2% 6%
10%
Solar PV
Wind
Hydro
Other renewables
Nuclear
Fossil fuels
Other
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 87  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
Battery demand increases fivefold to 2030 and fourteen-fold to 2050 to meet climate pledges 
driven by EV sales and growth in deployment of electric trucks 
EV sales and battery demand growth by scenario 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
Notes: EV = electric vehicle; LDV = light-duty vehicle. EV sales numbers exclude two-/three-wheelers. EV battery demand in the NZE Scenario includes all modes. 
0%
25%
50%
75%
100%
 40
 80
 120
 160
STEPS APS
NZE STEPS APS
NZE
2023
2030
2050
Million
EVs
LDVs
Two-/three-wheelers
Buses
Trucks
Storage
Sales share electric cars % (right axis)
EV sales
 2
 4
 6
 8
 10
 12
 14
STEPS
APS
NZE
STEPS
APS
NZE
2023
2030
2050
TWh/year
Battery demand
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 88  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
Manufacturing capacity for batteries is already running ahead of projected demand 
Battery production capacity versus demand for both EVs and storage  
  
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
Notes: Demand and capacity include both EVs and storage. Committed refers to current capacity and gigafactories that have reached a final investment decision and 
are starting or have already started construction, and preliminary refers to gigafactories that have been announced but are not yet being built. Preliminary and 
committed production capacity assumes a utilisation rate of 85%. 
Sources: IEA analysis based on BloombergNEF and Benchmark Mineral Intelligence.
 1
 2
 3
 4
 5
 6
 7
 8
 9
2023
2025
2030
TWh/year
STEPS
APS
NZE
Committed production capacity
Committed & preliminary production capacity
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 89  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
LFP cathodes continue growing in share, and manganese-rich chemistries are set to play a 
bigger role, while silicon doping of graphite anodes increases significantly 
Electric car battery chemistry share development 
 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
Notes: LFP = lithium iron phosphate; LMFP = lithium manganese iron phosphate; Na-ion = sodium-ion; NMC = lithium nickel manganese cobalt oxide. NCA = lithium 
nickel cobalt aluminium oxide. NMCA = lithium nickel manganese cobalt aluminium oxide. LNO = lithium nickel oxide. Low-nickel includes: NMC333 and NMC532. 
High-nickel includes: NMC622, NMC721, NMC811, NCA, NMCA, LNO. High-manganese includes lithium nickel manganese oxide (LNMO) and lithium-manganese-
rich NMC (LMR-NMC). Si-Gr = silicon-doped graphite. Si-Gr-low refers to 5% silicon content, Si-Gr-med = 5-50% and Si-Gr-high > 50%. 
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
2020
2023
2030
2035
2040
Low-nickel
High-nickel
High-manganese
LFP/LMFP
Na-ion
Cathode
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
2020
2023
2030
2035
2040
Graphite
Si-Gr-low
Si-Gr-med
Si-Gr-high
Li metal
Hard carbon
Anode
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 90  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
The adoption of EVs and battery storage is set to accelerate rapidly over the coming decades, 
driving a fourteen-fold increase in battery demand by 2050 in the APS
With ongoing policy support, improving economics, and an expanding 
number of models available, global EV sales (excluding two-/three-
wheelers) are set to grow strongly, more than tripling by 2030 in the 
STEPS and APS to almost 45 million and 50 million vehicles, 
respectively, and increasing more than fivefold to 70 million in the 
NZE Scenario. This is primarily driven by the sales of electric cars, 
where a global sales share of 18% in 2023 increases to 45% in the 
STEPS and almost 50% in the APS by 2030, while reaching two-
thirds of all sales in the NZE Scenario. This rapid sales growth 
continues to accelerate to 2050 with sales growing more than fivefold 
in the STEPS and over sevenfold in the APS. Sales grow almost 
eightfold in the NZE Scenario by 2050 reaching 110 million vehicles. 
The share of electric cars in total car sales continues to surge, 
reaching 60% in the STEPS, over three-quarters in the APS and over 
95% in the NZE Scenario by 2050. 
This exceptional growth in EV sales drives a dramatic growth in 
battery demand. From almost 1 TWh in 2023, demand more than 
quadruples by 2030 in the STEPS to 3.8 TWh and reaches 4.4 TWh 
in the APS, while increasing sevenfold to 6 TWh by 2030 in the NZE 
Scenario. The growth rates in battery demand outpace growth in EV 
sales due to additional demand growth of battery storage, which 
surpasses the rates of demand growth for light-duty vehicles in both 
the STEPS and APS by 2030 and by 2050. There is also significant 
growth in battery demand for electric trucks, which increases 
eighteen-fold in the STEPS and twenty-three-fold in the APS by 2030. 
In the NZE Scenario, EV battery demand grows sevenfold. By 2050 
global battery demand reaches 9 TWh in the STEPS and 12 TWh in 
the APS, growing tenfold and fourteen-fold from 2023 demand, 
respectively. In the APS, demand from electric trucks becomes larger 
than global storage demand in 2050. In the NZE Scenario demand 
reaches 13 TWh, a fifteen-fold increase.  
Manufacturing capacity 
In 2023 battery production capacity (at 85% utilisation rates) is two 
and half times battery demand. Looking forward, our analysis of 
committed production capacity includes gigafactories that are starting 
or under construction or have reached final investment decision. In 
2025 committed production is double both STEPS and APS demand, 
while being 40% higher than demand in the NZE Scenario. By 2030, 
rapid demand growth narrows this gap, such that committed 
production is only 30% higher than APS demand and close to the 
requirements in the NZE Scenario. However, if preliminary 
announcements are included, meaning gigafactories that have been 
announced but not yet reached final investment decision, anticipated 
manufacturing capacity takes another leap ahead. When preliminary 
announcements are included, production capacity exceeds APS 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 91  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
demand by 80% and is 40% greater than demand in the NZE 
Scenario. Of all new committed capacity additions from 2023, 55% 
are in China by 2030. These projections imply intense price 
competition among producers, with significant implications for global 
battery supply chains. 
Chemistry development 
In terms of electric car cathode chemistries, lithium iron phosphate 
(LFP) and lithium manganese iron phosphate (LMFP) are set to 
become the leading chemistries by share from 2035. The LFP variant 
LMFP looks likely to be increasingly utilised, taking share from LFP 
and also from the high-nickel chemistries due to its higher energy 
density than conventional LFP. Low-nickel high-cobalt chemistries 
such as the nickel manganese cobalt (NMC) 333 are assumed to be 
phased out by 2030, with the trend of reducing cobalt content in 
favour of higher nickel contents continuing. Manganese-rich 
chemistries including lithium-manganese-rich NMC (LMR-NMC) and 
lithium nickel manganese oxide (LNMO) start to take increasing 
shares of the high-nickel and LFP market. LNMO are anticipated to 
take a small share of the mid-range market, being higher energy 
density than LFP but not near the levels of the high-nickel 
chemistries. LMR-NMC enables significantly higher energy densities 
due to its ability to store higher concentrations of lithium, and 
therefore is expected to take increasing shares of the long-range 
high-energy-density 
market 
at 
the 
expense 
of 
high-nickel 
chemistries. High-nickel chemistries continue to play a major role in 
the long-range market with higher nickel contents being utilised 
including the 96% Ni NMC. However, their share of the EV market is 
expected to decrease from 55% in 2023 to around 40% in 2040, as 
manganese-rich chemistries and LFP/LMFP continue to displace 
them. This is a remarkable change from 2020 when high-nickel 
chemistries dominated the EV battery market. Finally, sodium-ion 
batteries are anticipated to play an increasingly significant role after 
2030, reaching a global market share of almost 10% in 2040, 
displacing some LFP in the low-range EV market, particularly if 
lithium prices rise and if there are phosphorous supply issues for LFP. 
Our analysis suggest that LFP remains the preferred solution for the 
battery storage market, with a growing longer-term role for sodium-
ion. 
Looking at anodes, current trends indicate a growing share of silicon-
doped graphite anodes and a shift towards higher silicon contents. 
This trend continues to displace conventional graphite anodes, 
eventually reaching high silicon contents above 50% and ultimately 
silicon anodes for long-range premium markets. Lithium metal 
anodes are anticipated to eventually play a greater role after 2035 
with ASSBs, hybrid liquid-solid-state batteries and advanced liquid 
electrolytes, starting with the most premium long-range vehicles. 
However, the speed of deployment is highly uncertain and dependent 
on considerable technical and scaling challenges to be solved. 
Finally, with the increasing adoption of sodium-ion batteries, hard 
carbon, anode material for sodium-ion batteries takes a greater share 
of the electric car anode market.
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 92  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
Mineral demand for clean energy technologies doubles between today and 2030 in the STEPS 
and APS and grows by almost three times in the NZE Scenario 
Mineral requirements for clean energy technologies by scenario 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
Note: Includes most of the minerals used in various clean energy technologies but does not include steel and aluminium.  
 10
 20
 30
 40
 50
2023
2030 2050
2030 2050
2030 2050
2023
2030 2050
2030 2050
2030 2050
Mt
Solar PV
Wind
Other low carbon
Copper
Nickel
Graphite
EVs and storage
Electricity networks
Hydrogen
Lithium
Manganese
Cobalt
Other
STEPS
APS
NZE
STEPS
APS
NZE
By technology
By mineral
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 93  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
The energy transition continues to drive mineral demand in all scenarios
The accelerating pace of energy transitions is set to significantly 
boost mineral demand across all the three scenarios. In the STEPS, 
demand doubles to 2030 with continued growth thereafter. In the 
APS, demand more than doubles by 2030 and triples by 2050. In the 
NZE Scenario, the swifter adoption of clean energy technologies 
implies an even more pronounced surge in demand for critical 
minerals, nearly tripling by 2030 and growing to over 3.5 times the 
current levels by 2050, reaching nearly 40 Mt.  
Our latest mineral demand projections have been updated from those 
in the Critical Minerals Market Review 2023, reflecting several new 
technological and policy developments:  
• 
Projected demand in the STEPS has been revised upwards due 
to faster clean energy deployments, notably in solar PV 
installations and EV sales, driven by strengthened policy 
measures and improved economics for these technologies.  
• 
Although they face some short-term headwinds, EV sales have 
also been revised slightly upwards in the long-term, driven by 
improving economics and policy efforts in major markets.  
• 
LFP shares have increased considerably over the last years, and 
its rapidly growing global share has been reflected in the updated 
chemistry projections. Manganese-based chemistries also take a 
larger share in the future in the revised assumptions. Alongside 
assessments of other emerging technologies such as sodium-ion 
batteries, solid-state batteries and silicon-based anodes, near- 
and long-term battery chemistry assumptions have been 
adjusted, affecting demand projections for nickel, cobalt, 
manganese, and other materials.  
• 
The projected deployment of battery storage has been revised 
upward to account for the rapid pace of deployment in recent 
years and the increasing need for power system flexibility, 
resulting in increased demand for battery metals, lithium in 
particular. 
• 
Material intensity assumptions have been updated based on the 
latest literature review and industry consultations.  
• 
Graphite material requirements have been revised upwards in all 
scenarios, reflecting a more detailed representation of the amount 
of silicon required in anodes. 
Each factor influences projected mineral requirements differently, 
resulting in slightly higher aggregated mineral demand across all 
three scenarios by 2050 compared with the previous outlook, with the 
STEPS seeing the largest overall upwards revision.  
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 94  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
Demand for each mineral is affected in different ways from these 
revisions and updates. Nickel sees the largest downwards revisions 
in both the APS and the NZE Scenario, largely due to the increased 
prominence of LFP, whereas graphite sees large upwards revisions 
in all scenarios.  
However, despite these adjustments in projected mineral demand, 
demand in climate-driven scenarios remains multiple times higher 
than current levels, underscoring the pivotal role of clean energy 
technologies in propelling total mineral demand growth. From copper 
to lithium and to cobalt, clean energy technologies emerge as the 
predominant consuming segment, significantly elevating their share 
in total demand compared with present levels.  
It is important to note that demand projections are subject to large 
variations, influenced not only by broader policy considerations 
(reflected in our energy scenarios) but also by technology costs and 
innovations, as well as behavioural factors. To address this 
complexity, the IEA has developed more than ten alternative cases 
to assess the impacts of different consumer preferences and 
technology advancements on future mineral requirements. The 
findings of these cases are available through the updated IEA Critical 
Minerals Data Explorer, an accompanying online data tool designed 
to allows users to easily access and navigate the projection results 
(see Annex).  
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 95  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
Overview of the projections for key 
energy transition minerals 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 96  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
Limiting global warming to 1.5 °C, as in the NZE Scenario, means very rapid growth in demand 
for key minerals 
Global critical minerals demand in the NZE Scenario 
 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
Notes: The figures for copper are based on refined copper. Those for rare earth elements are for magnet rare earth elements only. Growth rates (in blue) are 
between 2023 and 2040. 
28%
65%
63%
 4
 8
 12
 16
 20
2023 2030 2040
Graphite (Mt)
3.9x
18%
42%
41%
 40
 80
 120
 160
 200
2023 2030 2040
Rare earths (kt)
1.9x
30%
59% 59%
 120
 240
 360
 480
 600
2023 2030 2040
Cobalt (kt)
2.2x
15%
50%
56%
 1.5
 3.0
 4.5
 6.0
 7.5
2023 2030 2040
Nickel (Mt)
2.1x
56%
87%
91%
 0.3
 0.6
 0.9
 1.2
 1.5
2023 2030 2040
Lithium (Mt Li)
8.7x
24%
45%
50%
 10
 20
 30
 40
 50
2023 2030 2040
Clean energy
Other uses
Copper (Mt)
1.5x
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 97  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
The combined market value of key energy transition minerals more than doubles by 2040 in 
climate-driven scenarios, reaching USD 770 billion in the NZE Scenario 
Market value of key energy transition minerals in the APS and the NZE Scenario 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
Note: 2023 annual average price levels are assumed to estimate the market size for the projection period. 
 200
 400
 600
 800
1 000
2023
2030
2040
2030
2040
APS
NZE
Rare earths
Graphite
Cobalt
Nickel
Lithium
Copper
Billion USD
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 98  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
Latin America, Africa and Indonesia see a growing market value from their mining operations; 
nearly 50% of the market value from refining is concentrated in China by 2030 
Market value of mined and refined materials in select regions in the base case 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
Note: Market value was calculated by multiplying each region’s production volume in the base case with today’s market price for final products.
 30
 60
 90
 120
 150
23 30 40 23 30 40 23 30 40 23 30 40 23 30 40 23 30 40 23 30 40
Latin
America
Indonesia
China
Africa
Australia
North
America
Other
Copper
Lithium
Nickel
Cobalt
Graphite
Rare earths
Billion USD
 80
 160
 240
 320
 400
23
30
40
23
30
40
China
Other
Billion USD
Mining
Refining
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 99  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
Expected supply from announced projects is within range of projected 2035 requirements to 
reach national and global climate goals, with the major exceptions of copper and lithium 
Expected supply from existing and announced projects and 2035 primary supply requirements for focus minerals by scenario 
 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
Notes: Expected supply is based on mined or raw material output, except for graphite where the figure includes expected spherical graphite and synthetic graphite 
supplies. Primary supply requirements are calculated as “total demand net of secondary supply”, also accounting for losses during refining operations. The figures for 
rare earth elements are for magnet rare earth elements only.
​
 100
 200
 300
 400
Cobalt (kt)
​
 300
 600
 900
1 200
APS
NZE
Lithium (Kt Li)
Primary supply requirements in 2035
​
 2.0
 4.0
 6.0
 8.0
Nickel (Mt)
​
 4
 8
 12
 16
Graphite (Mt)
​
 40
 80
 120
 160
Rare earths (kt)
​
 10
 20
 30
 40
Base case
High production case
Copper (Mt)
Expected supply in 2035
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 100  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
Analysis of project pipelines indicates that the geographical concentration of mining operations 
is set to rise further or remain high over the projection period 
Geographical distribution of mined or raw material production for focus minerals in the base case 
 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
Notes: DRC = Democratic Republic of the Congo. Graphite extraction is for natural flake graphite. The figures for rare earth elements are for magnet rare earth 
elements only. The figure depicts the value of the top three producing countries in a given year.
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
23
30
40
23
30
40
23
30
40
23
30
40
23
30
40
23
30
40
Rest of world
Brazil
United States
Myanmar
Madagascar
Mozambique
Russia
New Caledonia
Philippines
Indonesia
China
Peru
DRC
Chile
Australia
Lithium
Copper
Nickel
Cobalt
Natural graphite
Rare earths
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 101  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
As many refining projects are being developed in today’s dominant producers, refined material 
production is also set to remain highly concentrated in a few countries  
Geographical distribution of refined material production for key minerals 
 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
Notes: The figures for graphite are based on battery-grade spherical graphite and synthetic graphite supplies. The figures for rare earth elements are for magnet rare 
earth elements only. The figure depicts the value of the top three producing countries in a given year.
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
20
30
40
23
30
40
23
30
40
23
30
40
23
30
40
23
30
40
Rest of world
Australia
Viet Nam
Germany
United States
Malaysia
Canada
Argentina
Japan
Finland
DRC
Chile
China
Indonesia
Lithium
Copper
Nickel
Cobalt
Graphite
Rare earths
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 102  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
Major implications for market balances if the largest supplier and their demand is excluded 
from the equation  
N-1 material requirements and N-1 refined material supply in 2030 in the APS 
 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
Notes: The N-1 supply excludes the production volumes from the largest producer from the total global supply, and N-1 requirements exclude consumption of that 
country from the total global demand. Graphite considers only battery-grade requirements and battery-grade supply, covering both spherical and synthetic materials. 
The figures for rare earth elements are for magnet rare earth elements only. For demand in the clean energy sector, the N-1 material requirements were estimated 
by considering each region's share of clean energy deployment. For demand outside the clean energy sector, the region's current consumption share was applied to 
the projected global demand in 2030. 
​
 1
 2
 3
 4
 5
Graphite (Mt)
​
 15
 30
 45
 60
 75
Rare earths (kt)
​
 60
 120
 180
 240
 300
Cobalt (kt)
​
 1.2
 2.4
 3.6
 4.8
 6.0
Nickel (Mt)
​
 0.1
 0.2
 0.3
 0.4
 0.5
Lithium (Mt Li)
​
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
N-1 material requirements
N-1 supply
35% of requirements
Copper (Mt)
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 103  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
Secondary supply from recycling plays an increasingly crucial role in meeting demand growth 
in climate-driven scenarios, particularly after 2030 
Secondary supply volumes and share of total demand for focus minerals in the NZE Scenario  
 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
Note: Includes recycled volumes from end-of-life equipment and manufacturing scrap. For copper, direct use of scrap is excluded.
 2
 4
 6
 8
 10
2023 2030 2040
Graphite (Mt)
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
 25
 50
 75
 100
 125
2023 2030 2040
Rare earths (kt)
 70
 140
 210
 280
 350
2023 2030 2040
Cobalt (kt)
 0.4
 0.8
 1.2
 1.6
 2.0
2023 2030 2040
Nickel (Mt)
 0.1
 0.2
 0.3
 0.4
 0.5
2023 2030 2040
Lithium (Mt Li)
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
2023 2030 2040
Secondary supply
Share of secondary supply in demand (right axis)
Copper (Mt)
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 104  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
A complex and varied picture for future supply-demand balances and security of supply
Demand for key energy transition minerals is set to expand 
significantly across all scenarios, mainly driven by the burgeoning 
requirements in the clean energy sector. In the STEPS, demand for 
lithium grows fivefold between today and 2040, while demand for 
graphite almost doubles over the same period. Demand for nickel, 
cobalt and rare earth elements also shows robust growth, increasing 
by 65-80% by 2040.  
If the world gets on track to limit global warming to 1.5 °C, as 
modelled in the NZE Scenario, demand for copper rises by 50% by 
2040. In this scenario, demand for nickel, cobalt and rare earth 
elements doubles over the next two decades, and graphite demand 
increases by almost four times to 2040, propelled by the substantial 
increase in battery deployment for EVs and grid storage. Of all the 
minerals, lithium stands out in this scenario with nearly ninefold 
growth by 2040, highlighting its crucial role in batteries. Across all 
materials, the share of clean energy technologies in total demand 
rises significantly. In most cases, the clean energy sector emerges 
as the largest consumer of these minerals. In the NZE Scenario, EVs 
and battery storage are projected to account for over 90% of total 
lithium demand by 2030. Moreover, batteries are poised to surpass 
stainless steel as the leading consumer sector for nickel. 
As demand expands, the market value of these minerals experiences 
substantial growth. From around USD 325 billion today, the combined 
market value of key energy transition minerals is set to increase by 
55% in the APS by 2030 and by 80% in the NZE Scenario. By 2040, 
the market value more than doubles in climate-driven scenarios, 
reaching USD 770 billion in the NZE Scenario. In this scenario, 
copper maintains the largest market value at USD 330 billion, while 
the lithium market undergoes significant expansion to USD 230 billion 
by 2040, emerging as the second-largest market, followed by nickel. 
The graphite market also registers almost sixfold growth over the 
same period. Today’s aggregate market value of key energy 
transition minerals aligns broadly with that of iron ore. In the NZE 
Scenario, copper on its own attains that scale by 2040. 
In the base case supply scenario, this growth in market value is 
spread across key regions. For mining, Latin America captures the 
largest amount with around USD 120 billion by 2030, driven by 
substantial copper production in the area. Indonesia sees the fastest 
growth, doubling its market value by 2030 due to its burgeoning nickel 
mining activities. Africa also witnesses a 65% increase in market 
value, attributed to the rapid expansion of copper production in the 
region. However, the market value for refining is notably more 
concentrated, with China claiming nearly 50% of the market value in 
2030. China also sees a rise in market value for mined materials as 
the country's production of copper, lithium, and rare earth elements 
undergoes rapid expansion.  
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 105  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
The rapidly growing demand for minerals, and the variations seen 
across different scenarios, raises uncertainties about future market 
balances, and whether future supplies can match the pace of demand 
growth in scenarios that meet national and global climate goals.  
In recent years, substantial investments have been made in mineral 
supply, and an increasing number of projects have been announced, 
indicating an expansion in expected supply volumes in the coming 
years. In some cases, such as cobalt, nickel and rare earth elements, 
the expected supply by 2035 from both existing and announced 
projects look tight, but aligns more closely with the projected demand 
in the APS, particularly when projects assumed in the high production 
case come to fruition. 
However, the timely delivery of planned projects is far from 
guaranteed and meeting the requirements in the NZE Scenario 
necessitates further project developments. A similar trend is 
observed for graphite, but it should be noted that there is a massive 
number of announced synthetic anode material projects, primarily 
located in China. Should natural graphite supply face price spikes or 
supply constraints, these facilities could offer additional volumes to 
the supply pool (see “Outlook for graphite”). 
The situation differs for copper and lithium. Announced projects 
indicate that a mined copper supply gap may develop in the current 
decade in the base case. Even under the high production scenario, 
the anticipated supply by 2035 falls well short of meeting the APS 
requirements, indicating a potential necessity for a further increase in 
scrap utilisation, demand reduction through material substitution or 
technological innovation, alongside efforts to foster additional project 
developments. Lithium presents another significant challenge, 
exhibiting a sizeable anticipated gap with climate-driven needs, 
owing to the strong position of lithium-ion batteries in EVs and storage 
applications. The current downturn in prices may dampen investment 
appetite for new greenfield projects, which could have profound 
longer-term implications. 
Global mineral supply chains are not well diversified, as highlighted 
in Chapter 1, and recent progress on diversifying supply sources has 
been limited. Will this picture change with the multitude of newly 
announced projects in recent years? Our analysis of project pipelines 
suggests that the geographical concentration of mining operations is 
set to remain high in most cases. The situation improves somewhat 
in the high production case, indicating that many projects being 
developed in geographically diverse regions are not among the front-
runners for development. This pattern mirrors the situation in refining 
operations, as most refining projects are located in today's dominant 
producers, thus prolonging high concentration levels in refined 
material production. Between now and 2030, some 70-75% of 
projected supply growth for refined lithium, nickel, cobalt and rare 
earth elements, and almost 95% for battery-grade spherical and 
synthetic graphite, comes from today’s top three producers. These 
high levels of supply concentration raise risks of potential supply 
disruptions due to physical accidents, geopolitical events or other 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 106  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
developments in a key producing country, with major potential 
implications for the speed of energy transitions. 
Global demand and supply balances often mask significant regional 
disparities. From the Inflation Reduction Act (IRA) in the United 
States (US) to the European Union’s (EU) Critical Raw Materials Act 
(CRMA), a wave of policies is emerging aimed at diversifying sources 
of supply. The IRA seeks to restrict the utilisation of materials 
obtained from Foreign Entities of Concern, while the EU CRMA 
targets that no single country should supply more than 65% of 
Europe's annual consumption of any key materials (implying that at 
least 35% should come from non-dominant players). Other major 
consuming countries are increasingly aligned with the objective to 
diversify their supply sources. 
However, given that the top producing nation is responsible for a 
large portion of global supply for most minerals, available supply 
outside the largest producing country may be significantly 
constrained to achieve these ambitions. We conducted the “N-1 test” 
to assess how the supply and demand landscape might appear if the 
largest global supplier were removed from the market. Specifically we 
assessed N-1 supply and N-1 material requirements in 2030 in the 
APS, excluding both anticipated supply from the largest supplier and 
projected demand from that country. In most cases, the N-1 supply 
falls significantly below the N-1 material requirements (even for 
minerals where the overall global balance is reasonably well 
supplied). If the CRMA’s non-single-origin minimum threshold (35%) 
is applied in a global context, the N-1 nickel and cobalt supply is 
barely able to meet this minimum threshold. The situation is even 
more pronounced for graphite. Although there is abundant supply of 
graphite globally, the expected N-1 supply is entirely insufficient to 
meet the minimum threshold. This indicates that without efforts to 
develop additional projects in geographically diverse regions, 
achieving the goals set by policy legislation would be challenging.  
This analysis underscores the need for concerted efforts to expedite 
the development of promising projects located in geographically 
diverse regions. Additionally, it highlights the importance of 
harnessing the potential for value chain expansion in major resource 
holders in emerging and developing economies, provided such 
expansion is economically viable and can yield significant economic 
and social advantages. 
Investment across the supply chain is crucial, yet equally vital is 
unlocking the potential of recycling, innovation, and behavioural 
change. A strong emphasis on recycling can not only diminish the 
magnitude of primary mineral requirements but also yield substantial 
security benefits for regions dependent on imported materials. While 
the share of secondary supply from recycling in total demand remains 
modest for most focus minerals, it experiences significant growth in 
the NZE Scenario, particularly post-2030, as policy mandates 
strengthen and a substantial volume of end-of-life EV batteries enters 
the market (see Chapter 4, “Recycling, innovation and behavioural 
change” section). 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 107  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
Outlook for copper  
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


          
2025
2030
2035
2040
Copper
Refining
Mining
Clean energy transition risk assessment
Mining requirements
Demand outlook
Supply risks
31%
shortfall in project pipeline vs.
2035 APS mining requirements
ESG and climate
risk exposure
52%
of mines located in
high water stress areas
Geopolitical risks
diversified
supply sources
Relatively
Barriers to responding to
supply disruption
Mature
markets
with sizeable volumes of 
secondary supply
Cleantech demand (kt)
5 380
6 311
12 001
16 343
Other uses (kt)
19 548
19 543
19 127
20 036
Total demand (kt)
24 928
25 855
31 128
36 379
Secondary supply and reuse (kt)
4 123
4 445
5 879
11 006
Primary supply requirements (kt)
20 805
21 409
25 249
25 373
Share of top three mining countries
46%
47%
48%
54%
Share of top three refining countries
57%
59%
59%
59%
2021
2023
2030
2040
Milestones (APS)
Low
Med
High
Cu
NZE
APS
Top three producers 2030
Chile
23%
China
46%
Peru
11%
Chile
5%
DRC
7%
DRC
14%
NZE
APS
Mt
25
50
2010
2050
2050
2010
Mt
25
50
2023
2023
Other clean technology
Construction
Grids
Other demand
Expected mine supply from announced projects
Primary supply requirements (mined)
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 109  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
Demand: Clean energy technologies drive substantial growth in copper demand 
Copper demand outlook by sector and scenario 
 
 
Notes: Copper refined demand excluding direct use scrap. EVs demand includes both EV batteries and EV motors demand. Other demand includes: Industrial 
equipment, other transport, consumer products, cooling, communications, and other electronics.  
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
25%
50%
75%
100%
 10
 20
 30
 40
2015 2021 2023
2030 2040 2050
2030 2040 2050
2030 2040 2050
Other
Construction
Other clean energy
technology
Wind
Solar PV
EVs
Electricity networks
Share of clean energy
technologies (right axis)
Mt Cu
APS
NZE
STEPS
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 110  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
Demand: Copper demand grows rapidly in all scenarios, driven by the rapid deployment of 
renewables and EVs
Copper is the only critical mineral present in all of the most important 
clean energy technologies – EVs, solar PV, wind, and electricity 
networks – due to its unmatched combination of characteristics: 
electronic conductivity, longevity, ductility and corrosion resistance. 
Therefore, the security of supply of copper is paramount for the 
energy transition. Total copper demand is made up of a combination 
of refined copper demand (including both primary and secondary 
production, 26 Mt in 2023) plus direct use of scrap (over 6 Mt).  
Historically, refined copper demand has been dominated by 
construction and electricity networks, responsible for 30% and 15% 
of global demand in 2023, respectively. Other key sources of demand 
include industrial machinery and equipment (12% of 2023 demand) 
and the transportation sector (15% of 2023 demand), as copper is 
used in the manufacture of key components in all modes of transport. 
Global refined copper demand grows from 26 Mt in 2023 to 31 Mt in 
the STEPS and APS and 33 Mt in 2030 in the NZE Scenario. Demand 
increases further by 20% through to 2050, reaching around 40 Mt in 
2050 in the NZE Scenario. This surge in demand is primarily due to 
the rapid deployment of renewables and EVs, and a significant 
expansion of electricity networks. Copper is critical for lithium-ion 
batteries for EVs, being irreplaceable for the anode current collector, 
as well as being used in wiring in the battery packs and being a key 
component of EV motors. Electricity networks remain the second-
largest source of demand after construction for the STEPS and APS, 
but in the NZE Scenario, it becomes the largest source of demand by 
2030 before construction again overtakes to be the dominant source 
after 2040. However, copper demand from EVs experiences the 
largest growth in demand, increasing more than twelvefold from 2% 
of demand in 2023 to 12% in 2050 in the APS and 13% in the NZE 
Scenario. Overall, construction remains the leading source of refined 
copper demand in climate-driven scenarios although material 
efficiency measures temper demand in the sector.  
The share of clean energy technologies in refined copper demand 
has grown modestly in recent years from 22% in 2015 to a quarter in 
2023; however, this decade the share dramatically increases, 
reaching a third in STEPS, almost doubling to reach almost 40% in 
the APS and 45% in the NZE Scenario in 2030 due to the rapid 
deployment of renewables and EVs. The earlier electrification of end 
uses and penetration of renewables requires a rapid addition of 
electricity networks over the period to 2040, after which the pace of 
expansion decelerates. This leads to a decrease in copper demand 
for electricity networks between 2040 and 2050, resulting in a slight 
decrease in the share of clean energy technologies. 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 111  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
Supply: Chile remains the leading copper miner with the DRC the new second, while China 
continues to dominate copper refining 
Copper production from operating and announced projects in the base case  
  
 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
Note: DRC = Democratic Republic of the Congo.
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
2015
2020
2023
2025
2030
2035
2040
Chile
Peru
China
DRC
Russia
Indonesia
Australia
Japan
India
Other
Top 3 share (right axis)
Mining
Mt Cu
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
5 000
10 000
15 000
20 000
25 000
30 000
35 000
2015
2020
2023
2025
2030
2035
2040
Refining
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 112  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
Supply: Lack of large-scale projects in the pipeline poses challenges for future copper supply 
Mining 
Global mined copper supply reached 22.5 Mt in 2023, up 8% from 
2020. Today’s copper supply is relatively diversified compared with 
the other key energy transition minerals. The share of the top three 
producers was 47% in 2023, and it has been at a similar level since 
2015. Chile is the world’s current largest producer, producing a 
quarter of global supply. This is down from 30% in 2015 due to 
declining ore grades, ageing assets and low reinvestment in 
expansion. Meanwhile, with its remarkable growth of copper output, 
the DRC has doubled its share of global supply from 6% to 12% over 
the same period, overtaking Peru as the second-largest supplier. The 
DRC copper belt is home to some of the highest-grade copper 
resources in the world, for instance the Kamoa-Kakula mine is one of 
the world’s highest-grade major copper mines, ten times the global 
average (5.5% compared with the global average of 0.6%). This 
makes capital and production costs, and emissions in the DRC 
significantly lower than other regions, driving a dramatic growth in 
supply. China is the fourth-largest producer with 8% of global supply 
while Russia supplies 5%. Indonesia has seen impressive growth 
since 2020 doubling its share to 5% in a few years while the share of 
Australian supply has been decreasing. The top three copper mines 
in 2023 produced over 10% of global copper production, being 
Escondida in Chile, PT Freeport Indonesia (Grasberg) in Indonesia 
and Collahuasi in Chile. 
Based on the current project pipeline, mined copper supply reaches 
around 25 Mt in 2026 then declines thereafter as assets age and 
grades decline. The top three producer’s share in total mine 
production increases to 55% by 2040 from 47% today. Chile remains 
the largest producer going forward, contributing around a quarter of 
global supply through to 2040 while the DRC remains the second-
largest producer. China also continues to grow its share of global 
supply, from 8% in 2023 to 12% in 2040. Russia and Indonesia also 
continue to grow in supply share, together supplying 13% in 2040. 
The growing share of supply from these countries displaces a 
significantly shrinking share from Peru, which drops from 12% today 
to 7% in 2040 due to a lack of viable projects and ageing assets.  
Top five largest copper mines 2023 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
Source: IEA analysis based on Wood Mackenzie. 
1%
2%
3%
4%
5%
Escondida
Grasberg
Collahuasi
Cerro Verde
Buenavista del Cobre
Chile
Indonesia
Peru
Mexico
Share of total mined production
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 113  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
Beyond the challenges of declining copper ore quality, there are 
additional pressures coming from local social and environmental 
opposition, particularly in Latin America. At the end of last year, Cobre 
Panama, one of the largest copper mines in the world supplying 1.5% 
of global copper output, was shut down by the government due to 
widespread protests regarding environmental damage and corruption 
concerns. Beyond the loss of one of the largest copper producing 
assets, the case is expected to deter mining investment in the 
country. One of Peru’s largest copper mines, Las Bambas, also saw 
a strike at the end of last year due to workers conditions, having 
already seen disruptions previously due to indigenous community 
protests demanding more equitable distribution of mining gains with 
the local community, as well as other protests. With most of the 
world’s largest mines located in Latin America, if several of these face 
major opposition, disrupting logistics or shutdowns similar to Cobre 
Panama, there could be major consequences for global copper 
supply. The world’s largest copper mine Escondida Chile produces 
5% of global copper supply alone, while four of today’s top five mines 
are located in the region, emphasising the vulnerability. Efforts to 
expand mines in other places could reduce this dependency. 
Refining 
Copper refining is more concentrated than mining, with a current top 
three refiner share of 60%, becoming more concentrated since 2015. 
Refining is much more concentrated in a single country. China is 
currently the world’s dominant copper refiner, with 45% market share, 
having rapidly grown from 30% in 2015. Despite Chile being the 
world’s largest copper miner supplying a quarter of global supply in 
2023, it produces only 8% of the world’s refined copper, and this 
share has decreased since 2015 when it was 12%. This 
demonstrates that over half of Chile’s mined copper concentrate is 
exported for refining, with the majority to China. Copper concentrate 
is the number one exported product from Chile in terms of value. 
Since 2012 exports of copper concentrates from Chile have 
increased 60% mainly to China while exports of refined copper have 
dropped 20% over the same period. This decline is largely due to the 
decline in production from solvent extraction electrowinning (SxEw) 
mines which directly produce refined copper from oxide ore. As the 
oxide ore supply decreased, with many transitioning from processing 
oxides to conventional sulphide mining, its export of concentrate 
increased and refined copper decreased. There are also 
environmental concerns which have led to the closing of smelters in 
Chile. 
The DRC is now the joint second-largest copper refiner with Chile. 
While Chile has lost market share since 2015, the DRC has doubled 
its share in the same time up from 4%. The top three copper refineries 
in 2023 produced 9% of global refined copper, being Guixi and 
Jinchuan in China, and Onsan in Korea. 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 114  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
Copper exports by Chile by type and destination 
 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
Note: LAC = Latin America. 
Source: IEA analysis based on COCHILCO (2023). 
 
Going forward, the share of the top three refiners remains at the same 
level at around 60%. China, however, continues to increase its 
dominance of copper processing, supplying around half of global 
refined copper from 2030 onwards. Little change occurs for the other 
countries in this period. This again creates a major dependency and 
vulnerability. Countries in Latin America could prioritise the 
development of greater domestic processing capability. Not only 
would this help diversify refined supplies of copper, it would support 
the countries’ economies increasing their share of the value chain. 
However, cost and environmental concerns are key barriers. 
Smelting is not a high-margin business, and increasing pressures 
from high labour and energy costs have made it challenging to 
compete with China. Capital requirements to reduce emissions and 
increase the sustainability of operations add to this pressure. 
Recently Chile’s Codelco closed its Ventanas smelter due to pollution 
which resulted in a poisioning incident in the local community. 
Copper mining and refining by geography vs. ownership, 2023 
 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
 
Notes: Ownership analysis of top 20 mining and refining companies in 2023 
representing 57% of mined and 56% of refined copper production. Ownership 
based on headquarters location. 
Source: IEA analysis based on Wood Mackenzie. 
 
Looking at mining and refining production in 2023 by ownership 
(defined based on company headquarters location) shows a different 
1 000
2 000
3 000
4 000
2012
20212012
2021
Other
LAC
Europe
United
States
Other
Asia
China
Copper concentrates
kt Cu
Refined copper
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Geography
Ownership
Geography
Ownership
Mining
Refining
Other
Europe
Australia
Japan
US
DRC
China
Peru
Chile
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 115  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
picture from production location. Based on the analysis of top 20 
companies, mining appears to be similarly diversified by ownership 
with a top three country owner share of 45%, the same as production 
location. European companies are in fact the largest copper producers 
with over 20% of production. US companies also produce almost 20% 
of global supply, despite little mining taking place domestically, and this 
is all from two companies: Freeport-McMoRan and Southern Copper. 
Companies from Australia and Canada are also major copper 
producers, together supplying 20% of production despite limited 
domestic supply. In terms of refining, the picture is similar with Chinese 
companies dominating with 40% of production. Top three refining 
countries’ share by owner is the same as by location with 60%. 
European companies are the second-largest refiners with 20% as well 
as being the second-largest refining location but with only 10% by 
geography. Japanese companies are the third-largest refiners despite 
being the fifth-largest refining location. Again US companies play a 
leading role in copper refining being the fourth-largest refiners.  
Capital and operating costs 
Declining ore quality is the most critical issue for copper, resulting in 
increasing capital and operating costs. Operating costs have 
increased in most areas in real terms since 2020 with energy, on-site, 
treatment and refining charges (TC/RCs), shipment costs and 
reagent cost increases all being major drivers. Capital costs have 
also increased significantly for new copper projects. Recent 
brownfield projects have a capital intensity around USD 30 000 per 
tonne, whereas in real terms past brownfield projects initiated around 
2017 were cheaper at around USD 20 000/tonne. Expansions are 
costing more due to having to go deeper and the need to mine more 
waste to maintain production levels from the declining ore quality. 
Greenfield projects also suffer higher costs due to the lack of high-
quality resources, the need to comply with higher ESG standards, 
challenging geology, and higher labour and equipment costs. The 
recently commissioned DRC mine Kamoa-Kakula, with one of the 
highest-grade copper ore in the world, contrasts from current trends 
with a capital intensity around just USD 7 000/tonne, demonstrating 
the major cost advantages in the high-grade areas of the DRC, and 
explaining its rapid rise in supply.  
Operating costs for copper mining (real) 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
Notes: lb = pound. Companies representing 75% of total copper production. 
Source: IEA analysis based on S&P Global. 
 50
 100
 150
 200
2020
2021
2022
2023
Royalty
TC/RC &
shipment
Other onsite
Reagents
Energy
Labour
US cent per lb
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 116  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
Copper mining disruptions 
Adding to the supply pressures from the declining ore quality are 
various disruptions to copper supply (assessed as shortfalls relative 
to expected supply). The global disruption rate in copper supply has 
been consistent around 5% of the original targeted production. At a 
global scale, the primary causes vary considerably with the leading 
causes being technical issues, slow ramp-up, and grades being lower 
than anticipated. Strikes have been a less critical issue over recent 
years; however, in 2017 they resulted in exceptional disruption due 
to strikes at the world’s largest mine Escondida in Chile. In 2020, 
Covid-19 was the primary cause of supply issues. Regionally, the 
picture varies considerably. Averaged over the past seven years, 
Oceania (predominantly Australia but including Papua New Guinea) 
has the highest apparent disruption rate over 6% of anticipated 
production, while Africa has had the lowest with 4%. However, in both 
regions technical disruptions are responsible for a higher share of 
disruption than the global average. Oceania has also been 
disproportionately affected by weather-related issues.  
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 117  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
Supply: Oceania and Latin America suffer greater disruptions to mining supply  
Copper mining disruptions by cause 
 
 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
Note: Regional mine disruption breakdowns are based on the last seven-year average. Oceania includes Australia and Papua New Guinea 
Source: IEA analysis based on Wood Mackenzie.
1%
2%
3%
4%
5%
6%
7%
8%
 200
 400
 600
 800
1 000
1 200
1 400
1 600
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
Technical
Strikes
Slow ramp-up
Weather
Grades
Other
% original production target
Global copper mine disruption
kt Cu
1%
2%
3%
4%
5%
6%
7%
8%
0%
13%
25%
38%
50%
63%
75%
88%
100%
Latin
America
Africa
Asia
Oceania
Regional copper mine disruption
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 118  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
Secondary supply: Copper recycling and direct use of scrap is set to increase substantially 
from 2030 providing a major source of supply in the future 
Historical and projected secondary copper supply in the NZE Scenario 
 
  
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
Notes: Direct use of scrap refers to high-grade manufacturing scrap which can be directly used as a source feed. Secondary production refers to end-of life and 
manufacturing scrap which must be further processed by smelting and/or refining before usage. 
Source: IEA analysis based on Wood Mackenzie and S&P Global.
2 000
4 000
6 000
8 000
10 000
12 000
2 000
4 000
6 000
8 000
10 000
12 000
2005
2010
2015
2020 2023
Secondary production
Direct use of scrap
Share of NZE demand excl. direct scrap (right axis)
Share of NZE demand incl. direct scrap (right axis)
Copper price (right axis)
Historical secondary supply
kt Cu
USD/tonne
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
5 000
10 000
15 000
20 000
25 000
2015 2020 2023 2025 2030 2035 2040
Secondary supply outlook
kt Cu
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 119  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
Secondary supply: Copper scrap plays an important role in cushioning potential market 
tightness or price shocks
Copper scrap falls under two broad categories. High-grade or No. 1 
scrap, known as direct use of scrap, is directly used by semi-
manufacturers supplementing their cathode supply as a source feed. 
There is also lower-grade No. 2 scrap, which contains greater 
impurities and is used by smelters and refineries. The higher 
impurities prevent this scrap from being used directly. 
Looking at historical secondary supply correlations with copper price 
shows they are strongly correlated with little lag, thus the price 
strongly determines secondary supply, which acts as a market-
balancing mechanism. This demonstrates that ramping up secondary 
supply can happen quickly and reactively with the right incentives. 
Therefore, secondary supply can be an increasingly important source 
of copper supply particularly in times of supply shocks and price 
spikes, if the right policy incentives are in place. However, this also 
shows the difficulty in sustaining high scrap usage rates in a low-price 
environment. 
Copper scrap use has decreased since 2015 from 18% to 17% of 
demand excluding direct use of scrap, and more significantly 
including direct scrap (from 37% to 33%). This is due to a combination 
of price, scrap trade restrictions from China, higher energy and 
shipping costs reducing recycling profitability, the impact of Covid-19, 
and that EU and US policies promoting domestic scrap collection 
have not yet taken effect. In climate-driven scenarios, however, 
copper scrap use increases significantly. In the NZE Scenario, the 
share of secondary supply in total demand rises to 20% by 2030 and 
30% in 2040, excluding direct use of scrap. This growth is driven by 
strong policy efforts to increase collection rates, optimise sorting 
systems, raise policy mandates for recycling and encourage 
investment in new processing facilities and smelters. Growing end-
of-life volumes from EV batteries also emerge as a major contributor 
from 2030. In the NZE Scenario, both sources of secondary supply 
experience strong growth, with direct use of scrap almost doubling 
from 2023 to 2040 while secondary production scrap increases by 2.5 
times in the same period.
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 120  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
Supply: A major primary copper supply deficit develops after 2025  
Expected mined copper supply from exisiting and announced projects and primary supply requirements by scenario 
  
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
Notes: Based on mined output. Primary supply requirements are calculated as “total demand net of secondary supply”, also accounting for losses during refining 
operations. See Introduction for definitions of the base and high production cases.
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
2023
2025
2030
2035
2040
High production case
Base case
NZE
APS
STEPS
Mt Cu
Expected supply
Primary supply requirements
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 121  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
Implications: A broad combination of supply and demand measures are needed to close the 
copper supply gap
Our analysis of project pipeline indicates that a copper primary supply 
shortfall may develop after 2025 in all three scenarios, despite the 
signficant growth in secondary supply. Even in the high production 
case where almost 2 Mt of extra mined supply is available shows a 
supply gap of 2.2 Mt (10%) to meet demand required by government 
climate pledges while there is a 4.5 Mt (20%) shortfall to match 
demand in the NZE Scenario in 2030. This demonstrates the urgency 
of financing and approving new supply projects given the long lead 
times to bring online new production. Beyond 2030 the supply gaps 
continue to expand as demand grows robustly for all scenarios. By 
2040, base case supply would have to increase by 80% to meet APS 
demand while it would have to double to be on track to meet 1.5° C 
by 2050. Even in the high production case, supply would have to 
increase by 60% in the APS and 75% in the NZE Scenario by 2040 
to meet demand. This anticipated primary supply deficit presents a 
growing concern for future clean energy technology deployment. 
The most critical risk for copper is this major supply gap from 2030 
onwards, being primarily driven by the strong increase in demand 
from clean energy technology deployment coupled with the declining 
ore quality in resources. For instance, the average grade of copper 
concentrate in Chile has decreased 30% since 2005. Although the 
implied supply gaps do not mean that achieving transition goals are 
unattainable, the substantial supply deficit requires a range of 
solutions to reduce pressure on primary copper supply requirements. 
This includes considerable supply and demand actions from 
governments and companies, including investment, substitution, 
material efficiency and recycling measures. The lack of diversification 
going forward, particularly in refining is also a key risk for the security 
of supply of copper. 
Supply measures 
First, on the supply side it is essential to stimulate significant 
investment in new primary supply, including in lower-grade plays. 
Governments can play a key role in supporting strategic projects 
financially and in streamlining permitting. However, the problem of 
declining ore quality poses a considerable challenge on the 
investment side, as there are few major new resources of high quality 
to exploit, also as a result of subdued exploration spending over the 
past decade. The tight supply market is likely to increase prices which 
could support investment in lower-grade plays, but pose economic 
pressures on end users. Many projects in the largest supply region, 
Latin America, which is also the region facing acute water stress 
challenges, are also facing critical social and environmental 
opposition, which has already resulted in the shutdown of the Cobre 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 122  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
Panama mine. This underlines the importance of governments and 
international mining companies working closely with the local 
community and ensuring benefits are felt to maintain social 
acceptability. 
Recycling is one of the most crucial measures to reduce primary 
copper supply pressure going forward. Copper is one of few materials 
that can be recycled repeatedly without any loss of quality. 
Manufacturing scrap is already reasonably well recycled; however, 
end-of-life scrap and mining waste have significant potential for 
improvement. With global copper secondary supply currently 17% of 
demand (excluding direct use of scrap), but increasing to 30% in 2040 
in the NZE Scenario, there is still substantial room for improvement. 
Given its multitude of applications, the global stock of copper is a 
critical resource, often referred to as the “urban mine”, and further 
exploitation of this is crucial. One of the critical issues limiting copper 
recycling is the difficulty in economically sorting and separating 
copper and its alloy types from complex electronic post-consumer 
scrap, where the value of recovered copper is often not high enough 
to match the recycling cost. Second, collection infrastructure is often 
insufficient in many regions, with limited coordination between supply 
chain actors. This is compounded by insufficient incentives and 
information for consumers to recycle copper-containing products. 
Lastly, there is a lack of regulatory mandates on copper recycling and 
collection.  
To address these challenges and enhance copper recycling, several 
actions 
are 
necessary. 
First, 
implementing 
comprehensive 
regulations is pivotal, including recycling rates and content mandates, 
bans on metals in landfills, and enforcement of design for recycling 
standards for new products to ensure a larger pool of products that 
are economically recyclable. Governments can support copper 
recycling supply chain coordination, which can reduce costs. Policy 
measures including China’s “Green Fence” policy, restricting the 
import of low-quality copper scrap, has inadvertently resulted in scrap 
oversupplies in Europe and thus low-quality scrap not being accepted 
in recent years. Therefore, increasing the scrap pool without 
accompanying investment in processing facilities may be less 
effective. This reinforces the need for greater global coordination 
between copper recycling supply chain actors, coupled with improved 
tracking of global scrap flows. Second, governments can support and 
scale up collection and sorting infrastructure, including information 
campaigns and incentives for consumers. Third, support for novel 
emerging recycling technologies which can efficiently sort and 
separate copper and its alloys is crucial, for instance sensor-based 
scrap sorting such as X-ray fluorescence and laser-induced 
breakdown spectroscopy. Lastly, supportive trade policies and 
measures promoting the development of new processing capabilities, 
along with economic incentives aimed at sustaining higher scrap 
usage in times of lower prices, are essential. 
Novel technologies offer promise for extracting greater amounts of 
copper from lower-grade plays and materials currently considered 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 123  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
waste. For instance, primary sulphide leaching, bioleaching or 
hydrometallurgy can enable copper recovery from ores below mill 
head grade, typically considered waste. Advanced separation 
techniques can also concentrate and upgrade low quality ore. 
Machine learning has also been used not only to optimise processing 
operations but also in identifying new resources. Despite their 
promise, many of these technologies are still emergent and have to 
be proven at scale. 
Demand measures 
On the demand side, there are multiple measures which can be taken 
to relieve supply pressure. Increasing material efficiency is key to 
reducing copper demand. For instance setting mandates and 
standards for copper intensity in products such as construction pipes 
or wiring can be effective. Providing financial incentives for 
consumers to purchase high material efficiency products can also 
help, particularly in appliances. Copper intensity is being reduced in 
products such as electric motors and solar panels, where price is 
often a driver. 
Substitution of copper where possible is an important measure going 
forward. Aluminium, though it has 60% of the electronic conductivity 
of copper, is the primary substitute option for many copper 
applications. It is also lower cost and lighter weight providing other 
potential advantages. There are applications where copper cannot be 
substituted including lithium-ion anode current collectors, due to 
lithium alloying with aluminium at low potentials. In networks 
aluminium’s lower electrical conductivity requires thicker cables, 
while the inferior thermal and mechanical properties necessitates 
greater maintenance, therefore, aluminium is less suitable for high-
voltage subsea and underground cables (although some OEMs are 
however starting to consider replacing copper in subsea 
applications).  
However, in many applications substituting copper is possible with 
commercial viability with minimal disadvantage. For instance, copper 
plumbing can often be replaced by plastic pipes such as cross-linked 
polyethylene (PEX) or high-density polyethylene (HDPE), though 
they can be difficult to recycle. Aluminium can replace overhead 
copper distribution cables, as well as copper windings in some 
motors, generators and transformers. However, it is also important to 
note aluminium processing is almost five times more carbon-
intensive than copper processing; therefore, there are energy-related 
implications to substituting copper with aluminium.
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 124  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
Outlook for lithium 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Clean energy transition risk assessment
Mining requirements
Demand outlook
Supply risks
Highest
price volatility than other
focus minerals
ESG and climate
risk exposure
50%
of mines located in high,
very high and arid areas
Geopolitical risks
85%
of refining by top three 
countries in 2030
Barriers to responding to
supply disruption
3%
of lithium sourced from
secondary supply today
Only
Low
Med
High
kt
kt
2010
2023
2023
2050
2050
2010
NZE
APS
1 000
2 000
1 000
2 000
2025
2030
2035
2040
Lithium
Li
Top three producers 2030
Expected mine supply from announced projects
Primary supply requirements (mined)
Electric vehicles
Other clean technology
Other demand
Refining
Mining
Australia
33%
China
23%
Argentina
13%
Chile
12%
Chile
15%
China
57%
NZE
APS
          
Cleantech demand (kt)
38
92
442
1 203
Other uses (kt)
63
73
90
123
Total demand (kt)
101
165
531
1 326
Secondary supply and reuse (kt)
2
5
28
154
Primary supply requirements (kt)
100
160
503
1 172
Share of top three mining countries
89%
85%
68%
70%
Share of top three refining countries
100%
96%
85%
84%
2021
2023
2030
2040
Milestones (APS)
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 126  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
Demand: In clean energy transitions, lithium is the mineral facing the fastest demand growth 
Global lithium demand outlook by sector and scenario 
 
 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
 400
 800
1 200
1 600
2 000
2015 2021 2023
2030 2040 2050
2030 2040 2050
2030 2040 2050
Other uses
Other batteries
Battery storage
EV batteries
Share of clean energy
technologies (right axis)
kt Li
APS
NZE
STEPS
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 127  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
Demand: Lithium fuels the growth of the EV industry, and its demand grows tenfold to 2050 in 
the NZE Scenario, propelled by the rapid deployment of EVs
Lithium is used in a variety of applications such as ceramics or 
lubricants, as well as in small volumes in pharmaceuticals, but 
demand structure has deeply transformed over the last ten years, 
making batteries the dominant driver of global lithium demand 
growth. Lithium, one of the lightest metals in the periodic table, is the 
natural candidate for high energy density in batteries due to its 
superior electrochemical characteristics. 
Lithium demand is set to rise almost threefold over this decade in the 
STEPS, expanding faster than all other focus minerals. By 2050, 
demand reaches 1 200 kt Li in the STEPS and 1 600 kt Li in the APS. 
In the NZE Scenario, demand increases to 1 700 kt Li by 2050, a 
tenfold growth from today’s levels, driven by clean energy 
technologies.  
Not only is lithium critical to clean energy transitions, but the lithium 
industry’s ability to ramp up has allowed the EV industry to outpace 
industry expectations. The EV industry contributes to about 90% of 
future lithium demand growth between today and 2050 in the APS. 
Meeting the 1.5 °C climate objective requires particularly rapid growth 
this decade: in 2030, the EV sector’s annual lithium demand is 40% 
higher in the NZE Scenario than in the APS. 
Battery storage is currently a minor consumer of lithium, accounting 
for about 5% of demand, but its development accelerates by the end 
of the decade. In the NZE Scenario, lithium demand for battery 
storage rises to 130 kt Li in 2050, well over ten times the current 
demand.  
Lithium-ion batteries’ role in fuelling the growth of the EV industry 
remains unchallenged in the near term. Alternative technologies such 
as sodium-ion batteries and vanadium flow batteries begin to take 
some shares from lithium-ion batteries in low-range vehicles and 
storage markets, but they do not materially alter the prospects for 
lithium demand in climate-driven scenarios. 
In an alternative case of the NZE Scenario where sodium-ion 
experiences wider popularity within the EV market, total lithium 
demand could be reduced by 10% in 2030. Likewise, in the case of 
an early adoption of vanadium flow technologies, demand for lithium 
in storage applications could be reduced by 6%. 
If technical challenges around their scale-up are overcome, solid-
state batteries with lithium metal anodes could create a new market 
for lithium in metal form (as opposed to chemicals such as carbonates 
or hydroxides), of 200 kt Li in 2040 and 330 kt Li in 2050 in the NZE 
Scenario.
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 128  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
Supply: New lithium players emerge in Argentina and Zimbabwe; China continues to dominate 
refining of hard rock ore 
Lithium raw materials and chemical production from operating and announced projects in the base case 
 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
Notes: Raw materials cover extraction of lithium from hard rock ore, as well as from clays and brines. Lithium chemicals cover the first production of lithium 
carbonate, hydroxide, sulphates and chlorides, and excludes reprocessing.
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
 100
 200
 300
 400
 500
2015
2020
2023
2025
2030
2035
2040
China
Australia
Chile
Argentina
Zimbabwe
Canada
United States
Europe
Other
Top 3 country share (right axis)
Raw materials
kt Li
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
2015
2020
2023
2025
2030
2035
2040
Chemicals
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 129  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
Supply: New players emerge on the mining side; refining takes different trajectories depending 
on chemical product 
Mining 
Today, annual production of lithium raw materials (from hard rock, 
brines and clays) amounted to around 190 kt Li in 2023, 70 kt Li from 
brines and 120 kt Li from hard rock. Lithium production has more than 
doubled in the past three years. The dominant producer of hard rock 
lithium is Australia, which produces 84 kt Li in the form of spodumene 
concentrate, mostly exported to China for refining. Another type of 
hard rock ore, lepidolite, is being developed, with a boom of 
production during the high price period of 2021-2023 in China’s Jianxi 
province, providing 12 kt Li to the market in 2023. Brines are 
extracted in salt lakes of Latin America (46 kt Li for Chile and 9 kt Li 
for Argentina), but also from high plateaux in western China (14 kt Li).  
Analysis of announced projects indicates that lithium raw material 
supply grows to 450 kt Li around 2030 in the base case, again more 
than doubling the current production, and reaching five times the 
production of 2020. In the high production case, an additional 70 kt Li 
of raw material supply could be made available on the market. If 
announced projects come online as planned, this volume approaches 
the requirements in the STEPS as well as in the APS in 2030, but is 
insufficient to stay on the 1.5 °C pathway. Beyond 2030, all scenarios 
require a further investment in new supplies.to keep pace with the 
demand growth. 
Australia remains a key producer of lithium with its spodumene 
deposits, through brownfield expansions of its major mines 
(Pilgangora, Greenbushes, Mount Marion and Wodgina) as well as 
several new projects, such as the Kathleen Valley and Mount Holland 
mines. Australia also hosts a first-of-its-kind tailings retreatment 
facility at Greenbushes, designed to extract further lithium from 
anterior mining waste. In the base case, Australia remains the largest 
producer in 2030, accounting for a third of world production. 
China is the world’s largest consumer of lithium as well as the world’s 
largest refiner, but traditionally sourced lithium feedstock from mines 
overseas. Significant efforts have been made to develop domestic 
supplies, with notable investments in domestic mines from 
downstream manufacturers, such as CATL. The Chinese share of 
global lithium mining has steadily increased since 2016, from 6% to 
17% in 2023. In the base case, it overtakes Chile and becomes the 
world’s second-largest lithium producer in the mid-2020s.  
Latin America has traditionally been a major lithium supplier with 
Chile’s Salar de Atacama. Chile remains the continent’s largest 
producer, but there are growing interests in Argentina, with a 
particularly strong pipeline of brine extraction projects. Based on 
announced projects, Argentina attracts over 80% of future capital 
investments for lithium in Latin America, with investors from all 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 130  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
regions, from the United States and Australia, as well as Europe 
(Eramet), China (Ganfeng, Zijn, Tibet Summit Resources) and Korea 
(POSCO Chemicals). By 2030, Chile’s base case annual supply 
grows to 56 kt Li, but Argentina emerges as a close contender, with 
47 kt Li of production. Despite significant lithium resources in Bolivia 
(23 Mt, about a fourth of world known resources), projects have yet 
to emerge there. The country has signed an agreement with Russia’s 
Rosatom and China’s CITIC Guoan Group to develop its lithium 
resources and recently launched an international tender for lithium 
extraction, although significant challenges remain. 
Geographical distribution of planned additional lithium mining 
projects, 2023-2030 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
Note: CSAM = Central and South America. 
 
Lithium mining is a recent phenomenon in Africa, where Zimbabwean 
production has recently ramped up, with 9 kt Li of lithium exported 
every year as concentrates of various hard rock ores (lepidolite, but 
also other minerals, such as petalite). Some informal artisanal and 
small-scale (ASM) mining activities have been reported in Nigeria, a 
phenomenon new to lithium, but frequent for other metals such as 
cobalt, gold, tin, tungsten and tantalum. Additional industrial 
capacities are planned in Zimbabwe, but other countries could follow 
suit, with projects in Ethiopia, Mali, Namibia, and possibly the 
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Ghana. In 2030, Africa's total 
lithium production in the base case rises to 53 kt Li, and further to 
70 kt Li in the high production case. 
There are many projects in the pipeline at their early stages of 
development, but price volatility may delay the projects coming up, 
particularly those outside of incumbent country producers, with 
implications for long-term supply and diversification. 
Refining 
Two regions have historically dominated the supply of lithium 
chemicals, with three distinct business models. Refining of lithium-
rich brines of China and Latin America is done locally, and lithium is 
then exported as a refined chemical – whether carbonate or 
hydroxide. This process traditionally involved evaporation ponds, 
making this relatively water-intensive. To reduce water requirements, 
a diversity of new “direct lithium extraction” technologies are under 
development, but may involve higher operating costs, 
Argentina
Other CSAM
Australia
Africa
North America
Europe
China
Base
case
Additional projects 
in the high 
production case
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 131  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
China currently dominates the refining of hard rock ore, from 
domestic resources, but also by refining the majority of lithium mined 
from hard rock overseas, notably from African countries and 
Australia. Lithium is generally mined and then locally processed into 
an exportable concentrate, but some African facilities, such as in 
Namibia, were built to directly ship ore to China. 
Some operations focus on conversion of one chemical into another, 
notably lithium carbonate to hydroxide, covering about 20% of current 
hydroxide supply, a technology dominated by China. 
Lithium chemicals can be recycled from secondary resources, 
typically 
“black 
mass” 
either 
from 
end-of-life 
batteries 
or 
manufacturing scrap from gigafactories. Historically, battery recycling 
facilities focused on higher-value metals, such as nickel and cobalt, 
and lithium was often not recovered. Depending on prices, the uptake 
of lithium recycling may require policy incentives. A number of 
recycling companies are also achieving 90% recycling rates for 
lithium, and policy makers are strengthening recycling targets 
significantly, such as with the EU battery regulation, all of which could 
help scale up secondary supply of lithium. In the APS, the share of 
secondary lithium supply increases from a low level today to 10% by 
2040. 
By 2030, lithium carbonate production nearly doubles to 220 kt Li in 
the base case, and possibly 260 kt Li in the high production case, but 
the project pipeline leaves little space for diversification. The top three 
country share remains close to 98%, covered by Argentina and Chile 
(refining their domestic brines) as well as China, which remains the 
major hub both for its domestic extractive activities, but also for the 
refining of hard rock overseas into carbonates. 
Projects being planned in other regions focus on lithium hydroxide, 
producing 170 kt Li in 2030 in the base case, and 185 kt Li in the high 
production case, more than twice the current production. The interest 
that investors take in hydroxide can be attributed to its dominance in 
North American and European demand, where the recent gigafactory 
projects almost exclusively focus on high-performance chemistries 
that require this chemical. The higher value of hydroxide is another 
aspect weighed by project developers, who anticipated a price 
premium relative to lithium carbonate. 
Geographical distribution of planned additional lithium chemical 
projects, 2023-2030 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
 
Argentina
Other CSAM
Australia
Korea
North America
Europe
China
Other
Lithium carbonate
Lithium hydroxide
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 132  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
China traditionally dominated refining of lithium from hard rock ore 
into hydroxide and continues doing so in the base case. It remains 
the main player with 60% hydroxide market share in 2030. Until 
recently, Australia was entirely dependent on China for the refining of 
its lithium ores, but two refineries are currently ramping up to produce 
lithium hydroxide, producing 30 kt Li by 2030. 
In other advanced economies, investors are also making bets on 
conversion facilities, importing carbonates and refining them into 
hydroxide closer to their consumers, with large plants including 
Albemarle’s Megaflex projects, as well as AMG’s Bitterfeld plant 
inaugurated in 2022 in Germany and POSCO’s planned conversion 
plant in Korea, as well as recycling plants. In North America and 
Europe, mining projects tend to be integrated, associating a mine with 
a hydroxide refinery. 
Projects are also being considered outside of lithium mining 
countries. Indonesia’s growth in nickel-rich cathode supply chain 
makes conversion plants likely to emerge there. Three lithium refining 
projects are also being considered in Saudi Arabia and the United 
Arab Emirates. However, refining projects have yet to emerge in 
Africa.
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 133  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
Implications: Short-term supply is expected to keep up with demand, but further projects need 
to come through to serve demand growth in the medium to long term 
Expected lithium primary supply from existing and announced projects and primary supply requirements by scenario  
 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
Notes: Based on raw material output covering extraction of lithium from hard rock ore, clays and brines. Primary supply requirements are calculated as “total demand 
net of secondary supply”, also accounting for losses during refining operations. See Introduction for definitions of the base and high production cases.
 300
 600
 900
1 200
1 500
2023
2025
2030
2035
2040
High production case
Base case
NZE
APS
STEPS
kt Li
Expected supply
Primary supply requirements
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 134  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
Implications: Investments are critical to keep pace with strong demand growth, but challenges 
remain in ensuring sufficient diversification and tailoring to future battery chemistry needs
Recent price volatility may lead to short-term supply responses, 
discouraging investment for new supplies. In February 2024, 
production in the world’s largest mine, Australia’s Greenbushes, was 
slowed, and other lithium producers announced plans to review their 
operations. Operating cost is one of the major considerations in 
production suspension decisions, but it is not the only factor. Those 
with long-term offtake agreements might continue even though their 
cost profiles are high, which could put additional pressure on prices 
beyond what supply-and-demand dynamics suggest. Symmetrically, 
integrated projects are reducing production, despite being on the 
lower end of the cost curve – such as Australian hard rock players. 
There are risks that the current low-price environment may reduce 
investments in lithium projects, including those offering better ESG 
performance or outside of incumbent regions, which would affect 
medium- to long-term supplies. Many recent projects had been 
planned during periods of higher prices, and their viability may be 
reassessed if investors’ long-term expectations are revised.  
While the market is well supplied at the moment, continued 
investment flows are required to develop projects to serve long-term 
demand and diversification goals. At 2024 values, the current project 
pipeline in the base case requires USD 13 billion of investment for 
raw material production, with an additional USD 7 billion required for 
the high production case.  
Cumulative capital investment requirements to support the 
current mining project pipeline in the base case, 2024-2040 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
Sources: IEA analysis based on company reports, Battery Materials Review. 
 
Analysis of the project pipeline suggests that significant regional 
disparities exist in the capital costs for developing new projects. In 
particular, European and American lithium extractive projects 
generally require higher upfront costs. Business models often 
compensate for this disadvantage through integrated approaches 
offering highly refined products, but volatility in the refined chemical 
markets is putting price assumptions at risk. 
 2
 4
China
Argentina
Australia
Canada
Zimbabwe
Other Africa
Other South America
Other North America
Europe
Base case
High production case
Billion USD (2024)
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 135  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
Average capital intensity of lithium mining projects 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
Sources: IEA analysis based on company reports, Battery Materials Review. 
 
In the long term, concerns remain regarding geographical and 
ownership concentration. Two trends are emerging. First, efforts to 
increase domestic feedstock supplies from dominant chemical 
producers – notably progress achieved by China researching new 
deposits and promoting domestic mining activities, with the financial 
support of domestic downstream battery manufacturers. Geological 
considerations put Chinese plays at a competitive disadvantage 
historically, but new deposits under development may be changing 
this picture. Notably, miners are developing domestic spodumene 
projects, the same type of ore as Australia’s lower-cost lithium mines.  
The incumbent players’ endeavours to procure resources abroad 
indicate that sustained supply concentration may exist through 
ownership – Chinese enterprises own most domestic ventures as 
well as major interests in Australian, Argentinian and African 
ventures. 
Lithium chemical demand by type in the APS 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
Finally, the lithium market structure is sensitive to the respective 
market shares of different battery chemistries, with growing supply 
chain segmentation between two chemicals: lithium hydroxide and 
lithium carbonate. Lithium hydroxide is required for nickel-rich 
chemistries, while carbonates are used both in the older generation 
of NMC chemistries and the LFP market. In the APS, EV 
requirements for carbonate and hydroxide are expected to rise in 
parallel, with hydroxide being required for 55% of total demand by 
2030. In an alternative case where LFP takes a larger share, demand 
for hydroxide demand would be 25% less, calling for readjustments 
in regional sourcing strategies and project development planning.  
 100
 200
 300
Australia
Africa
South America
Europe
North America
China
Million USD/kt Li
25%
50%
75%
100%
 250
 500
 750
1 000
2023
2030
2040
2030
2040
Hydroxide
Carbonate
Share of hydroxide
kt Li
Base case
High LFP and 
sodium-ion case
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 136  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
Outlook for nickel 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


          
Refining
Mining
Clean energy transition risk assessment
Mining requirements
Demand outlook
Supply risks
6%
of battery pack cost in 2023
ESG and climate
risk exposure
603 gCO2/kWh
Among the highest average grid
carbon intensity for refining
Geopolitical risks
61%
of mining by one
single country in 2030
Barriers to responding to
supply disruption
1%
of nickel sourced from
secondary supply today
Cleantech demand (kt)
240
478
1 953
3 381
Other uses (kt)
2 519
2 627
2 802
2 857
Total demand (kt)
2 759
3 104
4 754
6 238
Secondary supply and reuse (kt)
10
43
139
613
Primary supply requirements (kt)
2 749
3 061
4 615
5 625
Share of top three mining countries
60%
69%
76%
83%
Share of top three refining countries
66%
71%
71%
73%
2021
2023
2030
2040
Milestones (APS)
Low
Med
High
Indonesia
62%
Philippines
8%
Japan
6%
New Caledonia
6%
Indonesia
44%
China
21%
kt
kt
2010
2023
2023
2050
2050
2010
NZE
APS
4 000
8 000
4 000
8 000
2025
2030
2035
2040
NZE
APS
Nickel
Ni
Top three producers 2030
Expected mine supply from announced projects
Primary supply requirements (mined)
Electric vehicles
Other clean technology
Other demand
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 138  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
Demand: Growth in nickel demand is driven by clean energy applications; EVs become the 
largest-consuming segment in the coming decades in climate-driven scenarios 
Global nickel demand outlook by sector and scenario 
 
 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
Note: Alloys includes both demand for stainless steel and for non-ferrous applications.
25%
50%
75%
100%
2 000
4 000
6 000
8 000
2015 2021 2023
2030 2040 2050
2030 2040 2050
2030 2040 2050
Other
Alloys
Other clean energy
technology
Wind
Geothermal
EV batteries
Share of clean energy
technologies (right axis)
kt Ni
APS
NZE
STEPS
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 139  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
Demand: Nickel demand almost doubles over the period to 2050, driven by the rapid 
deployment of EV batteries
Nickel is used in a wide range of applications and is important for the 
broad economy with its use for alloys and stainless steel, as well as 
in the clean energy sector. The largest applications in the clean 
energy sector are within EV batteries, but nickel is also used in low-
emissions power generation, such as in wind and geothermal energy.  
Global nickel demand remained steady between 2018 and 2020 
around 2.4 Mt, but then began to increase rapidly, reaching around 
3.1 Mt in 2023. Demand is set to grow further in all scenarios, 
increasing to 4.5 Mt in 2030 in the STEPS. In the APS, demand 
growth is slightly higher, rising to 4.8 Mt in 2030. In the NZE Scenario, 
demand increases more rapidly to 5.6 Mt in 2030 as more EVs and 
low-emissions power generation are deployed. By 2040, demand 
under the NZE Scenario is slightly higher than the APS, but sees a 
larger fall to 2050 due to lower demand for uses in stainless steel as 
secondary supplies increase.  
Historically, demand for nickel was primarily for its use in alloys 
(including stainless steel and non-ferrous applications): in 2015, 75% 
of nickel’s total demand was for alloys. However, from 2020 to 2023 
this shifted substantially and demand from the clean energy sector 
became the main factor behind a 30% increase in overall nickel 
demand over this period. This was primarily due to the increasing use 
of nickel-rich EV batteries, but was also driven by the use of nickel in 
low-emissions power. In 2023, the share of clean energy applications 
in total demand crossed 15%.  
Looking to the future, nickel demand for alloys continues to play a 
large role in overall nickel demand with around 50% of market share 
in 2050 under the STEPS. In both the APS and NZE Scenario, the 
market share of nickel in alloys falls to around 35%, in part due to the 
higher clean energy demand but also due to lower material 
requirements for steel. 
Nickel use in clean energy technologies continues to drive overall 
growth in nickel demand. In all scenarios, clean energy technology’s 
share in total demand continues to rise, peaking at around 40% in the 
STEPS and around 55% in the APS and NZE Scenario by 2040 
before falling slightly due to lower demand for nickel-rich chemistries. 
However, the primary driver in nickel’s demand growth continues to 
be EV batteries in all scenarios, whose demand increases by 
approximately ninefold between today and 2050 in the APS and NZE 
Scenario. 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 140  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
Supply: Indonesia remains the largest producer of mined ore and refined primary nickel 
products to 2040; China dominates sulphate supply 
Nickel production from existing and announced projects in the base case 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
Note: Nickel refining includes nickel that is processed into either a metal, oxide, nickel pig iron (NPI), or ferronickel and excludes outputs from intermediate 
production steps. 
1 500
3 000
4 500
6 000
2015
2023
2030
2040
Indonesia
Philippines
Russia
New Caledonia
Australia
Canada
China
Japan
Finland
Other
Korea
Top 1 country share
Top 3 country share
Mining
kt Ni
0%
25%
50%
75%
100%
2015
2023
2030
2040
Sulphate
2015
2023
2030
2040
Refining
(right axis)
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 141  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
Supply: Intermediates sourced from laterite ores contribute to the largest growth in nickel 
supply, while conversion of laterite ores to battery-grade nickel continues to grow
Mining 
There are two types of nickel ore: laterite and sulphide. Laterite ores 
are primarily found in Indonesia, New Caledonia, the Philippines, and 
Australia, and sulphide ores are primarily found in Australia, Canada, 
Russia, and China.  
Over the last five years, nickel mining has experienced significant 
absolute increases in the amount of material mined, as well as a shift 
in the type of ore mined. From 2018 to 2023, mined nickel supply 
increased by almost 1.5 times from 2.4 Mt to 3.5 Mt. This increase 
was primarily driven by the rapid expansion of mining in Indonesia, 
which saw a tripling in mined nickel output between 2018 and 2023, 
rising from just 0.6 Mt in 2018 to 1.8 Mt in 2023. Increases were also 
seen in Brazil, New Caledonia and Canada.  
There has also been an increasing shift in the type of nickel ore, 
moving away from historically mined nickel sulphide to laterite. From 
2018 to 2023, laterite mining nearly doubled from 1.5 Mt to 2.8 Mt, 
whereas sulphide mining fell slightly from 0.8 Mt to 0.7 Mt. This led to 
the share of laterites in total supply growing from 65% to 80%. In our 
base case, this trend is expected to continue until it reaches almost 
90% in 2040, primarily driven by the growth in nickel mining in 
Indonesia, which almost doubles over the same period.  
The mined nickel market has been increasingly geographically 
concentrated since 2018, with Indonesia’s share of global production 
increasing from 25% in 2018 to 52% in 2023.  
Mined nickel production by ore type in the base case 
 
  
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
 
25%
50%
75%
100%
 2
 4
 6
2015
2020
2025
2030
2035
2040
Share of laterite supply (right axis)
Mt of contained Ni
Sulphide
Laterite – other
Laterite – Indonesia
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 142  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
Looking ahead, in the base case, mined nickel supply is expected to 
continue growing to 4.4 Mt by 2040, marking a one-third increase 
from today. As our high production case assumes several early-stage 
projects come online, mined nickel supply grows to around 6 Mt by 
2040, almost doubling. Geographical concentration is set to increase 
further in the base case, with the top three producing countries' share 
rising from 70% today to 83% by 2040. However, in the high 
production case, more projects come online from diversified regions, 
notably Australia and Brazil, bringing the top three countries' share 
slightly down to 81% by 2040. 
In the near term, there could be some oversupply in the mined nickel 
market as a result of high investment into nickel developments in the 
last five years. In the longer term, expected supply from announced 
projects in the base case may fall short of meeting primary supply 
requirements in both the STEPS and APS by 2030. Additional 
projects that are assumed to come online in the high production case 
will need to materialise in this case. In the NZE Scenario, planned 
and high-potential projects fall short of primary supply requirements 
by 2030, requiring new projects to come through. 
Refining 
There are two types of primary nickel products: high-purity Class 1 
products (containing 99.8% nickel or above) and lower-purity Class 2 
products (containing less than 99.8% nickel). Battery cathodes need 
nickel sulphate, which has historically been produced from Class 1 
products. 
There are many stages of the supply chain to produce both Class 1 
and Class 2 products. Intermediate products such as mixed-hydroxide 
precipitate (MHP) or mixed sulphide precipitate (MSP) are produced 
through hydrometallurgical processes such as bioleaching, and nickel 
matte is produced through smelting. Primary products such as nickel 
metals and nickel oxides, nickel pig iron (NPI) and ferronickel are 
produced through processes such as blast furnaces and electric arc 
furnaces, which can be used in end-use markets as final products. This 
section refers to the latter when discussing refined products. 
Similar to nickel mining, refined nickel production has significantly 
increased over the last five years. From 2018 to 2023, refined nickel 
products grew 1.4fold to 3.1 Mt, primarily driven by growth in 
Indonesia, which saw an almost fivefold increase in production. 
Geographical concentration of the top producing country, Indonesia, 
grew from 30% to 45%, whereas geographical concentration of the top 
three producers grew from 50% to 70%. 
Looking ahead, analysis of the project pipeline indicates that refined 
nickel production continues to grow in the base case, to 3.9 Mt in 2040. 
The largest driver of this growth is in NPI and nickel metals, each 
growing by around a quarter to 2040. This production is primarily 
driven by Indonesia, which sees an over 1.5-fold increase in refined 
nickel product production to 2040, primarily in the form of NPI, 
ferronickel and nickel metals. The top producing country – Indonesia – 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 143  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
continues to maintain a dominating market share, growing from 45% 
in 2023 to 59% in 2040. The high production case does not see a much 
higher refined nickel supply. While there is slightly more production in 
countries outside of the dominant producer, such as Australia, the level 
of concentration barely changes compared with the base case. 
Sulphate 
For use in EV batteries, nickel needs to be further processed into 
nickel sulphate, which is then used as input into battery cathodes. 
Historically, nickel sulphate has been obtained through refining 
sulphide ores into nickel matte or nickel metals and oxides pellets 
and then into battery-grade nickel as it requires high-content nickel. 
Recent nickel market developments, including high prices and 
Indonesia’s rise in prominence within the supply chain, have led to 
using MHP and MSP, sourced from laterite ores, as inputs for nickel 
sulphates. There has also been a rise in converting NPI and 
ferronickel – typically used in stainless steel applications – into nickel 
matte, which is then processed into nickel sulphate. 
From 2018 to 2023, the most significant increase in inputs for nickel 
sulphate production was from matte via sulphide ores. Over the same 
period, there was also a rise in the production of nickel sulphate from 
matte via laterite ore and the intermediate MHP derived from laterite 
ore. In the base case, we anticipate this shift towards utilising matte 
via laterite and intermediates from laterite ores to continue through 
2030. 
Nickel supply chain 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
Note: HPAL = high-pressure acid leaching. 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 144  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
There is also large growth in the utilisation of a mix of inputs into 
nickel sulphate production, with the largest absolute increase seen in 
a combination of Class 1 and laterite ore inputs, through either MHP 
or matte. Mixes combining Class 1 and recycled material or scrap 
also increase to 2030. In our high production case, while slightly more 
sulphate projects that utilise matte via sulphide may come online, the 
primary input drivers are expected to remain as laterite ore inputs. 
The surge in processing laterite ore for nickel sulphate production has 
been chiefly propelled by Indonesia, and the country is poised to 
maintain its leading role in driving growth in this sector. In the base 
case, Indonesia sees an over twofold increase in MHP production 
and an increase of 1.4 times in matte production by 2030.  
In the near term, nickel sulphate may be adequately supplied to 2025. 
However, in both the APS and NZE Scenario, nickel sulphate 
requirements exceed expected sulphate supply from announced 
projects by 2030 and beyond, even with increases in sulphate supply 
from secondary production as more EV batteries are deployed and 
recycled. However, new sulphate capacity can be introduced 
relatively quickly – within 18-24 months – and we expect that supply 
can be relatively responsive to developments within the EV battery 
industry. 
Inputs into nickel sulphate production 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
Note: Included in Class 1 is power/pellets/briquettes.
0%
25%
50%
75%
100%
2018
2020
2023
2025
2030
Mix (with Class I and
laterite ore intermediates)
MHP
MSP
Mix (Class I and
secondary material)
Mix (with Class I and
sulphide ore intermediates)
Matte (via sulphide)
Powder/pellets/
briquettes
Recycled/scrap
Crude nickel sulphate
Matte (via laterite)
Mix (laterite ore input
and secondary material)
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 145  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
Supply: The market could be well supplied in the near term, but additional projects need to 
come through to meet demand in climate-driven scenarios in the medium and long term  
Expected mined nickel supply from existing and announced projects and primary supply requirements by scenario 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
Notes: Based on mined output. Primary supply requirements are calculated as “total demand net of secondary supply”, also accounting for losses during refining 
operations. See Introduction for definitions of the base and high production cases. 
 1
 2
 3
 4
 5
 6
 7
2023
2025
2030
2035
2040
High production case
Base case
NZE
APS
STEPS
Mt Ni
Primary supply requirements
Expected supply
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 146  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
 
Supply: Analysis of the current project pipeline indicates that battery-grade nickel may see 
potential supply gaps in climate-driven scenarios by 2030, even with secondary supply 
Nickel sulphate supply and demand balances based on existing and announced projects 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
Notes: Sulphate supply requirements includes nickel demand from EV batteries and demand from non-batteries. Does not include a route where precursor cathode 
material is directly produced from refining operations. 
 
 1
 2
 3
 4
2023
2025
2030
2035
2040
Secondary
High production case
Base case
NZE
APS
Mt Ni
Sulphate supply
Sulphate supply 
requirements
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 147  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
Implications: Today’s low-price environment creates risks for future nickel supply and for the 
prospects for greater diversification
The recent low-price environment for nickel prompted several nickel 
producers to implement cost-cutting measures at existing operations. 
For instance, First Quantum's nickel mine announced production cuts, 
while BHP's Nickel West operations reduced its workforce. 
Additionally, other producers, such as Glencore's Koniambo nickel 
mine, placed their operations into care and maintenance. 
Consequently, nickel production in 2023 was lower than anticipated, 
with announced nickel mining production cuts and closures totalling 
around 80 kt.  
While the continuation of low nickel prices supports the growth of the 
EV market by keeping battery prices low, there is a potential 
downside: it may lead to further closures of nickel mines or halt 
ongoing developments. Operations such as BHP's Nickel West are 
contemplating putting their mines under care and maintenance, while 
New Caledonia's production faces the risk of investor loss. Reports 
have surfaced of producers halting project development due to 
nickel's low price, which threatens the long-term profitability of 
projects such as IGO's Cosmos nickel project. This risk of closure 
and development halts is especially pronounced for projects with 
higher costs and lower margins, often located in regions beyond the 
current dominant producers. 
We have identified approximately 25 operating or potential mines that 
could be at risk if the current low nickel price persists, primarily 
located in Canada and New Caledonia. While closures of these nickel 
mines and production cuts may not immediately result in a significant 
undersupply of mined nickel, given that the market is currently well-
supplied, they could lead to a shortfall in supply compared with 
medium-to-long-term demand in the APS and NZE Scenario. The 
total supply loss would be around 360 kt of supply in 2030 and 280 kt 
in 2040, respectively, almost 10% of supply in each year. 
The larger concern stemming from the continuation of the current 
low-price environment is the potential closure of high-cost nickel 
mines, which would further reduce the diversity of supply in an 
already geographically concentrated market. If all at-risk nickel mines 
were to close, this would increase Indonesia's market share — the 
top nickel mining country — and the top three countries’ share by 
around 6 percentage points in both 2030 and 2040. 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 148  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
Implications: Without greater efforts to shift to less energy- and emissions-intensive processes, 
emissions from Indonesian nickel production are set to increase  
Indonesia nickel processing volumes and associated emissions 
  
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
Notes: CO2-e = carbon dioxide equivalent; RKEF = rotary kiln electric furnace; OSBF = oxygen-rich side blowing furnace; PAL = pressure acid leaching. The low-
carbon case adopts “best case” intensities from the Minviro paper, which assume that processing operations are utilising renewable electricity and, where possible, 
non-coal thermal energy and reductants. 
0
20
40
60
80
 50
 100
 150
 200
 250
2023
2030
2030
t CO2-e/t Ni
Mt CO2
CO2 intensity (right axis)
Emissions from nickel processing
 1
 2
 3
 4
2023
2030
Mt Ni
RKEF (FeNi/NPI)
PAL/HPAL
RKEF (intermediates)
OSBF
Base case production process mix
Base case
Low-carbon case
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 149  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
Implications: Indonesia has a major role in shaping the global nickel market
In both the base case and high production case, Indonesia’s role in 
the global nickel market continues to expand as the country boosts 
its mining, refining and nickel sulphate production capacities. 
Indonesia’s laterites ores are converted into nickel ready for 
conversion to battery-grade nickel by two methods: through 
processing to MHP or MSP through hydrometallurgical processes 
such as HPAL or the production of ferronickel or NPI through electric 
furnaces such as RKEFs, which is then converted into nickel matte.  
Emissions per tonne of nickel vary by processing method. Currently, 
the emissions intensity of nickel production is estimated to be about 
65 t CO2-e to 105 t CO2-e for RKEF and 10 t CO2-e to 60 t CO2-e for 
HPAL depending on the source of electricity and thermal energy or 
reductant utilised. These variations between processes primarily 
stem from the higher energy intensity of the laterite-to-NPI via RKEF 
process, which requires more electricity – around 500 kWh more per 
tonne of feed – as well as a greater direct use of carbon-intensive 
chemical reductants and heat energy sources.  
In 2023, the primary production route of nickel in Indonesia was 
RKEF (to produce ferronickel or NPI), which accounts for almost 90% 
of production, resulting in an estimated 150 Mt CO2 emissions from 
nickel production in the country. In both supply cases, operational 
ramp-ups and new projects in Indonesia lead to a shift in the 
production mix towards less energy-intensive processes. By 2030, 
the share of RKEF production is projected to decrease to around 80%, 
remaining stable through 2040. Meanwhile, HPAL is expected to 
increase its share of the production mix to approximately 15% by 
2030. Additionally, OSBF processes also see a growing role, rising 
from 2% of the production mix in 2023 to 6% by 2030 in the base 
case. 
This transition away from RKEF towards less energy-intensive 
processes could, on its own, lead to a reduction in the overall CO2 
intensity per tonne of refined nickel in Indonesia, from around 80 
t CO2 per tonne to around 75 t CO2 per tonne by 2030. Despite this 
decrease in average intensity, if Indonesia’s power and thermal 
energy sources for nickel processing remain dependent on coal, as 
they do today, absolute CO2 emissions from nickel refining could be 
1.4 higher in 2030 and 1.6 times higher in 2040, compared with 2023. 
Indonesia is working to shift its energy mix to cleaner sources, which, 
in line with a long-term goal of reaching net zero emissions by 2060, 
could help to reduce the carbon impact of the country’s nickel 
production. There are indications of some near-term progress by 
industry players. For example, one company is developing several 
HPAL projects while exploring replacement of coal with lower-
emissions alternatives such as gas and bioenergy. 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 150  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
However, significant work remains to lower the carbon footprint of 
nickel operations, with measures that address energy demand 
requirements and emissions from power, chemical and thermal 
energy processes. As an illustration, if the Indonesian production 
processes projected in this report’s base case were to reduce their 
CO2 intensity to the "best case" levels identified in the Minviro paper, 
which assumes that processing operations utilise renewable 
electricity and, where possible, non-coal thermal energy and 
reductants, their average CO2 intensity would decline by 25% ("low-
carbon case"). Absolute CO2 emissions would be similar to today’s 
levels in 2030 and 20% higher in 2040 than today, despite the almost 
65% increase in production.  
Moreover, refining and processing operations often cause air, land 
and water pollution, in addition to significant carbon emissions, and 
there are trade-offs between the two commonly used processes for 
converting laterite ores to intermediates for battery-grade nickel. The 
process of using HPAL results in high waste production but has lower 
emissions intensity, whereas RKEF results in less waste but 
extremely high carbon emissions. 
There are other environmental issues that could arise from 
Indonesia’s growing role in the nickel market. The shallow, open-pit 
mining methods used in Indonesian nickel production have led to 
significant deforestation and the clearing of farmland. Research 
estimates that the direct land footprint of nickel mining in Indonesia 
amounts to 42 m2 per tonne of nickel contained in ore. Under the base 
case production, this would equate to around 800 km2 of additional 
land use impact between today and 2030.  
In addition, tailings management associated with HPAL production is 
a persistent issue. While initial proposals for deep-sea tailings 
placement were dropped over environmental concerns, the 
alternative, land-based dry tailings stacking, still faces technical 
challenges driven in part by Indonesia’s warm and humid climate. 
Hydrometallurgical waste from HPAL plants can be neutralised, dried 
and compacted by lining with geotextiles or thick clay layers to 
prevent waste stream leakage. However, significant investments in 
drainage and filtration systems are required to mitigate the impacts 
of high rainfall.
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 151  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
 The use of captive power for nickel in Indonesia 
 
 One of the main drivers behind high emissions intensity of 
Indonesia’s nickel is the reliance of the country’s power on fossil 
fuels, especially coal, which make up 81% of the on-grid electricity 
mix. Approximately a quarter of current coal-generated power in the 
country is not grid-connected, known as “captive power”, and serves 
energy-intensive industries, especially minerals processing, which 
are viewed as important to realising Indonesia’s industrial strategy. 
Coal plants integrated with industries that support value addition in 
the natural resources sector or have a major contribution to job 
creation and/or national economic growth are exempted from the 
moratorium on development in Perpres No. 112/2022. 
Over the last ten years, Indonesia has seen an increase in captive 
coal power capacity, which rose nearly eightfold from 1.4 GW to 
10.8 GW. Without a shift in the business plans, technology choices 
and regulation of such plants, growth is likely to continue, with 
estimates of the pipeline for new captive coal power ranging from 
14.4 GW to over 20 GW by 2030.  
Around two-thirds of existing captive coal plants service the 
operating nickel smelters in the country, which are located in places 
that are not well integrated with the grid-connected power system.  
 
Growth in smelter capacity and captive power to support it was 
driven in part by the country’s export ban of nickel ores in 2020. In 
Central Sulawesi, the location of the Morowali Industrial Park, there 
is almost 1 Mt of production capacity and about 2.7 GW of captive 
coal power in operation, with a further 2.8 GW under construction. 
The locations of many of the other nickel refining operations in the 
country – Obi Island and Weda Bay – also have many operating and 
planned captive power operations.  
To prevent a substantial rise in CO2 emissions as nickel production 
expands, Indonesia will need to accelerate the uptake of low-
emissions alternatives to captive coal power and find ways to phase 
out existing captive coal plants, as part of an overall strategy to shift 
Indonesia’s nickel sector to a low-emissions pathway. The Just 
Energy Transition Partnership plans to develop a study on 
transitioning the captive power sector, building on Perpres No. 
11/2022. Indonesia also released an Indonesian Taxonomy for 
Sustainable Finance which incorporates provisions for financing 
coal plants, aiming to expedite their closure. However, according to 
the taxonomy, new captive coal plants may be classified as a 
transition asset, and thus still eligible for finance, if involved in the 
processing and mining of critical minerals for the energy transition, 
such as nickel. 
 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 152  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
Implications: A price premium for low-emissions nickel?
As low-cost, high-emissions Indonesian nickel has come at scale to 
the global nickel market, market stakeholders have called on policy 
makers to support pricing mechanisms that can support the market 
for more sustainably produced nickel. However, the London Metal 
Exchange (LME) rejected calls to create traded contract 
specifications that would support a price premium for low-emissions 
or responsible nickel, citing concerns about market liquidity and 
interest as well as a lack of an agreed definition of “green.”  
Instead, the LME has highlighted its partnership with Metalshub, a 
digital platform for metals procurement and trading, as a way to help 
market participants assess potential premiums for "cleaner" nickel. 
Metalshub, in collaboration with a consultancy Minviro, plans to 
integrate nickel’s carbon footprint data into the Metalshub 
procurement platform. While Metalshub does not play an active role 
in facilitating price determination in the way that an exchange like 
LME does, its recent announcement to begin reporting volumes of 
low carbon Class 1 nickel could contribute to market-based price 
discovery for a “green premium.” LME and Metalshub have defined 
“low-carbon” nickel as having a carbon footprint lower than 
20 t CO2-e.  
Similarly, Fastmarkets and Benchmark Mineral Intelligence, price 
reporting agencies, have proposed launching price assessments to 
distinguish cleaner nickel. The Fastmarkets specification would use 
self-reported transaction data to identify whether, and at what levels, 
the market is paying a premium for nickel briquettes with a carbon 
footprint of less than 18 t CO2-e, whereas Benchmark’s assessment 
considers transaction data for nickel sulphate sourced from 
companies assessed to be “industry leading” within their proprietary 
ESG scoring system.  
The Fastmarkets and Metalshub emissions thresholds would exclude 
ferronickel and NPI production due to their relatively high carbon 
footprints but may still allow some production from HPAL pathways. 
However, it should be noted that the non-emissions environmental 
impacts associated with HPAL routes may require a more holistic 
view of sustainability that goes beyond the carbon footprint alone. 
Despite efforts by market participants, it is difficult to imagine a 
significant premium emerging voluntarily, at least at a level that would 
support higher-cost producers to restart or maintain production. 
Processing and manufacturing industries are sensitive to raw 
material input prices, and voluntarily paying above market price for 
feedstock is likely to significantly impact their competitiveness. 
Regulatory intervention may need to play a key role in incentivising 
the production and consumption of responsibly sourced materials.  
Subsidies or tax credits could be used to support the production of 
responsibly sourced nickel, with those provided under existing 
provisions such as the Inflation Reduction Act given only to producers 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 153  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
that source a certain percentage of their nickel supply from 
“responsibly sourced” supplies or whose upstream greenhouse gas 
emissions are below a certain threshold. In addition to its nickel 
finance assistance programme, Australia is considering introducing 
nickel production tax credits similar to those in the IRA, which 
considers giving a production tax credit of 10% to critical minerals 
producers. Such tax credits might be tied to emissions, giving 
preferential rates to low-emissions producers. 
Pricing differentiation between different sources of nickel could also 
be established through carbon pricing and trading schemes. The 
European Union's Carbon Border Adjustment Mechanism (CBAM), 
which imposes a carbon tax on imported energy-intensive goods, 
could be expanded to include other raw materials such as nickel or 
the embedded emissions in downstream products, such as stainless 
steel. Disclosure policies, such as the EU Battery Regulation which 
by 2025 will mandate battery producers to disclose the complete 
carbon footprint of EV batteries over their life cycle, could also make 
it easier for purchasers and consumers to determine the emissions 
of different nickel sources, which could support voluntary adoption. 
At a minimum, all these actions would require policy makers to 
develop criteria to distinguish between supplies based on ESG 
performance. Establishing a common understanding of what supplies 
should be prioritised would require collaboration among industry 
stakeholders, policy makers and environmental experts to develop a 
robust and widely accepted framework that takes into account not 
only greenhouse gas emissions but also other environmental and 
social impacts across the supply chain. 
All of these policies and industry actions should ensure that 
producers follow the principle of additionality, ensuring that product 
emissions are meaningfully reduced over the longer term. 
Calculations of emissions also need to be meaningful and across the 
supply chain, avoiding “greenwashing”. Policy makers can support 
this by creating regulations that mandate reporting and disclosure 
requirements for emissions. Examples include the US Environmental 
Protection Agency's Greenhouse Gas Reporting Program (GHGRP) 
which requires large metal manufacturing facilities to report their 
emissions annually under specific methodologies that incorporate 
those of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). 
On the demand side, industry can also take actions to start 
incentivising responsible sourcing. For example, the First Movers 
Coalition aims to leverage the collective purchasing power of major 
market participants to create early markets for low-emissions steel, 
aluminium, cement, etc. By committing to purchase a proportion of 
their future supply from low-emissions sources, coalition members 
aim to send a demand signal to incentivise clean material production 
at scale. This type of approach could also be taken on a bilateral 
basis by industry players in the downstream EV market. Some of 
these players have already showed a preference for low-emissions 
nickel, such as Vale’s long-term offtake agreement with Tesla, which 
emphasised secure access to low-emissions nickel.
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 154  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
Outlook for cobalt 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


          
Clean energy transition risk assessment
Cleantech demand (kt)
36
64
177
260
Other uses (kt)
145
150
167
194
Total demand (kt)
181
215
344
454
Secondary supply and reuse (kt)
15
24
45
131
Primary supply requirements (kt)
100
166
299
323
Share of top three mining countries
75%
77%
84%
84%
Share of top three refining countries
86%
88%
84%
85%
2021
2023
2030
2040
Milestones (APS)
Cobalt
Refining
Mining
Co
Top three producers 2030
DRC
66%
China
74%
Indonesia
10%
Finland
6%
Japan
4%
Russia
3%
2025
2030
2035
2040
Mining requirements
Demand outlook
NZE
APS
NZE
APS
kt
300
600
2010
2050
2050
2010
kt
300
600
2023
2023
Expected mine supply from announced projects
Primary supply requirements (mined)
Electric vehicles
Other clean technology
Other demand
Supply risks
16%
shortfall in project pipeline vs.
2035 APS mining requirements
ESG and climate
risk exposure
Low
environmental and social
performance for mining
Geopolitical risks
84%
of mining by one
single country in 2030
Barriers to responding to
supply disruption
low-cobalt
chemistries
Growing adoption of
Low
Med
High
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 156  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
Demand: Cobalt demand increases robustly with growing EV deployment, but to a lesser extent 
than other battery metals due to the market preference for low-cobalt or cobalt-free cathodes 
Global cobalt demand outlook by sector and scenario 
 
 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
25%
50%
75%
100%
 150
 300
 450
 600
2015 2020 2023
2030 2040 2050
2030 2040 2050
2030 2040 2050
Other uses
Alloys
Other batteries
Battery storage
EV batteries
Share of clean
energy technologies
(right axis)
kt Co
STEPS
NZE
APS
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 157  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
Demand: EV batteries emerge as the largest segment of cobalt demand, despite the growing 
trend towards low-cobalt or cobalt-free EV batteries
Cobalt demand has grown strongly in recent years, with traditional 
usage supplemented by uses in EV batteries. In 2023, the non-clean 
energy technology sector accounted for around 70% of total 
consumption, while EV batteries accounted for the remainder. Within 
the non-clean energy sector, portable batteries used in electronics 
represented the largest share. Although absolute demand sees a 
slight uptick, its proportion of total cobalt demand diminishes to 25% 
by 2040 in both the APS and NZE Scenario. 
Cobalt demand for EVs triples in the STEPS by 2040, grows by more 
than fourfold by 2040 in the APS and 4.5 times in the NZE Scenario 
from today. EV batteries take up the largest share of total cobalt 
consumption by the end of this decade, and their share rises to 60% 
by 2040 in the NZE Scenario. 
While demand for EV batteries continues to rise, the recent trend 
towards low-cobalt or cobalt-free batteries is slowing the pace of 
long-term growth compared with other battery metals such as lithium 
and nickel. In recent years, LFP cathode chemistries have rapidly 
expanded their market share in the EV industry, reaching a 40% 
share in 2023. Alternatives to lithium-ion batteries, particularly 
sodium-ion batteries, are also gaining traction in the EV market. It will 
take time for this relatively new technology to reach a full 
commercialisation, but the rise of alternatives implies a smaller piece 
of the EV-battery pie left for cobalt. Even among the traditionally 
popular NMC chemistries, the market is increasingly favouring 
chemistries with lower cobalt intensity. However, while alternative 
batteries with low or no cobalt are gaining traction, the overall size of 
the EV market continues to expand, supporting continued demand 
growth in the medium to long term.  
Cobalt’s role decreases steadily for battery storage, reaching 
negligible levels by 2050 in both the APS and NZE Scenario. 
Compared with EVs, storage batteries are not limited by space 
constraints, so the market is heading towards cheaper alternatives 
with lower energy density such as LFP cathode chemistries or 
sodium-ion batteries, neither of which contains cobalt. 
Outside of batteries, cobalt was used the most in superalloys integral 
to the military and aerospace industries due to its pivotal role in 
providing strong resistance to corrosion, extreme temperature and 
high pressure. Demand for cobalt in superalloys continues to remain 
robust. The industries consuming these superalloys are typically less 
price-sensitive, thus ensuring relatively stable demand, as evidenced 
by recent price trends where cobalt metal alloys consistently 
maintained higher prices than cobalt sulphate during periods of price 
downturns.
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 158  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
Supply: The already high geographical concentration of both mining and refining processes 
further intensifies as current dominant players continue to expand their operations 
Cobalt production from operating and announced projects in the base case 
  
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
Note: DRC = Democratic Republic of the Congo. 
25%
50%
75%
100%
 100
 200
 300
 400
2015
2020
2023
2025
2030
2035
2040
kt Co
DRC
Indonesia
Russia
China
Australia
Philippines
Others
Top 3 share (right axis)
Mining
25%
50%
75%
100%
2015
2020
2023
2025
2030
2035
2040
China
Finland
Japan
Indonesia
Canada
Korea
Others
Top 3 share (right axis)
Refining
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 159  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
Supply: Analysis of announced projects suggests an increase in cobalt supply to 2030 before 
falling steadily with declining ore grades  
Expected mined cobalt supply from existing and announced projects and primary supply requirements by scenario 
 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
Notes: Based on mined output. Primary supply requirements are calculated as “total demand net of secondary supply”, also accounting for losses during refining 
operations. See Introduction for definitions of the base and high production cases.
 100
 200
 300
 400
2023
2025
2030
2035
2040
High production case
Base case
NZE
APS
STEPS
kt Co
Expected supply
Primary supply requirements
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 160  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
Supply: A tale of two suppliers: the DRC and Indonesia
The cobalt market is well supplied today. In the near term, the current 
oversupply may continue with supplies from new mines and 
previously stockpiled volumes coming online in the Democratic 
Republic of the Congo (DRC). In the long-term, global mined supply 
begins to subside from 2030 as reserves in the DRC deplete although 
strong growth from Indonesia partly offsets this decline. Future cobalt 
supply could face major challenges as the current low-price 
environment makes financing new projects more challenging. 
The DRC, the traditional No. 1 supplier 
Mined cobalt production in the DRC is poised for significant growth in 
the near future as several new mines ramp up their output. China-
based CMOC's Tenke Fungurume mine (TFM) resumed exports in 
April 2023 after resolving a royalty dispute with Gécamines, the DRC 
state-owned mining company. TFM's second-phase expansion 
began operations in the second half of 2023, with output estimated to 
reach 30 kt by 2027. Another major project by CMOC, the Kisanfu 
copper-cobalt mine started production in the first half of 2023 and is 
expected to contribute an average of 30 kt of cobalt per year by 2026 
once it reaches full capacity. The Kinsevere copper mine's expansion 
under the China-based MMG Group, commenced operations in 2023 
and is anticipated to produce 5 kt of cobalt annually in the near term. 
The cobalt output from China-based Jinchuan Group International 
Resources, which operates an open-pit Ruashi mine and is currently 
advancing the underground Musonoi mine in the DRC, is expected to 
surge by 75% to 10 kt in 2024. These sizeable new cobalt mines are 
anticipated to contribute significant volumes to the near-term supply 
pool, countering the slower production from non-Chinese major 
cobalt miners. 
In the long term, existing mines in the DRC are likely to reduce their 
supply or close down due to diminishing ore grade and increasing 
production cost, resulting in a 15% drop in production from today’s 
level by 2040 in the base case. Glencore’s Mutanda mine may 
experience a reduction of up to 15% in annual production due to the 
depletion of oxide ore deposits on the surface. To sustain production 
levels, the cobalt-rich DRC would need to explore new deposits, 
re-evaluate old tailings, or transition its open-pit mines to 
underground operations. It is important to highlight that the DRC still 
possesses substantial high-grade resources. However, unlocking 
this potential necessitates new investments, a task that may pose 
challenges during periods of weak cobalt prices and ample market 
supply although robust copper prices could help.  
Indonesia, the fast-rising second place 
As of 2023, Indonesia had ascended to become the world’s second-
largest cobalt supplier. Indonesia’s cobalt production rose by almost 
20 times in the last four years since the Indonesian government 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 161  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
nickel ore export ban drove an influx of investments in domestic 
nickel-cobalt processing operations including HPAL facilities. In the 
base case, Indonesia’s cobalt production more than doubles to 2030, 
reaching 50 kt. In the high production case, its supply is estimated to 
reach 80 kt by 2030, constituting 23% of global cobalt supply, 
nudging the DRC’s production share down from 65% in 2023 to 50% 
by 2040. 
Cobalt as a by-product 
Cobalt is mostly extracted as a by-product of copper ore or nickel ore. 
Traditionally, the primary mineral from which cobalt is refined as a by-
product has been copper due to the abundance of copper-cobalt 
mines in the DRC. Copper accounts for almost 70% of the primary 
mineral of cobalt’s supply today. However, declining ore quality of 
existing copper-cobalt mines in the DRC limits its supply post-2030 
in the base case, reducing copper’s share to below 60% by 2040. 
Primary cobalt mines continue to take a small part, most of which 
comes from ASM in the DRC. Its share takes up less than 5% of the 
total cobalt primary supply throughout 2040 in our base case. 
Nickel plays a growing role as a primary mineral for cobalt production 
with the rise of Indonesia’s nickel production. Today, 30% of the 
primary mineral refined into cobalt has been from nickel plays, and 
this share rises to almost 40% by 2040 in our base case. 
Primary resources from which cobalt is produced 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
Sources: IEA analysis based on Wood Mackenzie and S&P Global. 
Low cobalt price threatens future production 
With the weak cobalt prices persisting, mining projects are witnessing 
delays as project developers are forced to seek additional funding for 
future production. Trafigura, a commodity trading company, is now 
forced to seek an additional USD 200 million to USD 300 million 
investment, which is worth almost half the initial USD 600 million 
syndicated financing and marketing deal from 2022 with Chemaf SA, 
a mining company operating in the DRC. Had the project been 
completed by the end of 2023 as originally planned, the Mutoshi mine 
alone would have become the world’s third-largest cobalt mine with 
capacity reaching 16 kt of annual cobalt hydroxide in its full form.  
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
 80
 160
 240
 320
 400
2023 2030 2035 2040
kt Co
Others
Cobalt
Nickel
Copper
Share of nickel
(right axis)
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 162  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
High inflation has compounded the challenges posed by the low 
cobalt prices. This caused the suspension of final construction of 
Idaho Cobalt Operations in March 2023, which would have been the 
only primary cobalt mine in the United States with an annual 
production capacity of 2 kt. The CEO of the project’s developer, 
Jervois Global, argued that prices would have to double or additional 
government support would be needed to complete the construction.  
Despite the unfavourable market conditions, there are some 
developers willing to finance new projects. Kazakh miner Eurasian 
Resources Group announced it would invest USD 800 million to 
revamp its Comide copper and cobalt mine including the construction 
of hydrometallurgical plant and drilling programme in October 2023. 
The plant is set to come online in different phases which would reach 
up to 15 kt of annual cobalt hydroxide output once its full capacity is 
met. 
The weak prices also triggered actions or considerations to stockpile 
cobalt. China has notably taken advantage of the low cobalt price. 
The National Food and Strategic Reserves Administration, the 
government’s stockpiling body, agreed to buy around 5 kt of cobalt in 
July 2023 and 3 kt in October. As the low price persists, there could 
be additional stockpiling schemes introduced from the government. 
The United States also reportedly considered adding cobalt to its 
stockpiling list. While stockpiling plans of the Defense Logistics 
Agency (DLA) that run from October 2023 to September 2024 
ultimately did not include cobalt, the United States’ efforts to diversify 
its cobalt supply sources coupled with low commodity price could 
lead to new stockpiling activities. 
Smelting and refining 
After mining, copper-cobalt or nickel-cobalt concentrates are 
obtained through mineral processing techniques including crushing, 
screening, drying, flotation or magnetic separation (though cobalt 
produced from HPAL facilities does not require significant 
beneficiation). Then, primary extraction using hydrometallurgical or 
pyrometallurgical methods take place typically close to the mines. 
This process produces matte, oxides, nickel-cobalt intermediates, 
and other co-products, which are then usually shipped overseas for 
further refining. 
Cobalt refining continues to remain geographically concentrated in 
our base case. Today, China is responsible for more than 75% of the 
global refined cobalt supply, and its share remains at a similar level 
to 2040 in the base case. Finland and Japan account for around 9% 
and 3% of refined cobalt supply in 2023 respectively, and their shares 
sustain to 2040. 
Among many forms of refined chemistries, cobalt sulphate used in 
EV batteries sees the largest increase in demand. In the base case, 
cobalt sulphate supply increases by more than 50% by 2030 and 
more than doubles in the high production case. This helps to meet 
the sulphate supply requirements in the APS in 2030, helped by 
growing secondary supply.
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 163  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
 The role of artisanal small-scale mining in cobalt supply 
 
 The ASM sector in the DRC has historically made up a significant 
but variable share of global cobalt supply, accounting for an average 
5-15% of the total.  
The sector is highly variable depending on the price of cobalt, with 
higher prices incentivising more ASM activities. Due to lower cobalt 
prices, in 2023 ASM made up approximately 4 kt of cobalt supply, 
accounting for only 2% of demand. In our base case, supply from 
ASM increases to 7 kt in 2030 and almost 10 kt in 2040. However, 
as global mined supply climbs in response to demand for cobalt for 
the energy transition, ASM accounts for a smaller share of supply 
moving forward. 
Due to ASM’s sensitivity to market fluctuations, the sector has 
historically played an important role in maintaining market stability: 
ASM sites take much less time to begin production compared with 
larger industrial operations, allowing traders and producers to top 
up supplies during shortages or sell off volumes when other sources 
are in surplus. This flexibility helps to balance supply and demand, 
with ASM acting as swing producers. However, as ASM supplies 
are projected to take up a smaller share of supply moving forward, 
their role as swing producers may be diminished. 
 
The sector has historically been associated with human rights 
abuses due to its unregulated and informal nature. Disengaging 
entirely from ASM as a strategy does not constitute responsible 
sourcing and may exacerbate the root causes of child labour. To 
varying extents, ASM offers socio-economic advantages; losing 
these may heighten the local community’s vulnerability to other 
forms of exploitation. 
There have been various efforts to formalise the sector over the 
years. In 2019, the DRC government created the Entreprise 
Générale du Cobalt (EGC), a state-owned enterprise which is 
intended to hold the sole right to purchase, treat, transform, sell and 
export cobalt extracted by artisanal and small-scale miners in the 
DRC. The entity released a Responsible Sourcing Standard 
document in 2021, outlining its steps for formalising the sector. 
However, the EGC has not been fully operationalised since it was 
established. 
Formalisation of the sector could mitigate the worst forms of child 
labour, but could bring some unintended consequences as well. 
Addressing poverty at its core is essential for a lasting solution. This 
requires ongoing collaboration across actors and sustained 
community engagement. 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 164  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
Implications: Environmental and logistical bottlenecks mean that reliable cobalt supplies are far 
from assured
Environmental consequences from low-quality ores 
Cobalt mining practices are becoming more energy-intensive as 
copper-cobalt mines in the DRC near depletion and HPAL facilities in 
Indonesia take on a larger role in global cobalt extraction. 
As existing DRC mines edge closer to depletion, the country would 
have to develop new mines or dig wider and deeper in their existing 
open-pit and underground mines. The process of seeking better 
quality copper-cobalt ores would involve significant energy uses and 
emissions. 
Moreover, the increasing cobalt extraction from nickel mines in 
Indonesia is raising concerns on top of the existing environmental 
challenges. HPAL technology uses sulphuric acid at high pressure 
and temperature to recover nickel and cobalt separately from low-
grade deposits of nickel laterite ore. Additionally, new coal plants 
have often been added near HPAL facilities to accommodate an 
increase in power demand and provide affordable source of power to 
enhance the price competitiveness of mineral supply. 
In recent years, there has been a notable increase of the China-
backed Indonesia-based HPAL operations such as PT Halmahera 
Persada Lygend, PT Huayue Nickel Cobalt, PT QMB New Energy 
Materials and PT Huayou. In the high production case, almost half of 
the cobalt supply in 2040 is refined from laterite ore from today’s level 
of less than 30%. 
Cobalt mining has traditionally been supported by hydropower in the 
DRC, which led to relatively lower-emissions intensity associated with 
production. However, a combination of more energy-intensive 
operations in the DRC and the rise of Indonesia means that the 
average emissions intensity associated with cobalt production is set 
to rise substantially as production grows. This makes a strong case 
for strengthened regulatory and industry efforts to reduce emissions 
from cobalt production operations. 
Risks of supply concentration 
High concentration of cobalt mining in a single country owned and 
operated by foreign mining entities has shown the challenge of 
maintaining a secure supply. As exemplified by the recent disputes 
between the DRC government and foreign miners, the state’s 
endeavour to gain more control over its mines is forming into royalty 
disputes and sanctions on some of the largest mines in the world.  
Notably, the DRC state-owned Gécamines had suspended China-
based CMOC’s TFM, the world’s second-largest cobalt mine, in July 
2022 after an escalation in royalty dispute. CMOC holds an 80% 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 165  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
stake in the TFM copper-cobalt ore project and Gécamines holds 
20%. The mine resumed export in April 2023 after CMOC struck a 
USD 2 billion deal – a USD 800 million settlement between 2023 and 
2028 and at least USD 1.2 billion in dividends. 
More recently in April this year, the DRC suspended nine 
subcontractors working at mines run by the Kazakhstan-backed 
Eurasian Resources Group alleging that the firms are not controlled 
by Congolese nationals as required by law. The sanction affects 
companies’ operations under contracts, including Metalkol, the 
fourth-largest cobalt supply source in 2023. 
Risks of potential supply disruptions from the world's largest cobalt 
supplying nation persist, amid an ongoing tug of war between the 
DRC administration and foreign miners over ownership stakes in the 
region's vast copper and cobalt resources. 
Logistic constraints: Rocky roads from mines to ports 
There are also risks associated with logistics due to the fragile 
transportation infrastructure connecting the copper-cobalt mines in 
Central Africa located far inland to the nearest ports, the export 
corridors that would ship raw minerals overseas for refining. 
A large portion of DRC production currently relies on trucks to be 
transported over long distances by road, passing through several 
borders. Trucks would generally transport minerals from the so-called 
copper belt to Indian Ocean ports such as Beira in Mozambique, Dar 
es Salaam in Tanzania or Durban in South Africa, which take 17, 20 
and 25 days, respectively. The road networks are inconsistent with 
large sections in need of significant maintenance and improvement. 
In rainy seasons, many roads become inoperable. 
Truck deliveries have raised concerns for being more costly, slow and 
unreliable compared with railways. In October 2023, thousands of 
truckers in the DRC went on strike demanding logistics firms to pay 
an extra risk allowance of USD 700 per journey. The strike blocked 
exports of copper and cobalt produced by some of the biggest 
producers including CMOC’s Tenke Fungurume, Glencore’s Kamoto, 
Ivanhoe Mines’ Kamoa-Kakula, and Sicomines’ Mashamba West 
until coming to an end in November. These events related to logistics 
underscore that the possibility of short-term supply disruptions cannot 
be ruled out, even though overall supply and demand balances may 
appear stable. 
As logistical issues disrupt secure upstream supply, railway 
transportation via the Lobito Corridor has gained momentum in recent 
years. The corridor is an agreement to construct railways and 
supporting infrastructure to connect mines in Central Africa to the 
Angolan port city of Lobito. 
The United States and Europe recently announced significant 
financing plans for the Lobito Corridor to enhance material shipments 
via the Atlantic Ocean. In July 2023, the Lobito Atlantic Railway 
company secured a 30-year concession to provide railway services, 
contingent on investing USD 100 million in the DRC and USD 455 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 166  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
million in Angola through a public-private financing arrangement. In 
October 2023, the United States, the European Union, the African 
Development Bank, and the Africa Finance Corporation signed a 
MoU to co-operate on extending the Lobito Corridor, under the 
shared vision. 
Initial trial shipments via the Lobito Corridor began in December 
2023, loading copper from Kamoa-Kakula in Kolwezi and reaching 
the port of Lobito in just eight days. In February 2024, Canada’s 
Ivanhoe Mines and Trafigura became the first long-term users of the 
corridor. Meanwhile, China proposed a USD 1 billion project to 
upgrade the Tazara railway connecting Zambia’s copper belt to the 
port of Dar es Salaam in Tanzania. While the extent of the 
refurbishment plan remains unclear, the revitalisation of railways 
connecting Central Africa to both the Atlantic and Indian Oceans 
would help address some of the major logistical issues the region has 
long suffered from.
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 167  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
Outlook for graphite 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


          
Clean energy transition risk assessment
Cleantech demand (kt)
532
1 292
6 013
9 839
Other uses (kt)
3 388
3 340
4 406
6 185
Total demand (kt)
3 920
4 632
10 419
16 023
Secondary supply and reuse (kt)
149
308
1 333
2 489
Primary supply requirements (kt)
3 771
4 324
9 086
13 535
Share of top three mining countries
89%
92%
88%
89%
Share of top three refining countries
97%
98%
97%
95%
2021
2023
2030
2040
Milestones (APS)
Graphite
Battery grade supply
Total supply (all grades)
C
Top three producers 2030
China
82%
Madagascar
3%
China
93%
US
1%
Mozambique
2%
Japan
3%
2025
2030
2035
2040
Supply requirements
NZE
APS
Mt
10
20
Demand outlook
NZE
APS
Mt
10
20
2010
2050
2050
2010
2023
2023
Expected supply from announced projects
Primary supply requirements
Electric vehicles
Other clean technology
Other demand
Supply risks
12%
annual demand growth in the APS
vs. 3% in 2010-19
ESG and climate
risk exposure
Lowest
average social and governance
score for mining
Geopolitical risks
10X higher
demand than supply outside 
of top 1 producer in 2030
Barriers to responding to
supply disruption
Limited
short-term substitution options
Low
Med
High
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 169  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
Demand: Batteries are driving demand growth for graphite to 2040, with demand from electric 
arc furnaces for steel production also rising fast 
Global graphite demand outlook by sector and scenario 
 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
Notes: EAF = electric arc furnace. Demand is for raw natural flake graphite and synthetic graphite. 
25%
50%
75%
100%
 5
 10
 15
 20
2015 2021 2023
2030 2040 2050
2030 2040 2050
2030 2040 2050
Other uses
Electrodes (EAF)
Other batteries
Battery storage
EV batteries
Share of clean energy
technologies (right axis)
Mt 
APS
NZE
STEPS
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 170  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
Demand: As graphite maintains its dominant position in anodes, its demand is supercharged in 
climate-driven scenarios by the rapid deployment of EVs and battery storage
Graphite, a form of carbon commonly known for its use in pencil 
cores, traditionally serves various technical applications: as a 
lubricant, an electrical conductor, a refractory material or simply as a 
source of raw carbon. Historically, the metallurgical industry has been 
the primary consumer of graphite, employing it in crucibles, as an 
input for steelmaking and as electrodes in electric arc furnaces. 
However, the battery industry is rapidly emerging as the leading 
consumer of graphite, with projections indicating it may account for 
over half of total demand by the late 2020s. 
Graphite’s expanding role in battery anodes contributes to a robust 
short-term growth outlook, with global demand projected to double by 
2030 in the STEPS. By 2040, total graphite demand reaches 13 Mt 
in this scenario. Meeting announced climate pledges in the APS 
pushes up demand further close to 16 Mt by 2040 and to 18 Mt in the 
NZE Scenario, a fourfold increase from today’s levels. 
The EV industry emerges as a primary consumer of graphite. In the 
APS, this sector consumes 5.4 Mt in 2030, higher than current global 
production levels, representing 60% of total demand. Battery storage 
is also a significant contributor to demand growth. When considering 
other battery applications, such as those in electronics, the demand 
for graphite related to batteries – requiring specific grades and 
dedicated supply chains – is expected to account for 65% of total 
demand by 2040, compared with the 33% today. 
In EV batteries, while silicon is increasingly being doped in graphite 
anodes, it is unlikely to challenge graphite’s dominant position in the 
short term. However, we expect a continued shift towards higher 
silicon contents over time. This trend, coupled with the adoption of 
alternative anode chemistries such as lithium metal anodes, high 
silicon anodes (exceeding 50% silicon content) and hard carbon 
(used in sodium-ion batteries), gradually affects the pace of graphite 
demand growth in the longer term, leading to a moderate reduction 
in graphite demand in batteries post-2040. However, the speed of 
deployment of these alternative chemistries depends on overcoming 
significant technical and scaling challenges, such as ensuring high 
cycle life and resisting volume changes. 
In both the APS and NZE Scenario, there is a notable shift towards 
the increased use of electric arc furnaces over traditional blast 
furnaces, especially in Europe, aiming to decrease emissions 
associated with steel production. This increases demand for graphite 
electrodes, primarily based on synthetic graphite. By 2040, graphite 
demand for metallurgical applications reaches 3.4 Mt in the APS and 
3.8 Mt in the NZE Scenario, up from 1.5 Mt today.
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 171  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
Supply: New natural graphite mining projects emerge in diversified regions, notably in Africa, 
but the production of battery-grade graphite remains highly concentrated 
Total and battery-grade graphite supply from existing and announced projects in the base case 
 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
Notes: Total supply includes all grades of mined and synthetic graphite. Refined battery-grade supply includes spherical graphite made from natural flake graphite 
and synthetic anode production.
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
 3
 6
 9
 12
 15
2015
2020
2023
2025
2030
2035
2040
China
Asia ex-China
North America
Europe
Russia
Africa
Other regions
Top 3 share (right axis)
Top 1 share
Total supply (natural and synthetic)
Mt
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
2015
2020
2023
2025
2030
2035
2040
Refined battery-grade supply (spherical and synthetic)
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 172  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
Supply: Options to synthesise graphite allow for sufficient supply volumes, but natural 
deposits are better able to support cheaper, diversified and less energy-intensive supplies  
Graphite is found and extracted from natural geological deposits in 
various forms (vein, amorphous, flakes). However, since the turn of 
the 20th century and the discovery of the Acheson process, the 
mineral can also be synthesised from fossil fuel-based products, such 
as petroleum coke, with an emissions-intensive process.  
Most battery producers globally are heavily reliant on China for 
graphite anodes. While sizeable natural graphite anode capacities 
exist outside of China, they depend almost entirely on refined 
graphite supply from China and exhibit low utilisation rates. 
Battery-grade graphite supply 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
Mining, a limiting factor to natural anode supply 
Currently, natural graphite mining is dominated by China, accounting 
for 80% of global production. In the base case, mined natural graphite 
reaches 2.7 Mt in 2030 and 3 Mt by 2040. The share of China 
declines to 70% in 2030 due to the growth of two emerging producers: 
Mozambique, notably with the Ancuabe project (60 kt), and 
Madagascar, with the Molo project (150 kt). Additionally, new players 
are emerging in Canada, India, Australia and Tanzania (Nachu 
project, 130 kt), aiming to cater to the growing battery market. 
Not all forms of natural graphite are suitable for entry into the battery 
supply chain. Manufacturers use natural flakes, from medium and 
fine grades, and their availability emerges as a key limiting factor in 
scaling up battery-grade anodes based on natural graphite. The 
production of natural battery anodes involves multiple steps, 
including spheronisation, a process of reshaping the graphite flakes, 
involving over 50% material losses. In the base case, the need for 
natural graphite anode supply reaches 750 kt by 2030, and this 
requires close to 1 700 kt of fine- and medium-grade flakes. Of the 
total 2 700 kt of graphite mined in 2030, about 70% is likely to be 
suitable grades. This brings the battery-grade flake market slightly 
above equilibrium, limiting the potential for additional natural graphite 
supply to the battery anode market. Additional mining capacities are 
Natural graphite
Synthetic graphite
Flake graphite
Amorphous graphite
Vein graphite
Medium and fine 
flake
Synthetic anodes
Spheronisation
Purification
Coating
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 173  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
required to meet the necessary volumes of natural graphite anodes 
post-2030 in climate-driven scenarios. 
Refined natural graphite: A major diversification issue 
While some progress has been achieved in diversifying the mining of 
natural graphite, the production of spherical graphite, a refined form 
of natural graphite, remains highly concentrated. Currently, China 
accounts for 99% of the global market for spherical graphite. 
Although some downstream operations, such as coating and 
purification, are occasionally conducted overseas, industrial players 
in these processes become highly dependent on China for their 
feedstock supplies. 
The industry is developing new projects in geographically diverse 
areas, with a growing number of integrated projects. These include 
Northern Graphite (80 kt) and Nouveau Monde (32 kt) in Canada, 
Syrah resources (38 kt) in the United States and several projects in 
Europe, such as Talga resources of Sweden (12 kt). If these projects 
come online as planned, the share of China in spherical graphite 
supply is set to fall to 85% in 2030 and 80% in 2040 in the base case.  
Synthetic supply brings equilibrium to demand, at a cost 
Due to constraints on natural graphite supply, synthetic graphite 
production is increasing its share in batteries although its production 
is also dominated by a single player, China. Synthetic graphite has 
been largely used for other applications, notably electrodes, which 
required lower-quality products. However, in recent years, battery-
related synthetic graphite production has surged from zero to 40% of 
total synthetic graphite supply, rising to 55% by 2040. Synthetic 
graphite became a dominant input for battery anodes, commanding 
an 80% market share. 
Use of mined natural and synthetic graphites in batteries 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
Synthesis of graphite requires the supply of needle coke, a 
co-product from the oil and coal industries. There are surplus 
capacities to produce needle coke today, mostly in China, meaning 
that the supply of needle coke is unlikely to be a limiting factor for 
synthetic graphite supply in the near term, but this may change in the 
long term in climate-driven scenarios. 
2 000
4 000
6 000
8 000
2023
2030
2035
2040
kt
Synthetic anode supply
Battery-grade natural 
flake graphite
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 174  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
Implications: The large pipeline of announced synthetic capacities has the potential to balance 
the market, although this may lead to increased supply concentration and higher emissions 
Expected graphite supply from existing and announced projects and primary supply requirements by scenario 
 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
Notes: Primary supply requirements are calculated as “total demand net of secondary supply”. See Introduction for definition of the base case.
 4
 8
 12
 16
 20
2023
2025
2030
2035
2040
Additional synthetic
anode projects
Base case
NZE
APS
STEPS
Mt
Primary supply requirements
Expected supply
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 175  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
Implications: Diversification is urgently needed but faces significant challenges  
In the base case, the anticipated supply of battery-grade spherical 
graphite and synthetic graphite is projected to be adequate to meet 
near-term demand. However, sustaining the long-term demand 
trajectory will require additional production volumes. The supply of 
battery-grade natural flake graphite may turn to deficits over the next 
decade. However, it should be noted that there is a substantial 
number of announced synthetic anode projects, primarily in China, 
exceeding the scale required in the NZE Scenario. Many of these 
projects are likely to experience low utilisation rates or may not come 
to fruition. However, this implies that any short supply of battery-
grade natural graphite could result in a further increase in the share 
of synthetic graphite to offset the deficit. 
However this comes at a cost. The extraction and conversion of 
synthetic graphite involves significantly higher greenhouse gas 
emissions compared with its natural equivalent, as it involves an 
electricity-intensive process relying on fossil resources. Although less 
energy-intensive graphite synthesis projects and techniques exist, 
such as lengthwise graphitisation, a higher proportion of synthetic 
graphite in anodes is expected to result in significantly greater GHG 
emissions during battery production. Nonetheless, some projects 
developed in areas with low-emissions power generation sources 
claim to achieve significant reductions in emissions compared with 
current supply chains.  
Moreover, China currently accounts for the vast majority of existing 
and planned synthetic graphite production capacity. Therefore, a 
further increase in the share of synthetic graphite in batteries would 
reinforce China's dominance in this sector. 
Following germanium, gallium and rare earth elements-related 
technologies, graphite is now subject to a system of export licences 
from China since December 2023. These controls specifically focus 
on graphite for battery grades (flake graphite, spherical graphite, 
high-purity products), considered “highly sensitive”, and exclude 
lower-quality 
grades, 
such 
as 
electrodes 
for 
metallurgical 
applications. 
These controls can have numerous ripple effects. The announcement 
has placed pressure on anode producers overseas to stockpile 
significant volumes. As implementation commenced in January 2024, 
export volumes to key anode producers in Japan and Korea 
plummeted well below previous monthly averages before returning to 
normal levels in March. Customers can apply for licences with a six-
month validity, a process that requires disclosure of the end user, 
creating significant rigidity in trade and discouraging risk-averse 
investors from expanding downstream capacities. 
Currently, 45% of EV and storage batteries are sold and installed 
outside of China, translating into 350 kt of graphite content in their 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 176  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
anodes. By 2030, this implied demand outside of China is set to reach 
2.2 Mt in the APS and 3.5 Mt in the NZE Scenario. When the 35% 
threshold for the share of a single supplier, targeted in the EU Critical 
Raw Materials Act, is applied, this means that 1.3 Mt needs to come 
from regions outside of China.  
In the base case, the expected supply outside of China falls 
significantly short of these material requirements. While additional 
projects in the early stage, not included in the base case, could 
narrow the gap somewhat — such as those in the United States, 
Korea, Saudi Arabia, India, Norway and Finland — the anticipated 
supply may still not be sufficient to meet the requirements. This 
indicates that achieving the diversification ambitions outlined in 
recent policy measures would be highly challenging without 
significant efforts to expedite the development of projects in 
geographically diverse regions. These projects would, however, need 
to move ahead amid strong competition from incumbent players and 
significant announced overcapacities in China, which may require 
strategic and co-ordinated support from governments.  
Ex-China battery-grade graphite requirements and pipeline of 
probable projects in the NZE Scenario 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
Note: High diversification case assumes that a number of early-stage projects 
in geographically diverse regions come to fruition.  
 250
 500
 750
1 000
1 250
Japan
Indonesia
Korea
Europe
North America
Other regions (ex-China)
kt
NZE requirement x 35%
High diversification 
case 
Base case
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 177  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
Outlook for rare earth elements 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


          
Refining
Mining
Clean energy transition risk assessment
Mining requirements
Demand outlook
Supply risks
High
price volatility than
other minerals
ESG and climate
risk exposure
607 gCO2/kWh
Among the highest average grid
carbon intensity for refining
Geopolitical risks
77%
of refining by one
single country in 2030
Barriers to responding to
supply disruption
Low
transparency of pricing schemes
Cleantech demand (kt)
11
16
46
64
Other uses (kt)
67
76
87
105
Total demand (kt)
78
93
134
169
Secondary supply and reuse (kt)
22
25
36
48
Primary supply requirements (kt)
57
67
98
121
Share of top three mining countries
81%
85%
81%
81%
Share of top three refining countries
98%
98%
92%
93%
2021
2023
2030
2040
Milestones (APS)
Low
Med
High
Australia
18%
China
54%
Australia
3%
Myanmar
9%
Malaysia
12%
China
77%
kt
2010
2023
2050
2050
2010
NZE
APS
110
220
kt
110
220
NZE
APS
Rare earth
elements
Nd Pr Dy Tb
Top three producers 2030
2025
2030
2035
2040
Electric vehicles
Wind
Other demand
Expected mine supply from announced projects
Primary supply requirements (mined)
2023
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 179  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
Demand: Demand for magnet rare earth elements doubles between today and 2050 in climate-
driven scenarios  
Global magnet rare earth elements demand outlook by sector and scenario 
 
 
 IEA. CC BY 4.0 
Notes: REE = rare earth elements. The figures are for magnet REE only.
30%
60%
90%
 70
 140
 210
2015 2021 2023
2030 2040 2050
2030 2040 2050
2030 2040 2050
Other uses
Industrial equipment
Other magnets
Wind turbines
EV motors
Share of clean energy
technologies (right axis)
kt REE
APS
NZE
STEPS
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 180  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
Demand: EV motors and wind turbines drive demand for rare earth elements
Rare earth elements (REE) are a set of 17 nearly indistinguishable 
silvery-white soft metals. Several of these are often found together in 
many known deposits. Though relatively plentiful in the entire Earth’s 
crust, they have garnered the label “rare” because of how unusual it 
is to find them in a pure form. Rare earth elements are usually 
classified into light rare earths (LREE) such as lanthanum, cerium, 
praseodymium, neodymium, samarium and europium; and heavy 
rare earths (HREE) such as gadolinium, terbium, dysprosium, 
holmium, erbium, thulium, ytterbium, lutetium, scandium and yttrium. 
Light rare earths are often used in water purifiers (cerium) and 
hydrogen absorbers (lanthanum) and as stabilisers in catalytic 
compounds (lanthanum and cerium). Heavy rare earths are used to 
produce more energy-efficient phosphors for the displays of 
computers and phones as well as fluorescent lamps (yttrium and 
terbium) and in fibre optic cables and repeaters (terbium). 
Neodymium and dysprosium can handle a greater saturation 
magnetisation than more common magnetic elements such as iron, 
which allows for fabrication of stronger and smaller magnets. 
Combined with other elements, these magnets (NdFeB magnets) are 
among the strongest magnets in the industry, able to withstand 
temperatures as high as 230⁰ C. This section presents analysis and 
insights largely focusing on the four rare earth elements that are 
commonly used to manufacture modern permanent magnets: 
neodymium (Nd) and praseodymium (Pr) are the primary elements, 
while dysprosium (Dy) and terbium (Tb) are commonly used as 
additives to enhance the performance of Nd-Pr-based magnets.  
Magnets made with these elements play a very important role in clean 
energy transitions as they are used in automotive traction motors for 
EVs as well as in wind turbine motors. Electric motors and generators 
driven by rare earth permanent magnets represent the most energy-
efficient devices developed so far, making energy savings of about 
20-40% compared with ordinary motors. Moreover, the addition of 
small quantities (1-2 kg) of these magnet rare earth elements in a 
motor can dramatically reduce (60-80 kg of lithium, nickel, cobalt) the 
requirements for other critical minerals needed for an EV.  
The global demand for magnet REE nearly doubled between 2015 
and 2023 to reach 93 kt, while the share of clean energy 
technologies, driven by new EV sales and wind turbine deployments 
to meet climate ambitions, has expanded from just 8% to nearly 18% 
during the same period. In the APS, we see total magnet REE 
demand reaching 131 kt by 2030 and further to 181 kt by 2050, with 
the share of demand from EV motors rising most sharply from 7% in 
2023 to nearly 30% in 2050. The NZE Scenario sees a slightly 
accelerated ramp-up of EV sales and wind turbine deployment 
between today and 2030 compared with the APS, driving the total 
demand in this year to be 15 kt higher than in the APS. 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 181  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
Supply: Magnet rare earths have the highest geographical concentration for refining of all 
energy transition minerals 
Magnet REE production from operating and announced projects in the base case 
  
 
 IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
 
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
30 000
60 000
90 000
120 000
2015
2020
2023
2025
2030
2035
2040
China
Myanmar
United States
Australia
Other
Top 3 share (right axis)
t REE
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
2015
2020
2023
2025
2030
2035
2040
China
Malaysia
Australia
United States
Other
Top 3 share (right axis)
Mining
Refining
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 182  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
Supply: Geographical concentration for mining sees some improvements om the horizon, but 
refining remains in very few hands
The production of rare earth elements is perhaps among the least 
geographically diversified of all key energy transition minerals. Their 
high level of geographical concentration is comparable to those of 
cobalt and natural graphite for mining; at the same time rare earth 
elements rank as the most concentrated in terms of global refining 
capacity. The share of the top three producers for mining of magnet 
REEs in 2023 stood at 85%, of which China alone accounted for 62% 
of global mined production. When looking at refining, the top three 
countries controlled the lion’s share of the refined output in 2023, with 
China’s dominance being even more pronounced than in mining as it 
single-handedly represented 92% of the global refined output.  
The expected supply of magnet REE from operating and announced 
mining projects rises by 44% and 52% respectively from today’s 
levels to surpass 107 kt in 2030 and reach 114 kt in 2040. The 
dominance of the top three countries in global mined supply reduces 
slightly, falling to around 81% of the total compared with 85% today. 
The expected refined supply from operating and announced projects 
rises similarly to 106 kt in 2030 and over 110 kt in 2040, with the 
share of top three refining countries remaining extremely high, falling 
marginally from 98% to 92% today. By 2030, China’s share of global 
refined output falls to 77%. 
The type of ores that the four magnet REE often come from is heavy 
sands (monazite sands), which also contain radioactive elements 
such as uranium and thorium, making their extraction quite 
challenging. Outside of China, very few countries have the 
infrastructure and the willingness to build solutions for the storage of 
these radioactive by-products. Processing a kilogramme of rare earth 
oxides can produce close to 1 kilobecquerel of uranium-235 (U-235) 
equivalent of radioactive elements. Proper storage is the only way to 
prevent this material from entering the environment through waste 
streams, but studies show that only 17% of operating rare earth 
miners align with the Global Industry Standard on Tailings 
Management 
(GISTM). 
Appropriate 
waste 
management 
performance will be vital to scaling rare earths supply chains in 
geographically diverse regions.  
In the upstream segment, only a handful of mines are operating at 
scale outside China and Myanmar (one each in the United States, 
Australia, Viet Nam and Brazil), and some mines are producing the 
rare earths as a by-product of manganese or titanium production. In 
general, newly announced projects have a lead time of eight years 
on average, making the scaling up of mined production beyond China 
a challenging proposition. The refining segment of the supply chain 
outside China is even more nascent than mining, with only a couple 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 183  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
of operating industrial-scale facilities existing in Malaysia and 
Estonia, some facilities in Australia nearing operation, and some 
smaller-scale refining units nearing operation in France and the 
United States.  
Regional mining trends 
On mining, a vast majority of total mined REE production as of 2024 
comes from China, notably from the Bayan Obo mines in Inner 
Mongolia. In the rest of the world, Mount Weld in Australia and 
Mountain Pass in the United States are leading producers. The two 
fastest growing regions in terms of mined production of magnet REE 
between 2015 and today have been Myanmar, which grew its share 
in global production from just 0.2% to 14%, and the United States 
whose share grew from 1% to 9% in the same period. In the period 
to 2030, China remains the top mining country for magnet REE 
supply, but Australia increases its share in the global total to 18% and 
the United States maintains its share similar to today’s levels at 7%.  
REE mining in Myanmar 
Most REE mining operations in Myanmar occur close to the Pang 
War-Tengchong border crossing with China in Kachin State, which is 
largely controlled by the Kachin Independence Organisation (KIO). 
As a result of the proximity of these critical resources to China, the 
vast majority is transported over the border for further processing and 
refining. While most tin concentrate sourced from Myanmar is 
processed in Yunnan Province, China, it should be noted that REEs 
sourced from Myanmar are far more difficult to trace. This is a result 
of the multiple REE processing facilities throughout China that often 
combine raw materials from diverse sources. The resilience of all 
global supply chains was tested during the pandemic. During this 
period, the trade of both tin and REEs from Myanmar to China was 
negatively impacted by major border port closures, notably at the 
Menglian, Diantan and Menglong ports, resulting from China’s zero-
Covid policy, exposing the existing fragility of this supply network. 
In April 2023, the KIO announced the suspension of REE mining in 
Kachin state from 4 September 2023, as protests highlighted 
environmental damage from mining and processing. Despite this, 
Chinese companies were permitted to gradually halt production in 
line with necessary steps rather than coming to an abrupt halt. 
Pressure has been building to comprehensively monitor mining 
operations in the region following environmental concerns, with the 
local government announcing inspections of REE mining operations 
in September 2023 that were expected to last only ten days, equating 
to one to three weeks of supply. However, after random inspections 
across more than 300 mining sites, the extended suspension has led 
to the temporary dismissal of local workers and uncertainty 
surrounding the resumption of operations as no new notices have 
been released by authorities. 
Chinese imports of REE material spiked significantly in August 2023, 
increasing by approximately 76% year-on-year, according to Chinese  
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 184  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
trade data, prior to the implementation of the suspension. Stockpiling 
of REE material ahead of peak consumption was further driven by 
environmental inspections that took place in late August in Jiangxi 
province, a major REE production hub. In early 2022, REE 
manufacturers in Ganzhou, Jiangxi province, suffered production 
capacity reductions of at least 25% after border gates between 
Myanmar and China were shut down at the beginning of the year, 
illustrating the significance of the current suspension. 
While reserves should be sufficient for up to three to six months, any 
extended suspension of REE mining in Kachin state could be 
damaging for refineries in China reliant upon feedstock from 
Myanmar. The government-guided price for REEs in China has 
remained relatively low to incentivise downstream production, as 
magnet producers have found it increasingly difficult to pass 
additional costs to downstream end users, though this has caused 
poor financial performance for upstream operators. 
Regional refining trends 
On refining, Chinese dominance in 2023 remained unchallenged. In 
the rest of the world, refineries owned by Lynas in Malaysia, Viet Nam 
Rare Earth JSC (VTRE) in Viet Nam and Neo Performance Materials 
in Estonia (Silmet) are the few notable industrial-scale producers. 
The fastest growing region in terms of refined production of magnet 
REE between today and 2030 is Malaysia, raising its share in global  
Additional refined output of magnet REE between 2023 and 2030 
in the base and high production cases 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
Notes: The shares in the figure indicate share of additions to 2030 and not the 
absolute share of the country in global refining capacity. UK= United Kingdom. 
Norway
0.3%
Base case
(29 kt)
High
production case
(31 kt)
United States
12%
United States
14%
Australia
13%
Australia
12%
China
36%
China
33%
Malaysia
31%
Malaysia
29%
France
3%
UK
7%
Estonia
1%
Canada
1%
Estonia
1%
Canada
1%
UK
7%
Viet Nam
0.3%
Viet Nam
0.3%
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 185  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
refined output from 5% to 12%. While the overall picture for regional 
distribution of expected refined supply does not change much to 2030, 
there is an additional 29 kt of refined output between 2023 to 2030 in 
the base case and 31 kt in the high production case. The majority of 
additions to 2030 in the base case come from China, Malaysia, the 
United States and Australia. In the high production case, the 
emergence of France and Norway as refiners in Europe reduces 
China’s contribution to the total additions to 2030 by 3 percentage 
points. 
REE refining in Malaysia 
Lynas’ operation in Malaysia from 2012 made it the ﬁrst REE reﬁning 
plant outside China. After years without steady supply of REEs, 
Japan started sourcing the materials from Malaysia since 2013 – 
which has enabled Japan to recover and increase their 
manufacturing activities since then. Currently, Lynas produces rare 
earth oxides, carbonates, oxalates and chlorides in Gebeng, Pahang, 
with a total capacity of 22 000 tonnes per year.  
Recognising the potential of the downstream industry of magnet 
manufacturing as well as the advantages of having rare earth oxides 
(REO) production as raw materials in the country, the Malaysian 
government, through the Malaysian Investment Development 
Authority (MIDA), has been promoting the production of advanced 
materials including rare earth magnets under the Promotion of 
Investment Act (PIA) 1986. To continuously support this, MIDA 
announced that it will continue its collaborations with the relevant 
stakeholders to attract potential investors to develop the industry. The 
support will focus on downstream manufacturing activities, as well as 
integrated projects including rare earth metals manufacturing that can 
convert oxides into metals. 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 186  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
Supply: Expected supply nearly in line with requirements to 2030, but limited announcements 
of new projects with long lead times pose risks 
Expected mined magnet REE supply from existing and announced projects and primary supply requirements by scenario 
  
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
Notes: Based on mined output. Primary supply requirements are calculated as “total demand net of secondary supply”, also accounting for losses during refining 
operations. See Introduction for definition of the base case.
 20
 40
 60
 80
 100
 120
 140
2023
2025
2030
2035
2040
Base case (greenfield)
Base case (brownfield)
NZE
APS
STEPS
kt REE
Primary supply requirements
Expected supply
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 187  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
Implications: Supply risks arise from challenges to diversification of production
Demand-supply balance and secondary supplies 
For the four magnet rare earths mentioned above, the supply from 
today’s operating projects is sufficient to meet current demand, and 
this is broadly likely to be the case in 2025. Between 2025 and 2040, 
the majority of the supply increases come from operating mines, 
particularly Bayan Obo in China and Mount Weld in Australia, 
increasing their expected production (brownfield expansion). The 
primary supply requirements (total demand net of secondary supply) 
in the STEPS grow in line with the projected brownfield and greenfield 
expansion and can be satisfied if additions occur as planned. 
However, after 2025, for the NZE Scenario and 2035 for the APS, a 
gap emerges between projected primary supply requirements and 
supply additions. In the NZE Scenario, there is an implied supply gap 
of 5 kt in 2030 and 14 kt in 2040. The major concern for magnet REE, 
however, is not a huge gap between demand and supply like in the 
case of copper or lithium, but rather an extremely important level of 
geographical concentration of today’s as well as future mining and 
refining projects that expose this market significantly to supply 
disruptions. 
Primary supply requirements in the medium to long term are also a 
function of growing interest in recycling manufacturing scrap and end-
of-life magnets that will generate secondary supplies. In 2030, around 
35 kt and 40 kt of total magnet REE demand may be met using 
secondary supplies respectively in the APS and the NZE Scenario. 
Between 2030 and 2050, the secondary supply expands 1.7-fold in 
each scenario, to 60 kt and 67 kt respectively. Recycling so far has 
focused on the traditional “long-loop” recycling, which involves 
breaking down each element using various techniques to recover 
them as rare earth oxides that then have to be converted into metals 
before being cast into alloys and broken down into a fine alloy powder 
to make the magnets. It is an important but energy-intensive and 
expensive process. New technologies such as those of HyProMag, a 
UK-based company with its recycling facility in Birmingham, and 
MagREEsource, a French start-up that secured Euro 5 million to 
open its pilot site in Grenoble, have recently been in the news for their 
patented Hydrogen Processing of Magnet Scrap (HPMS) technique, 
which uses hydrogen as a processing gas to separate magnets from 
waste streams as a magnet alloy powder, which can be directly 
compactified into sintered rare earth magnets. This “short-loop” 
process does not require heat and is relatively quick, and magnets 
made with these recycled elements have been shown to have 
significantly lower enviromental footprint (CO2 emissions and water 
consumption) than those produced in China from mined minerals. 
Other companies using innovative recycling technologies, such as 
ReElement 
Technologies 
in 
the 
United States 
and 
Ionic 
Technologies in Northern Ireland, receiving support from major 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 188  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
companies 
provides 
further 
positive 
signals 
for 
increasing 
contributions from secondary supplies. 
Project funding grows steadily despite price declines 
Two major rare earths producers outside China, Australia-based 
Lynas Rare Earths Limited and US-based MP Materials Corp., are 
clamping down on costs to offset a sharp drop in prices and weak 
Chinese demand. Lynas’ average selling price for neodymium-
praseodymium (Nd-Pr) fell by 32% per kilogramme year-on-year 
between July and December 2023, while MP Materials witnessed a 
34% price dip to USD 5 622 per metric tonne of rare earth oxide 
concentrate year-on-year for the December 2023 quarter. This low-
price environment in recent months, in part caused by China 
producing in excess of demand, has created some tensions in the 
market, but many experts believe that long-term demand beyond 
2025 will remain robust. Industry expectations are that export credit 
agencies will continue to support rare earth developers outside 
China, despite the challenging price environment at the moment. 
Moreover, China will continue to be a strong driver of rare earths 
demand, as evidenced by China's BYD Company Ltd. overtaking 
Tesla Inc. as the top-selling EV maker in 2023. Under these 
circumstances, China may prioritise supply for the domestic market, 
leaving a deficit globally. 
Since the last major global discussion about potential disruptions in 
rare earth elements supply in 2011, almost no new large-scale 
facilities have come online. The feasibility of announced projects for 
these minerals has been very low outside China. Efforts for 
diversification can be seen from different parts of the world. In 
September 2023, the Malaysian government stated that it is 
considering a ban on unprocessed rare earth concentrate in order to 
boost domestic REE processing. In March 2024, it was further 
mentioned that the Malay National Mineral Council would assess a 
proposal to create a government-linked company for rare earth 
extraction. In the United States, USA Rare Earth (USARE) signed an 
offtake agreement with ReElement Technologies in March 2024 for 
supply of rare earth oxides to its magnet manufacturing facility in 
Oklahoma from 2025, with the goal of expanding to 900 tonnes per 
year by 2028. Additionally, the US Export-Import Bank sent letters of 
interest in March 2024 to provide up to USD 600 million in debt 
funding to rare earth developers Meteoric Resources and Australian 
Strategic Minerals. Meteoric Resources is developing the Caldeira 
project in Brazil targeting ionic adsorption clays, while Australian 
Strategic Minerals is developing the Dubbo project in Australia and 
downstream metallisation capabilities in Korea. This announcement 
from the United States follows a series of government backed 
investment in rare earth projects, with the US Department of Defense 
providing additional funding to Lynas Rare Earths for its Texas-based 
refinery, and the Australian government providing financial support to 
Hastings Technology Metals, Iluka Resources and Arafura 
Resources to continue development of their respective rare earth 
mines and processing facilities. 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 189  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
There are two broad classifications of magnets made from REE: 
bonded magnets (smaller magnets, mainly used for electronics or 
small motors) and sintered magnets (most commonly used in traction 
motors for EVs and wind turbines). Besides China, only two facilities 
in Japan are known to produce the latter at industrial scale. New 
project announcements from Neo Perfomance Materials in Estonia 
approved by the European Commission and some from the Korean 
company Star Group funded by POSCO could come online within the 
next years. Roughly, three-quarters of the unit cost of making 
permanent magnets is attributed to the raw materials and about 10% 
to energy costs, and the rest is labour costs. Labour costs (not labour 
intensity) are comparable to China in Europe and North America; 
however, energy costs are significantly lower in China. Today, 
original equipment manufacturers (OEMs) are hesitant to pay the 
30% premium – equivalent to around USD 30 to USD 50 per vehicle 
– that comes from energy costs and trade taxes for magnets made 
outside China, creating the biggest challenge for diversification of the 
industry in the rest of the world. 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 190  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
New technologies: Innovative extraction processes and new magnet technologies 
There is a constant development of new rare earth processing 
technologies by various industry participants globally, though many 
of these processes have struggled to make significant advances. This 
is not always the fault of the technology developer, however, with 
difficulties in acquiring necessary feedstock at commercially viable 
prices, as is the case for REEtec in Norway, also causing delays and 
setback at processors.  
Will ionic adsorption clay deposits change the game? 
Ionic adsorption clay (IAC) is also known as regolith-hosted ionic 
adsorption deposits (IADs), which contain rare earth elements 
adsorbed physically to the clay minerals surface, mainly kaolinite and 
halloysite. Weathering of igneous rock, primarily granite, that 
contains specific rare earth-bearing minerals results in the formation 
of IAC. The best environments for this process to occur are warm, 
humid and slightly acidic conditions in subtropical regions. Important 
source rocks typically have a relatively high background in rare earths 
and rare earth-bearing minerals in these rocks will include monazite, 
xenotime, bastnaesite, allanite, titanite and apatite. The hype 
surrounding this form of deposit comes from the hope that extracting 
rare earths that are loosely bonded to the surface of rocks is relatively 
simpler, less energy-intensive and cheaper than obtaining them from 
the depths of hard rock formations, and could also avoid the 
radioactive by-products that accompany the traditional mining 
processes for these minerals. 
Ore deposits containing physically adsorbed lanthanides are 
substantially lower-grade than other rare earth deposit types (hard 
rock); however, the low mining and processing costs make them 
economically attractive as sources of rare earths. Global resources 
of HREE are dominantly sourced from Chinese regolith-hosted IADs 
or clay deposits in Myanmar and Laos, in which the elements are 
inferred to be weakly adsorbed onto clay minerals. Similar deposits 
elsewhere might provide alternative supply for these high-tech 
metals, but the adsorption mechanisms remain unclear. 
Traditional REE projects based on hard rock developments are 
extremely 
capital-intensive 
and 
can 
cost 
USD 1 billion 
to 
USD 2 billion to build, for which most junior miners cannot secure 
funding. In recent years, focus in the junior miner space has shifted 
from highly capital-intensive hard rock REE projects to low capital-
intensity IAC projects which are enriched in HREE. Despite in-situ 
grades being lower than most hard rock projects, the mining is easier, 
leading to substantially lower capital expenditure and operating costs. 
Most clay operations involve digging or scraping of only the top 
twenty metres or so of earth, as opposed to blasting hard rock 
sources which may extend down to hundreds of metres or more. Clay 
material is soft and requires only breaking up, whereas hard rock 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 191  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
material needs to be crushed and ground, often in large quantities. 
Then there is the processing. Large-scale high temperature roasting 
and acid leaching for hard rock projects, compared with heap or vat 
leaching at atmospheric temperature and pressure for ionic clay 
projects. Last but not least, clay waste material is generally inert and 
can be backfilled into the mining area, meaning there is no need for 
tailings dams or dry stacking. 
In regolith deposits, Chinese miners found that weakly acidic 
ammonium sulphate or sodium chloride solution readily reclaims the 
rare earths from the ionic bonded clays, allowing the resulting crude 
solution to be chemically treated to eliminate contaminants for further 
solvent extraction separation and refining. This processing can be in-
situ leaching; heap leaching; or in-tank leaching with increasing cost 
and all with significant environmental impact. Generally, Chinese 
costs for REE reclamation from IAC deposits are low and despite the 
low recoveries peaking at around 30% to 40% in final products, these 
projects appear to be economic. 
The economic viability of IAC deposits remains uncertain, but they 
look increasingly attractive from perspectives of capital intensity, 
ease 
of 
working, 
carbon 
intensity 
and 
radioactive 
waste 
management. While China appears to have developed a low-cost 
method of reclaiming rare earths from IAC deposits, not all REE clay 
projects are IAC projects and it is important for prospective investors 
to have sufficient metallurgical testing carried out to establish the 
ionic adsorption capacity and suitability for ion exchange within all 
new clay discoveries. 
There has been a steady flow of announcements of IAC discoveries 
outside southern China and Myanmar in recent years, such as in 
Australia, Brazil and Uganda. How quickly these discoveries can be 
converted to projects operating at scale remains to be seen. In March 
2024, Appia Rare Earths & Uranium announced a maiden mineral 
resource estimate for its ionic adsorption clay PCH project in Goiás, 
Brazil. 
In addition to the growth in IAC type production, the most significant 
change in the rare earth space would be the growth of supply from 
heavy mineral sand (HMS) operations, which are expected to 
contribute volumes of not only Nd-Pr feedstocks but also provide 
notable quantities of Dy-Tb to downstream processors. While some 
HMS producers are looking to integrate production, as is the case 
with Iluka, Energy Fuels and Tronox, many producers will continue to 
supply material into the Chinese market. 
Alternative magnet technologies 
On the technology innovation side, the development of alternative 
magnet technologies such as iron nitride has been a key topic of 
interest for many stakeholders wanting to understand the potential 
impact on neodymium iron boron (NdFeB) magnets used in 
automotive applications. Niron Magnetics’ Clean Earth Magnet has 
attracted interest from General Motors in the United States, with 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 192  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
whom Niron has partnered for the development of EV drivetrains, 
starting with a demonstrator for the Chevrolet Bolt. Further funding 
for Niron has also come from Samsung and Stellantis. 
One apparent disadvantage of iron nitride magnets is that their 
coercivity is less than that of neodymium. Coercivity is a measure of 
the magnet’s ability to resist having the polarity of its field reversed 
when exposed to a strong opposing field. Without coercivity, the 
magnetic fields in a motor would rotate without turning the shaft. Initial 
assessments indicate that iron nitride will struggle to compete with 
incumbent neodymium iron boron magnets for automotive drivetrains 
as the importance of high magnetic density, high coercivity and field 
strength which the latter technologies bring are non-negotiable for 
compact motor and EV manufacturers.  
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 193  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
Brief review of other key materials 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 194  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
Aluminium
Aluminium traded within a fairly narrow range of USD 2 100 to 
USD 2 450 per tonne over the past year, with the strong dollar and 
slowing industrial activity setting a ceiling on prices. This trend is likely 
to continue in the near term owing to the persistent slowdown in 
manufacturing as well as supply-side uncertainty. In the long term, 
global demand growth is expected to narrow the surplus, driven in 
large part by increasing utilisation in clean energy applications. 
Aluminium’s use as a lightweight structural element in solar PV 
installations and EVs is expected to remain as a primary demand 
driver. In addition, transmission requirements arising from increased 
electricity demand and renewable penetration are expected to boost 
the use of aluminium conductor steel-reinforced cables. Demand 
growth from traditional demand sectors in construction and 
manufacturing are likely to remain modest. 
On the supply side, drought risks in the southwestern Chinese 
province of Yunnan pose significant near-term potential for supply 
volatility and elevated prices. Hydro-powered Yunnan accounts for 
about 12% of Chinese aluminium production, but low water levels 
have resulted in production cuts totalling more than 1 Mt per annum 
between November 2023 and February 2024.  
The proportion of Russian metal within LME stocks has doubled from 
45% in February 2023 to over 90% in 2024 amid low overall stock 
levels. The LME’s April 2024 ban on accepting Russian aluminium, 
copper and nickel created opportunities for traders, which further 
dried up the liquidity for tradeable metal. 
Proportion of Russian metal within LME stocks 
 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
Source: IEA analysis based on London Metal Exchange. 
 
Global production levels are expected to be able to serve near-term 
demand increases. Despite slowing growth in China as primary 
production capacity reaches the government-mandated limit of 45 Mt 
per year, secondary production growth as well as new smelting 
capacity are expected to support long-term market growth.  
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
 100
 200
 300
 400
 500
 600
Jan 23
Feb 23
Mar 23
Apr 23
May 23
Jun 23
Jul 23
Aug 23
Sep 23
Oct 23
Nov 23
Dec 23
Jan 24
Feb 24
Rest of world
Russia
Share of Russian metal
kt
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 195  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
Manganese: Demand surges driven by EV batteries, but significant concerns remain about the 
future supply of battery-grade manganese sulphate where China dominates supply 
Manganese demand in clean energy technologies by scenario 
 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
Source: IEA analysis based on US Geological Survey (2024), Minerals Commodity Summaries 2024.
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
 500
1 000
1 500
2 000
2 500
3 000
3 500
2015 2021 2023
2030 2040 2050
2030 2040 2050
2030 2040 2050
Other clean energy
technologies
Other renewables
Wind
EVs
Share of clean
energy technologies
(right axis)
kt Mn
APS
NZE
STEPS
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 196  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
Manganese
Manganese demand is primarily driven by steel, as it is a key 
component of steel alloys. Currently, batteries account for a small 
share of total manganese demand; however, this share is set to 
increase rapidly due to the surging deployment of EVs. Manganese is 
a critical component of one of the dominant EV cathode chemistries, 
NMC, as well as now being utilised in the new variant of the current 
leading chemistry LFP known as LMFP, where LMFP is set to start 
taking market share. For instance, CATL’s LMFP cells have been 
confirmed for use in six models in China and are undergoing validation 
by Tesla, who are expected to use the cells in the Model 3 made in 
China. The addition of manganese increases energy density 
compared with traditional LFP. Other chemistries under development 
such as lithium nickel manganese oxide (LNMO) also use higher 
fractions of manganese compared with conventional nickel-rich 
cathodes. Therefore, this shift towards greater manganese contents in 
cathode chemistry is expected to drive a surge in demand. Manganese 
is also a key metal used in wind turbines as a critical part of steel 
components. 
By 2030 manganese demand from clean energy technologies 
increases almost threefold in the STEPS, over threefold in the APS 
and almost fivefold in the NZE Scenario. By 2050 manganese demand 
from clean energy technologies is a remarkable 11 times higher than 
today in the STEPS, 16 times higher in the APS and 17 times higher 
in the NZE Scenario. The rapid growth in EV deployment is responsible 
for the exceptional increase in manganese demand in clean energy 
technologies. This results in the share of demand from clean energy 
technologies increasing from 1% today to 15% in 2050 in the APS and 
17% in 2050 in the NZE Scenario. Thus, steel remains the dominant 
driver of total manganese demand. However, it is critical to note all of 
this remarkable growth in manganese demand from EV batteries will 
need to be high-purity manganese sulphate.  
Geographical distribution of manganese production and reserves 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
Note: Refining refers to production of battery-grade manganese sulphate. 
Sources: US Geological Survey (2024), Minerals Commodity Summaries 2024 
and IEA (2023), Critical Minerals Market Review 2023. 
 
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Production
Reserves
Refining
Other
Brazil
India
China
Ghana
Australia
Gabon
South Africa
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 197  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
In terms of supply, mined manganese production is highly 
concentrated with the top three countries producing three-quarters of 
global supply. South Africa is the world's largest producer with 35% 
of production, followed by Gabon with a quarter and Australia with 
15%. This concentration already poses significant risks. Exports of 
manganese ore from Gabon dropped by 13% from 2022 to 2023 due 
to the military coup and a landslide on key rail infrastructure which 
required significant maintenance. This increased political instability 
and risk deters investment and causes concern for future supply 
disruptions for the key supply region. Gabon also has the highest 
grade (average 45%) compared with the other two leading producers 
Australia (42%) and South Africa (38%), thus its critical importance 
for global manganese supply. Australia’s GEMCO mine is the world’s 
second-largest manganese mine but it has suspended exports due 
to infrastructure damage from Tropical Cylone Megan in March. 
Operations and export sales will remain suspended until early 2025. 
Exports from South Africa also dropped by 7% following extreme 
weather, maintenance challenges and insufficient investment for key 
rail infrastructure transporting manganese ore. 
Nevertheless, there is potential for diversification, seen by comparing 
current production with reserves (defined as economically extractable 
resources). In terms of reserves, South Africa is indeed the largest 
with almost 20%, followed by Australia with 15% of the global total. 
China and Brazil hold significant reserves with 15% together. There 
are several qualifications which must also be taken into account when 
assessing reserves including the resource quality or any above-
ground constraints limiting potential. Also, critically, there is a need 
for updated geological surveys in emerging and developing 
economies, where the current surveys are out of date. 
However, the critical risk for manganese is the supply of high-purity 
manganese sulphates required for battery chemistries, a crucial issue 
given the remarkable growth from EV battery demand. While 
manganese is abundant, only around 1% of global supply is suitable 
for batteries. China dominates supply of battery-grade manganese 
sulphate, producing 97% of global supply. There are only two other 
refineries outside China in operation, in Japan and Belgium, though 
with several projects in development including in Canada, 
South Africa, Australia and the United States. With manganese 
sulphate prices relatively low due to slight surpluses from China, it is 
difficult for many other regions to compete with China on costs. This 
is proving challenging for new ventures to be competitive and secure 
investment. Some analysts even forecast a deficit in supply of 
battery-grade manganese sulphate as early as 2027, adding concern 
for ensuring sufficient supply for EV batteries. Nevertheless, the total 
dominance of China in the supply of high-purity manganese 
sulphates today is a major risk alone, making supply highly 
vulnerable to suddent changes in policy, geopolitics or supply shocks.
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 198  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
Silicon
The silicon market is poised to be affected by two waves of demand 
growth from clean energy technologies. A first phase is related to the 
ramp-up of solar PV deployment, requiring close to 1.5 Mt in 2030 in 
the APS, and close to 2 Mt to meet the needs in the NZE Scenario. 
A second phase corresponds to the growing use of silicon in the 
battery industry, as a higher-performance substitute for graphite, with 
related demand reaching over 1 Mt in 2050 in the APS and the NZE 
Scenario. 
Silicon is produced in its metallic and crystalline forms using silica-
rich minerals, generally from high-purity quartzite. The existing silicon 
industry is already mature, supplied by an abundant resource, with a 
current global production already close to 3.8 Mt, but new demand 
trends related to clean energy (and also digital transitions) are 
transforming the supply chain, requiring larger volumes of higher-
purity products. Consumption was historically dominated by the 
aluminium alloy industry and silicone producers (silicon-based 
polymers, often found in rubber or oil-like products), calling for 
“metallurgical grade” of 99.99% (4N) purity silicon. Solar PV is known 
for requiring 99.9999% (6N) while electronic applications can require 
even higher purity, ranging up to 11N. Both electronic and solar PV 
uses may increase demand for high-purity products. 
Technological gains in efficiency are significantly reducing pressures 
on silicon resources, with requirements in solar panels declining from 
6.8 g/W in 2010 to 2.3 g/W in 2022 and close to 1.5 g/W in the latest 
generation of solar PV technologies. 
Silicon demand related to clean energy technologies  
by sector and scenario 
  
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
For EV batteries, manufacturers are already adding small volumes of 
silicon in anodes, but further increasing this share faces significant 
technological hurdles, such as swelling during the charging cycle. 
Several start-ups are developing various silicon nanoproducts to 
reduce these effects, suggesting potential for new specialised silicon 
supply chains. For stationary storage, silicon uses are expected to 
remain small, due to lower energy density requirements. Similar to 
other minerals, the silicon refining industry has demonstrated the 
capacity to adapt to the rapid growth in demand, albeit at the expense 
 500
1 000
1 500
2 000
2 500
3 000
2015 21
23
2030 40
50
2030 40
50
2030 40
50
Solar PV
Electric vehicles
Battery storage
kt
STEPS
APS
NZE
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 199  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
of increasing concentration and significant price volatility. The supply 
was initially affected by a glut that began in 2015, followed by a period 
of supply tightness in 2021. Currently, there is an oversupply 
situation, with a high volume of capacities developed in China in line 
with its downstream solar PV capacities. Silicon prices fell by 74% in 
2023 to around USD 8 per kilogramme.  
China’s share of solar-grade silicon grew from 27% in 2010 to over 
80% today. The current price context and local energy prices are 
adding pressure on European solar-grade polysilicon manufacturers, 
with some capacities closing down. US restrictions on solar PV 
imports related to concerns of forced labour have increased demand 
for supplies outside of China, with some plants being developed in 
the United States recently. 
Recycling silicon remains challenging due to weak economic 
incentives, driven by the low cost of the material input and the 
prevailing low-price environment affecting the 6N refined silicon 
market. Historically, solar PV recycling players have prioritised base 
materials present in larger volumes (such as copper, aluminium and 
glass), or precious metals such as silver, rather than silicon. 
However, some European are developing plants designed to recycle 
silicon. 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 200  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
Phosphoric acid
The success of LFP battery chemistries is creating a market for a new 
input, iron phosphate, and its precursor – purified phosphoric acid. 
As LFP cathode production rises, so does demand for this high-purity 
input, reaching over 2 Mt in the APS by 2030 and close to 4 Mt in the 
NZE Scenario. Further demand growth for high phosphoric acid 
comes from next-generation lithium-iron phosphate manganese 
(LMFP) chemistries, whose higher performance is likely to further 
popularise EV batteries containing phosphate. In 2040, demand rises 
to almost 6 Mt in the APS and over 6.5 Mt in the NZE Scenario. 
Phosphates are cheaper than the metals they replace from previous 
battery compositions (cobalt, nickel) and are currently produced in 
vast quantities for fertiliser applications. About 220 Mt of phosophate 
rocks are extracted each year, containing about 28 Mt of phosphorus, 
and enough to produce over 80 Mt of phosphoric acid. 
Three challenges could arise from these developments: 
• 
Increased competition with agricultural supply – despite demand 
in smaller volumes and higher-grade requirements, additionnal 
demand from the energy sector could change supply and demand 
balances in the fertiliser market. 
• 
Geological deposits for phosphate rocks are sufficient, but 
questions remain regarding mining capacities, particularly the 
best deposits for the production of purified phosphoric acid. This 
process requires high grade and low rates of heavy metals such 
as cadmium. Some LFP supply chain investments are oriented 
towards countries with significant phosphate resources, such as 
Morocco, which also benefits from a number of favourable free 
trade agreements. 
• 
An ability for new players to access supplies already secured by 
refining. Once concentrated in China, LFP technologies have 
gained popularity elsewhere including among North American 
gigafactories. These new players need to find a channel to source 
materials reliably. 
Phosphoric acid demand from the EV sector by scenario 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.
2 000
4 000
6 000
2015 21
23
2030 40
50
2030 40
50
2030 40
50
LFP chemistries
LMFP chemistries
kt
APS
NZE
STEPS
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 201  
2. Demand and supply outlook 
Platinum group metals
Prices for platinum group metals (PGMs) remained under pressure 
for the past year, driven in large part by poor automotive sales. The 
basket price, defined as the average price of the five PGMs (platinum, 
palladium, rhodium, iridium and ruthenium) weighted by production, 
seems unlikely to increase meaningfully in the short term. Although 
the five PGMs occur together in nature, divergent market outlooks 
are complicating strategic decision-making for these elements.  
In the near term, prices for platinum, iridium and ruthenium are 
expected to remain stable, with platinum having modest upside 
potential. Rhodium and palladium are likely to remain under pressure 
due to lower demand for internal combustion engine (ICE) emissions 
catalysts, which represents about 90% of demand for rhodium and 
80% of demand for palladium. Future increases in platinum demand 
remain subject to the future of hydrogen fuel cell vehicle sales, along 
with demand from existing industrial and ICE applications.  
Palladium and rhodium demand are likely to decline structurally due 
to the uptake of EVs. In addition, growing secondary supplies are 
likely to exert further pressure on producers, especially for North 
American mines mining palladium-rich ores.  
Demand for iridium and ruthenium are likely to increase consistently 
in the coming years thanks to demand for membrane electrodes, 
including those used in proton exchange membrane hydrogen 
electrolysers. This is likely in spite of continued technical research 
and development to reduce the amount of precious metals per unit 
product. Price volatility in the iridium market is expected to continue, 
driven by concerns over long-term supply. However, given the 
relatively small contribution of iridium and ruthenium to the PGM 
basket, prices for these metals will have to increase significantly to 
motivate structural increases in supply. 
On the supply side, near-term shocks remain possible thanks to 
persistent electricity system issues in South Africa and geopolitical 
concerns impacting Russian palladium supplies from Norilsk. Since 
the second half of 2023, South African PGM miners including 
Sibanye-Stillwater, Anglo-American Platinum and Impala Platinum 
have announced cost-cutting measures to mitigate the impact of low 
prices. These measures, which include project deferrals and shutting 
shafts, have not meaningfully boosted prices, which have remained 
anaemic. If the current price environment continues, further closures 
might occur, jeopardising long-term primary supply for all five metals. 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 202  
3. Risk assessments 
 
3. Clean energy transition 
risk assessments 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 203  
3. Risk assessments 
IEA’s mineral-specific “clean energy transition risk assessment” framework 
 
 
Notes: ESG = environmental, social and governance. “N-1” refers to the case that excludes anticipated supply from the largest supplier and projected demand from 
that country from global market balances. 
Supply risks
Short-term supply-demand balances
Long-term market balances in climate-driven scenarios
Status of secondary supply
Observed price volatility
Visible stock levels
Hurdles to develop new projects in diversified regions
Geographical concentration of mined supply
N-1 demand and supply balances
Environmental performance: mining
Social and governance performance
Barriers to 
respond to 
disruption
Exposure to ESG 
and climate risks
Exposure to natural hazards and climate risks - water stress
Transparency of pricing schemes
Impacts on clean energy cost
Export risks of major suppliers
Geopolitical 
risks
Expected pace of demand growth
Geographical concentration of refined supply
Visible stock levels
Availability of options to moderate demand
Environmental performance: refining
Exposure to natural hazards and climate risks - earthquake
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 204  
3. Risk assessments 
Mineral-specific “clean energy transition risk assessment” framework 
Understanding potential risks across the critical mineral supply chain 
is an essential step to enhance readiness against potential 
disruptions and devise necessary policy actions. An approach to 
mineral security may vary depending on each mineral’s market 
context and risk exposure. Conducting structured risk assessments 
can assist policymakers in identifying vulnerabilities in the supply 
chain, devising appropriate security measures, and directing policy 
efforts to where they are most needed. 
We have performed “Clean energy transition risk assessments” for 
the six key energy transition minerals: copper, lithium, nickel, cobalt, 
graphite, and rare earth elements. These assessments are based on 
a comprehensive framework that combines both quantitative and 
qualitative analyses, to understand potential risk areas that could 
hamper progress towards energy transitions. The framework 
encompasses four main categories: supply risks, geopolitical risks, 
barriers to respond to disruptions, and exposure to environmental, 
social, and governance (ESG) and climate risks (see Annex for 
detailed evaluation criteria). 
The first category (supply risks) assesses five dimensions.  
• 
Pace of demand growth compares projected annual average 
demand growth rates in the Announced Pledges Scenario (APS) 
between 2023 and 2030 in relation to historical growth rates 
between 2010 and 2019. 
• 
Short-term market balances assesses the near-term balances 
between expected supply and primary supply requirements. 
• 
Long-term market balances in climate-driven scenarios 
reviews the balances between expected supply and primary 
supply requirements in 2040 in the APS. 
• 
Observed price volatility evaluates historical price volatility 
based on monthly prices between 2011 and 2023. 
• 
Impact on clean energy cost examines the share of a material 
in the total cost of end-use clean energy technologies to assess 
how price volatility could affect clean energy deployment. 
The second category (geopolitical risks) assesses five dimensions.  
• 
Geographical concentration of mined supply assesses the 
expected share of the top three producing countries for mining in 
2030 under the base case supply scenario. 
• 
Geographical concentration of refined supply assesses the 
expected share of the top three producing countries for refining in 
2030 under the base case supply scenario. 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 205  
3. Risk assessments 
• 
N-1 supply and demand balances reviews market balances 
excluding the largest supplier by comparing the N-1 supply and 
material requirements in 2030 in the APS (refined product basis). 
• 
Export risks of major suppliers assesses the risks of trade 
restriction measures by examining the weighted average export 
restriction risk score of the current production portfolio for both 
mining and refining, based on the Organisation for Economic 
Co-operation and Development's (OECD’s) inventory of export 
restrictions on industrial raw materials and announced intentions.  
• 
Hurdles to develop new projects in diversified regions 
conducts qualitative assessments of challenges in building supply 
chains in geographically diverse regions, such as lead time, 
capital requirements and technological barriers. 
The third category (barriers to respond to disruptions) assesses 
four dimensions.  
• 
Visible stock levels reviews stock levels at major exchanges. 
While exchange stocks represent only a fraction of the industry's 
overall stock levels, they offer a valuable indication of an 
accessible buffer during disruptions. 
• 
Transparency of pricing schemes conducts a qualitative 
assessment of market liquidity, transparency of pricing schemes 
and the availability of financial tools to hedge price risks. 
• 
Availability of options to moderate demand assesses possible 
demand-side and technology-switching options to moderate 
demand growth in the event of supply tightness. 
• 
Status of secondary supply assesses the ability of secondary 
supply to ramp up during market tightness by examining the share 
of secondary supply in total supply and its potential for growth. 
The fourth category (exposure to ESG and climate risks) assesses 
five dimensions.  
• 
Environmental performance of mining reviews the weighted 
average enviromental performance score of today's mined 
production, based on selected indicators in Yale’s Environmental 
Performance Index.  
• 
Environmental performance of refining reviews the weighted 
average grid carbon intensity of the regions refining minerals 
today, considering that refining operations are highly electricity-
intensive. 
• 
Social and governance performance assesses the weighted 
average corruption, human rights and conflict score of today's 
mined production, based on relevant indicators in the V-Dem 
database.  
• 
Exposure to water stress assesses the share of mine 
production located in areas with high and extreme high-water 
stress and arid conditions. 
• 
Exposure to earthquake risks assesses the share of mine 
production located in areas with high earthquake risks.
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 206  
3. Risk assessments 
Overall: Lithium and graphite show the highest risk scores, though the specific areas of 
exposure vary by mineral 
Aggregate risk score by mineral 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
 4
 8
 12
Copper
Cobalt
Nickel
Rare earths
Graphite
Lithium
Supply risks
Geopolitical risks
Barriers to respond to
disruptions
Exposure to ESG and
climate risks
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 207  
3. Risk assessments 
Copper: Assessment results 
Area 
Score 
Rationale 
Supply risks 
Medium 
 
Pace of demand growth 
Low 
Projected pace of demand growth is in line with historical growth rates 
Short-term market balances 
Medium 
Supply could meet near-term demand, but risks of tightness if disruption occurs beyond usual range 
Long-term market balances 
High 
Expected base case supply falls significantly short of the primary supply requirements in 2040 
Observed price volatility 
Low 
Historical price movement has been less volatile compared with other commodities 
Impact on clean energy cost 
High 
Price spikes could significantly affect grid deployment (20% of capital costs). Copper in lithium-ion anode 
current collector is difficult to be replaced, thus price spikes can have major impacts on battery prices 
Geopolitical risks 
Low 
 
Geographical concentration: mining 
Low 
Expected top 3 share in 2030 is around 48% and top 1 share is around 23% 
Geographical concentration: refining 
Low 
Expected top 3 share in 2030 is around 60% and top 1 country accounts for less than half of global supply 
N-1 supply and demand balances 
Low 
N-1 supply in 2030 able to serve N-1 demand 
Export risks of major suppliers 
Medium 
Risk score 2.7 (mining 2.2/refining 3.3) 
Hurdles for diversification 
High 
Challenges of declining ore quality, very low global average grade (0.6%), few major resources of high 
quality to exploit. Capital and operating costs increasing, coupled with long lead times to build new mines 
Barrier to respond to disruption 
Low 
 
Visible stock levels 
Medium 
Able to monitor stock levels at major exchanges, but the current exchange stocks at low levels 
Transparency of pricing schemes 
Low 
Established regulated market trading with ample liquidity 
Availability of options to moderate 
demand 
Medium 
Scope to moderate demand through scaling up recycling and scrap use and substitution for aluminium. 
However, copper is irreplaceable for many applications (e.g. lithium-ion anode current collectors, subsea 
cables). The replacement of underground power lines with aluminium requires additional cost 
Status of secondary supply 
Low 
Sizeable secondary supply and growing direct use of scrap, which could be tapped in times of price spikes 
Exposure to ESG & climate risk 
Medium 
 
Environmental performance: mining 
Medium 
Weighted average score 47 
Environmental performance: refining 
High 
467 g CO2/kWh 
Social and governance performance 
Low 
Weighted average score 0.68 
Exposure to water stress 
High 
52% of mine production located in high-risk areas 
Exposure to earthquake risks 
Medium 
46% of mine production located in high-risk areas 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 208  
3. Risk assessments 
Lithium: Assessment results 
Area 
Score 
Rationale 
Supply risks 
High 
 
Pace of demand growth 
High 
Projected pace of demand growth is materially higher than the rates observed in the last decade 
Short-term market balances 
Low 
Sufficient supply expected to serve short-term demand 
Long-term market balances 
High 
Expected base case supply meets less than 40% of the primary supply requirements in 2040 
Observed price volatility 
High 
High volatile price movements observed in recent years 
Impact on clean energy cost 
High 
20% of battery pack cost. Fluctuation of prices has major impacts on battery prices and deployment 
Geopolitical risks 
Medium 
 
Geographical concentration: mining 
Medium 
Expected top 3 share in 2030 is around 68% and top 1 share is around 33% 
Geographical concentration: refining 
High 
Expected top 3 share in 2030 is above 80% and top 1 country accounts for more than half of global supply 
N-1 supply and demand balances 
Medium 
Expected ex-China supply could serve around half of APS ex-China material requirements in 2030 
Export risks of major suppliers 
Medium 
Risk score 3.1 (mining 2.4/refining 3.8) 
Hurdles for diversification 
Medium 
New capacities do not necessarily involve higher capital, but need to overcome technological barriers 
Barrier to respond to disruption 
High 
 
Visible stock levels 
Medium 
Limited information about visible stock levels, but accumulated industry stocks are expected 
Transparency of pricing schemes 
Medium 
Early-stage regulated market trading, but liquidity is still lacking 
Availability of options to moderate 
demand 
High 
Limited options to reduce demand. Sodium-ion may ease concerns, but has limitations to be adopted in 
major transport segments 
Status of secondary supply 
High 
Limited share of secondary supply as of today, but set to increase in future years 
Exposure to ESG & climate risk 
Medium 
 
Environmental performance: mining 
Medium 
Weighted average score 59 
Environmental performance: refining 
High 
531 g CO2/kWh 
Social and governance performance 
Low 
Weighted average score 0.78 
Exposure to water stress 
High 
50% of mine production located in high-risk areas 
Exposure to earthquake risks 
Medium 
26% of mine production located in high-risk areas 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 209  
3. Risk assessments 
Nickel: Assessment results 
Area 
Score 
Rationale 
Supply risks 
Low 
 
Pace of demand growth 
Low 
Projected demand growth rates are in line with historical growth rates 
Short-term market balances 
Low 
Sufficient supply expected to serve short-term demand 
Long-term market balances 
Medium 
Expected base case mine supply meets a large portion of the primary supply requirements in 2040 due to 
the rise of Indonesian output, but lack of sufficient nickel sulphate capacity remains an issue 
Observed price volatility 
Low 
Historical price movement has been less volatile compared with other commodities 
Impact on clean energy cost 
Medium 
6% of battery pack cost in 2023. Fluctuation of nickel prices can have major impacts on battery prices 
Geopolitical risks 
High 
 
Geographical concentration: mining 
High 
Expected top 3 share in 2030 is around 75% and top 1 share is around 61% 
Geographical concentration: refining 
High 
Expected top 3 share in 2030 is around 67% and top 1 country supplies more than half of global output 
N-1 supply and demand balances 
Medium 
N-1 supply serves 35% of N-1 requirements in 2030 in the APS 
Export risks of major suppliers 
Medium 
Risk score 3.9 (mining 3.8/refining 4.1) 
Hurdles for diversification 
High 
Most diversified projects in the pipeline in the base case or high production case are located in higher-cost 
jurisdictions, posing significant barriers to entry without mechanisms to incentivise high ESG performance 
Barrier to respond to disruption 
Medium 
 
Visible stock levels 
Medium 
Nickel exchange stocks at historically low levels 
Transparency of pricing schemes 
Medium 
Established regulated market trading but liquidity has been reduced considerably in recent years 
Availability of options to moderate 
demand 
Medium 
Possible to shift more towards lithium iron phosphate (LFP) or lithium manganese iron phosphate (LMFP) 
at the expense of long-rage electric vehicles 
Status of secondary supply 
High 
Limited share of secondary supply as of today, but set to increase in future years 
Exposure to ESG & climate risk 
High 
 
Environmental performance: mining 
High 
Weighted average score 35.5 
Environmental performance: refining 
High 
603 g CO2/kWh, one of the highest 
Social and governance performance 
Medium 
Weighted average score 0.65 
Exposure to water stress 
Low 
12% of mine production located in high-risk areas 
Exposure to earthquake risks 
Low 
19% of mine production located in high-risk areas (Weda Bay / South Sulawesi assessed as low risk) 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 210  
3. Risk assessments 
Cobalt: Assessment results 
Area 
Score 
Rationale 
Supply risks 
Medium 
 
Pace of demand growth 
Low 
Projected demand growth rates are in line with historical growth rates 
Short-term market balances 
Low 
Sufficient supply expected to serve short-term demand 
Long-term market balances 
Medium 
Expected base case mine supply meets 70% of the primary supply requirements in 2040 
Observed price volatility 
High 
Highly volatile price movements observed in the past decade 
Impact on clean energy cost 
Medium 
2% of battery pack cost in 2023 with low cobalt prices, but the share was 5-6% in the past, which means 
cobalt would have modest impacts on battery cost and deployment 
Geopolitical risks 
High 
 
Geographical concentration: mining 
High 
Expected top 3 share in 2030 is around 84% and top 1 share is around 66% 
Geographical concentration: refining 
High 
Expected top 3 share in 2030 is around 84% and top 1 country supplies three-quarters of global output 
N-1 supply and demand balances 
Medium 
N-1 supply serves 37% of N-1 requirements in 2030 in the APS 
Export risks of major suppliers 
Medium 
Risk score 3.3 (mining 2.4/refining 4.1) 
Hurdles for diversification 
High 
The low-price environment and relatively downbeat demand outlook present challenges in building 
diversified assets whereas projects continue to be developed in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, 
Indonesia and the People’s Republic of China (hereafter “China”) 
Barrier to respond to disruption 
Medium 
 
Visible stock levels 
Medium 
Minimal amount of exchange stocks 
Transparency of pricing schemes 
Medium 
Early stage regulated market trading but liquidity is still lacking 
Availability of options to moderate 
demand 
Low 
Ongoing efforts to reduce cobalt use in cathode chemistries (e.g. LFP, LMFP) 
Status of secondary supply 
Medium 
Around 10% of secondary supply share, but set to improve in future years 
Exposure to ESG & climate risk 
High 
 
Environmental performance: mining 
High 
Weighted average score 36 
Environmental performance: refining 
High 
533 g CO2/kWh 
Social and governance performance 
Medium 
Weighted average score 0.47 
Exposure to water stress 
Low 
5% of mine production located in high-risk areas 
Exposure to earthquake risks 
Low 
4% of mine production located in high-risk areas 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 211  
3. Risk assessments 
Graphite: Assessment results 
Area 
Score 
Rationale 
Supply risks 
Low 
 
Pace of demand growth 
High 
Projected pace of future demand growth is significantly higher than the rate observed in the 2010s 
Short-term market balances 
Low 
Sufficient supply expected to serve short-term demand 
Long-term market balances 
Medium 
Expected base case mine supply meets two-thirds of the primary supply requirements in 2040, although 
synthetic graphite could fill the gap (at cost) 
Observed price volatility 
Low 
Historical price movement has been less volatile compared with other commodities 
Impact on clean energy cost 
Low 
Graphite is not a major part of total battery pack costs 
Geopolitical risks 
High 
 
Geographical concentration: mining 
High 
Expected top 3 share in 2030 is around 88% and top 1 share is around 69% 
Geographical concentration: refining 
High 
Battery-grade supply continues to be dominated by China, with 93% share (down from 100% today) 
N-1 supply and demand balances 
High 
Very limited supply potential to serve N-1 battery-grade graphite requirements in 2030 
Export risks of major suppliers 
High 
Risk score 4.4 (mining 4.5/refining 4.4) 
Hurdles for diversification 
High 
New projects are capital-intensive, requiring up to two times higher capital requirements than Chinese 
projects. New graphite project developers have limited financial capacity 
Barrier to respond to disruption 
High 
 
Visible stock levels 
Medium 
Limited information about visible stock levels, but accumulated industry stocks are estimated to exist 
Transparency of pricing schemes 
High 
Price reporting driven through survey pricing and unregulated platforms with limited liquidity 
Availability of options to moderate 
demand 
Medium 
Silicon could take growing shares in anodes, but unlikely to challenge graphite use in the near term 
Status of secondary supply 
High 
Share of secondary supply remains low, with limited ability to scale up secondary supply quickly 
Exposure to ESG & climate risk 
High 
 
Environmental performance: mining 
Medium 
Weighted average score 41 
Environmental performance: refining 
High 
577 g CO2/kWh 
Social and governance performance 
High 
Weighted average score 0.3 
Exposure to water stress 
Medium 
Many natural graphite mines in Heilongjiang and Inner Mongolia, regions with medium water stress 
Exposure to earthquake risks 
Low 
Heilongjiang and Inner Mongolia are not exposed to major earthquake risks 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 212  
3. Risk assessments 
Rare earth elements: Assessment results 
Area 
Score 
Rationale 
Supply risks 
Medium 
 
Pace of demand growth 
Low 
Expected demand growth rates are in line with historical growth rates 
Short-term market balances 
Low 
Sufficient supply expected to serve short-term demand 
Long-term market balances 
Medium 
Expected base case mine supply meets 70% of the primary supply requirements in 2040 
Observed price volatility 
High 
Highly volatile price movements observed in recent years 
Impact on clean energy cost 
Low 
While crucial for performance, rare earth elements are not a major contributor to final clean energy cost 
Geopolitical risks 
High 
 
Geographical concentration: mining 
High 
Expected top 3 share in 2030 is over 80% and top 1 share is around 55% 
Geographical concentration: refining 
High 
Expected magnet rare earth supply continues to be dominated by China, with 77% share 
N-1 supply and demand balances 
Low 
N-1 supply could serve N-1 requirements in 2030 in the APS 
Export risks of major suppliers 
High 
Risk score 4.5 (mining 4.1/refining 4.8) 
Hurdles for diversification 
High 
High entry barrier due to extensive resource endowment, accumulated technological know-how in the top 
producing country. Disadvantaged in terms of scale and costs (energy costs and cross-border trade taxes) 
Barrier to respond to disruption 
High 
 
Visible stock levels 
High 
Limited information about visible stock levels 
Transparency of pricing schemes 
High 
Price reporting driven through survey pricing and unregulated platforms with limited liquidity 
Availability of options to moderate 
demand 
Medium 
Alternative new technologies have lower magnetic density and coercivity, and may struggle to compete 
commercially with the rare earth-based alternatives that produce the strongest known permanent magnets  
Status of secondary supply 
Medium 
Share of secondary supply remains modest but hard to tap in times of price spikes 
Exposure to ESG & climate risk 
Medium 
 
Environmental performance: mining 
Medium 
Weighted average score 40.2 
Environmental performance: refining 
High 
607 g CO2/kWh, one of the highest 
Social and governance performance 
Medium 
Weighted average score 0.34 
Exposure to water stress 
Medium 
Infrastructure located in Australia and Inner Mongolia (China) are in regions at high risk of water stress 
Exposure to earthquake risks 
Medium 
Infrastructure located in Inner Mongolia (China), United States, India and Japan are in regions of medium 
to high risk of seismic activity 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 213  
3. Risk assessments 
Risk score by category: Lithium and copper are more exposed to supply and volume risks 
whereas graphite, cobalt, rare earths and nickel face more substantial geopolitical risks 
Risk score by category and mineral 
 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
Note: High = score above 2.33, Medium = score between 2.33 and 1.67, Low = score less than 1.67.
 1
 2
 3
Nickel
Graphite
Rare
earths
Cobalt
Copper
Lithium
High
Medium
Low
Supply risks
 1
 2
 3
Copper
Lithium
Rare
earths
Cobalt
Nickel
Graphite
Geopolitical risks
 1
 2
 3
Copper
Cobalt
Nickel
Lithium
Rare
earths
Graphite
Barriers to respond
to disruptions
 1
 2
 3
Lithium
Copper
Rare
earths
Graphite
Cobalt
Nickel
Exposure to ESG
and climate risks
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 214  
3. Risk assessments 
Supply risks: Lithium and copper are most exposed to supply risks 
Risk score for supply risks – aggregate and individual dimensions 
 
Material 
Overall 
score 
Pace of 
demand 
growth 
Short-term 
market 
balance 
Long-term 
market 
balance 
Observed 
price volatility 
Impact on 
clean energy 
cost 
Lithium 
High  
(2.6) 
High 
Low 
High 
High 
High 
Copper 
Medium 
(2.2) 
Low 
Medium 
High 
Low 
High 
Cobalt 
Medium 
(1.9) 
Low 
Low 
Medium 
High 
Medium 
Rare earth elements 
Medium 
(1.7) 
Low 
Low 
Medium 
High 
Low 
Graphite 
Low 
(1.5) 
High 
Low 
Medium 
Low 
Low 
Nickel 
Low 
(1.5) 
Low 
Low 
Medium 
Low 
Medium 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 215  
3. Risk assessments 
Supply risks: Prices for critical minerals tend to be volatile, often more so than for fossil fuels 
and base metals 
Price movement and volatility of selected commodities 
 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
Notes: Assessment based on the London Metal Exchange (LME) Lithium Carbonate Global Average, LME Nickel Cash, LME Cobalt Cash, LME Copper Grade A 
Cash prices, China flake graphite (-194 free on board) and neodymium oxide 99.5-99.9% Min China. Nominal prices. 
Sources: IEA analysis based on S&P Global and Bloomberg.
 200
 400
 600
 800
1 000
2016
2018
2020
2022
2023
2024
Lithium
Rare earths
Cobalt
Nickel
Copper
Graphite
Price movement
Index (Jan. 2016 = 100)
 100
 200
Graphite
Aluminium
Zinc
Copper
Natural gas
Oil
Nickel
Cobalt
Rare earths
Coal
Lithium
Volatility
Monthly standard deviation
(Jan. 2016-Dec. 2023)
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 216  
3. Risk assessments 
Geopolitical risks: Most minerals are highly exposed to geopolitical risks 
Risk score for geopolitical risks – aggregate and individual dimensions 
 
Material 
Overall 
score 
Geographical 
concentration 
of mining 
Geographical 
concentration 
of refining 
N-1 supply and 
demand 
balances 
Export risks of 
major 
suppliers 
Hurdles for 
diversification 
Graphite 
High  
(3.0) 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
Nickel 
High  
(2.7) 
High 
High 
Medium 
Medium 
High 
Cobalt 
High  
(2.7) 
High 
High 
Medium 
Medium 
High 
Rare earth elements 
High  
(2.7) 
High 
High 
Low 
High 
High 
Lithium 
Medium 
(2.3) 
Medium 
High 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Copper 
Low 
(1.6) 
Low 
Low 
Low 
Medium 
High 
 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 217  
3. Risk assessments 
Barriers to respond to disruptions: Graphite, rare earth elements and lithium have relatively 
little ability to respond to potential supply disruptions 
Risk score for ability to respond to disruptions – aggregate and individual dimensions 
 
Material 
Overall 
score 
Visible 
stock levels 
Transparency of 
pricing schemes 
Availability of 
options to 
moderate demand 
Status of 
secondary supply 
Graphite 
High  
(2.5) 
Medium 
High 
Medium 
High 
Rare earth elements 
High  
(2.5) 
High 
High 
Medium 
Medium 
Lithium 
High  
(2.5) 
Medium 
Medium 
High 
High 
Nickel 
Medium 
(2.3) 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
High 
Cobalt 
Medium 
(1.8) 
Medium 
Medium 
Low 
Medium 
Copper 
Low 
(1.5) 
Medium 
Low 
Medium 
Low 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 218  
3. Risk assessments 
Exposure to ESG and climate risks: Most minerals are exposed to high environmental risks 
Risk score for exposure to ESG and climate risks – aggregate and individual dimensions 
 
Material 
Overall 
score 
Environmental 
performance - 
Mining 
Environmental 
performance - 
Refining 
Social and 
governance 
performance 
Exposure to 
water stress 
Exposure to 
earthquake 
risks 
Graphite 
High  
(2.4) 
Medium 
High 
High 
Medium 
Low 
Nickel 
High  
(2.4) 
High 
High 
Medium 
Low 
Low 
Cobalt 
High  
(2.4) 
High 
High 
Medium 
Low 
Low 
Rare earth elements 
Medium 
(2.3) 
Medium 
High 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Lithium 
Medium 
(2.2) 
Medium 
High 
Low 
High 
Medium 
Copper 
Medium 
(2.2) 
Medium 
High 
Low 
High 
Medium 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 219  
3. Risk assessments 
Exposure to ESG and climate risks: Today’s refining operations occur in places with higher 
carbon intensity of the grid, mostly in regions relying on coal-based electricity 
Weighted average grid carbon intensity of today’s refining regions 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
Notes: The carbon intensity for natural gas-based power generation is around 427 gCO2/kWh. For all minerals, the weighted average carbon intensity of the grid is 
higher than this, hinting that operations take place in regions relying on coal-based electricity. In some places (e.g. Indonesia), the rise of refining operations is being 
served mainly by off-grid, which runs entirely based on coal. 
 200
 400
 600
 800
Rare earths
Graphite
Nickel
Cobalt
Lithium
Copper
g CO2/kWh
World 
North America
Carbon intensity of 
electricity generation
(2023)
Europe
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 220  
3. Risk assessments 
Exposure to ESG and climate risks: Mining assets are exposed to growing water stress and 
earthquake risks 
Share of production volume by water stress and earthquake risk levels for selected minerals, 2023 
 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
Note: Water stress levels are as defined in the Aqueduct 3.0 dataset according to the ratio of total water withdrawals over the total available surface and groundwater 
supplies. Earthquake risk levels are as defined in the GEM Global Seismic Hazard Map (v2023.1) based on peak ground acceleration (PGA) with a 10% probability 
of being exceeded in 50 years.  
Sources: IEA analysis based on S&P Global, WRI (2019), Aqueduct 3.0, and GEM (2023), Global Seismic Hazard Map.
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Cobalt
Nickel
Lithium
Copper
Low (< 10%)
Low-Medium (10-20%)
Medium-High (20-40%)
High (40-80%)
Extremely high (> 80%) or arid
Exposure to water stress
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Cobalt
Nickel
Lithium
Copper
Low
Medium
High
Exposure to earthquake risks
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 221  
3. Risk assessments 
Around 10% of global copper production faces supply risks related to droughts 
Water consumption intensity and drought risk in copper production by region, 2022 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
Notes: Production at risk is the exposure percentage of the production at risk due to drought. It reflects the interaction of how water is used on site in the context of 
identified external climate risks, the operations water source matrix, its water efficiency and operational resilience. Drought risks are based on statistical analysis of 
monthly precipitation data and trends. 
Source: Data provided by Skarn Associates.
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
 50
 100
 150
 200
 250
North America
Eurasia
Asia Pacific
Central and
South America
Europe
Middle East
Africa
Intensity of water consumption
Share of global production (right axis)
Share of production at drought risk (right axis)
m3 per tonne of copper
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 222  
4. Implications 
 
 
4. Implications 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 223  
4. Implications 
Four focus areas for policy makers, industry, and consumers to promote reliable and 
sustainable supplies of critical minerals
The picture that emerges from the analysis in previous chapters is a 
complex one. It shows some commonalities across the critical 
minerals examined, notably in the combination of rising demand and 
high concentrations among suppliers. However, it also highlights the 
specificities of the outlook in each case, with different sources of 
strain and opportunities for growth and for substitution. 
This final chapter reflects on four broad themes that apply, to a 
greater or lesser extent, to all of the minerals examined. These areas 
constitute an agenda for future work by policy makers and industry 
as they seek to ensure reliable and sustainable supplies of critical 
minerals: 
 
Investment in diversified supply. Long-term security of supply 
is typically a question of adequate investment, but in the case of 
critical minerals it is not only the adequacy of supply that matters 
but also the diversity. It can be very challenging for new entrants 
to gain a foothold in markets with well-established incumbents. 
This section looks at the financing options open to governments 
that are seeking to encourage or de-risk investments in diversified 
sources of supply.  
 
 
Recycling, innovation, and behavioural change. Strategies for 
critical minerals security sometimes have an imbalanced focus on 
expanding supply, but measures to temper demand are essential. 
Recycling creates a valuable secondary source of minerals that 
relieves the pressure on primary supply; technology innovations 
have proven potential to ease strains on the supply side; and 
behavioural issues and consumer preferences can have strong 
implications for vehicle and battery sizes, and therefore on 
mineral requirements. 
 
Market transparency. Transparency of pricing and market 
information brings important benefits to all aspects of the supply 
chain, but for the moment these aspects remain weak for many 
critical minerals. This section considers options to improve the 
quality of information available to market participants, including 
moves towards market-based price discovery. 
 
Sustainable and responsible supplies. As production of critical 
minerals expands, it will be crucial to ensure that projects do not 
come at the expense of the people involved or result in local 
environmental damage. This section discusses how the benefits 
associated with mineral production, such as revenue and jobs, 
can be felt by producer countries and communities.
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 224  
4. Implications 
Investment in diversified supply 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 225  
4. Implications 
Major capital investment is required across all minerals to meet demand in climate-driven 
scenarios 
Capital requirements for mining to meet 2040 demand in the APS and NZE Scenario  
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
Notes: Capital requirements for the APS and NZE Scenario are calculated based on compiled capital intensity by region and production route. The values also 
assume an increased average capital intensity over today due to declining ore grades. 
Source: IEA analysis based on data from S&P Global and company reports.
 200
 400
 600
 800
APS
NZE
Cobalt
Rare earths
Lithium
Nickel
Copper
Billion USD (2023)
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 226  
4. Implications 
The NZE Scenario requires around USD 800 billion of investment in mining between today and 
2040
Capital requirements to meet climate goals 
Large amounts of investment will be required to develop new supply 
sources to meet the required demand for critical minerals in climate-
driven scenarios. For mining, we estimate that approximately USD 
590 billion is required in new capital investments between now and 
2040 in the Announced Pledges Scenario (APS). As the Net Zero 
Emissions by 2050 (NZE) Scenario sees faster deployment of clean 
energy technologies, total capital requirements are about 30% higher 
at USD 790 billion over the same period (excluding sustaining capital 
expenditure). 
The largest investment among the critical minerals is in copper. 
Capital requirements to 2040 for copper mining are USD 330 billion 
in the APS and USD 490 billion in the NZE Scenario. These amounts 
reflect not only the significant levels of demand, but also escalating 
capital requirements per tonne of ore caused by declining ore quality. 
Although all minerals face this challenge, it is more acute in mature 
and established markets such as copper. Nickel sees the second-
largest levels of capital spending (USD 160 billion to 2040 in the NZE 
Scenario), followed by lithium (USD 80 billion). Lower but still 
significant amounts of investment are also needed for new refining 
and smelting facilities. Part of these increases in capital investment 
need to be made in a way that fosters a more diversified array of 
supply sources in the future.  
Key financing challenges  
Financing diversified critical mineral supply chains faces numerous 
challenges, primarily stemming from two underlying factors: high 
input costs and long-term price uncertainty. 
Supply-side cost inflation, driven by rising energy prices and declining 
resource quality over the past few years, have persisted even as 
commodity prices have dropped in recent years. Rising interest rates 
have further elevated capital costs for producers. As a result, margins 
have been reduced across the board, impacting operations at each 
stage of the value chain. During periods of weak prices, these factors 
led some producers across many commodities to reduce or defer 
spending on mines as well as midstream assets.  
Increasingly stringent environmental, social and governance (ESG) 
requirements have also influenced project costs in some advanced 
economies, making these assets less competitive compared with 
those in countries with lower regulatory standards. 
Although the volatile, cyclical nature of commodity prices is well 
understood by market participants, the policy focus on ramping up 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 227  
4. Implications 
the supply of critical minerals for the energy transition has been 
challenged by record price volatilty and persistent supply chain 
disruptions. Investors and producers have thus been reluctant to 
commit to large projects without sufficient confidence in the long-term 
business case for new and more diversified assets. 
The lack of transparent pricing for many minerals contributes to this 
uncertainty. Although price discovery for metals such as nickel and 
copper takes place on liquid exchanges, pricing of lithium, cobalt and 
graphite, among other materials, still relies upon bilateral contracts 
that are surveyed and reported by price reporting agencies (PRAs) 
(see section on market transparency). Uncertainty over capital costs 
exacerbates the challenges facing project developers. For instance, 
in recent years, several lithium raw material development projects 
experienced a more than 50% increase in estimated capital intensity 
between 
pre-feasibility 
studies 
or 
preliminary 
economic 
assessments, and definitive feasibility studies.  
Diversified refining and processing projects face additional 
challenges due to their limited pricing power, especially for non-
integrated assets, relative to powerful incumbents. Positioned 
between the raw materials and the downstream value chain, projects 
are exposed to a cost and revenue squeeze and need to navigate the 
price volatility between raw material prices and downstream 
component prices. Price hedging has often proved challenging in 
relatively small and illiquid markets. Many projects being developed 
in geographically diverse regions have a higher-cost profile than 
those in today’s dominant regions: for example, several coated 
spherical graphite projects under development in advanced 
economies have more than twice the capital intensity of those in the 
People’s Republic of China (hereafter “China”). Without specific 
government measures to reinforce the investment case, consumers 
and investors typically do not assign much value to diversification, so 
such projects often face major challenges in mobilising the necessary 
capital. Moreover, many companies that aim to develop new refining 
and processing projects in diversified regions are small in size with 
limited track records, making it challenging to mobilise debt financing 
at affordable rates.  
Government investment vehicles 
Governments can intervene in various ways to help finance more 
diversified value chains. These interventions can come from four 
main sources: government departments and policy banks, sovereign 
wealth funds (SWF), development finance institutions (DFI), and 
export credit/insurance agencies (ECA). These agencies may 
engage directly with private sector firms, through state-owned or 
backed enterprises, in a hybrid fashion, or in partnership with foreign 
counterparts. They have a number of policy options available to them 
that range from direct debt or equity investments to indirect financial 
support and de-risking measures that boost competitiveness. 
While there are often significant overlaps in the remits and 
capabilities of many of these institutions, they are differentiated in 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 228  
4. Implications 
their strategic focus, risk tolerance, and the time horizon of their 
investment decision-making, as outlined in the table at the end of this 
section. The support they provide can be either in the form of capital 
expenditure (capex) financing, operating expense (opex) support, 
and/or risk mitigation.  
Capex financing support 
The vast majority of financial support mechanisms for the critical 
minerals sector have focused on large upfront capital expenditures. 
These include finance for the construction of mines, refineries and 
processing plants, and factories. These transactions, like those in the 
private sector, can contribute to various parts of the capital stack – 
as loans, equity stakes, or grants.  
In the United States, the Department of Energy Loan Programs Office 
(LPO) has to date authorised more than USD 5 billion in conditional 
loan commitments for domestic minerals projects. Among these, the 
USD 2.26 billion conditional loan for Lithium Americas’ Thacker Pass 
mine is the largest public commitment for a single project.  
The French government, through the General Secretariat for 
Investment (SGPI), invested EUR 500 million as the anchor investor 
in a EUR 2 billion critical minerals fund managed by InfraVia, an 
infrastructure asset manager. In contrast to the approach taken by 
the US LPO and International Development Finance Corporation 
(DFC), which has invested directly in specific projects and 
companies, this investment relies on the external fund manager to 
identify the opportunity set and capitalise on them in alignment with 
French government policy.  
Opex support 
In addition to capex support, opex support measures are also 
adopted in ensuring the long-term bankability of projects given the 
decades-long investment horizons associated with planning, 
operating, and decommissioning. By lowering operating costs 
associated with mineral extraction and processing and helping 
stabilise long-term cash flows, higher-cost operations can improve 
economic competitiveness, thus helping the aim of diversification.  
One of the most prominent policy initiatives for supply chain 
diversification is the Inflation Reduction Act (IRA) in the United 
States. The use of various tax credits on both the supply and demand 
sides have led to significant investment in the downstream domestic 
supply chain as well as the formation of agreements with free-trade 
agreement-compliant upstream suppliers. In addition to investment 
support through capital cost tax credits (48C), there are also 
production cost credits (45X) which provide 10% production tax credit 
for critical mineral processors. These forms of opex support can be 
effective in improving the business case to stimulate new investment, 
but require more policy commitment as they incur sustained financial 
burden over the long term.  
Despite the attractiveness and importance of ongoing financial 
support mechanisms, their long-term nature also makes them more 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 229  
4. Implications 
sensitive to political headwinds. This is in contrast to direct capex 
financing mechanisms, where committed loans and disbursements 
cannot easily be clawed back after a change in administration. 
Risk mitigation and ancillary services 
A third group of financial measures comprises options that are 
intended to de-risk investments and crowd in other investors, rather 
than directly subsidising or financing projects. Common strategies 
include offering loan guarantees to reduce the financial risk for private 
investors by providing a sovereign backstop, insuring transactions 
against counterparty risks that may not be available at a reasonable 
rate from commercial insurers, and directly lowering the cost of debt 
by bridging the gap between rates available to public institutions and 
the firm or project seeking funding.  
These services are often offered by ECAs, which typically have 
expertise in risks associated with complex, multi-jurisdictional 
projects, in addition to or as an alternative to direct financing options. 
For instance, the Korean Export and Import Bank, as part of the 
government’s five-year plan to support battery supply chains, has 
increased the maximum loan size from 40% of the owner’s equity to 
50%, in addition to a preferential rate up to 120 basis points (bps) 
lower. Furthermore, the Korea Trade Insurance Corporation has 
announced an insurance policy discount of up to 20% in addition to 
increases in loan guarantees available.  
In 2022, Canada’s Critical Minerals Strategy introduced the 30% 
Critical Mineral Exploration Tax Credit (CMETC) aimed at helping 
companies raise equity capital by incentivising investors with tax 
benefits associated with flow-through shares. This functions by 
allowing investors to claim a tax deduction equivalent to a portion of 
exploration expenditures incurred by the company.  
The CMETC acts in parallel with, but cannot be claimed in addition 
to, the existing Mineral Exploration Tax Credit (METC) of 15%. The 
METC, originally set to expire in March 2024, was extended to March 
2025. The Prospectors and Developers Association of Canada 
estimates that flow-through share financing contributes over 65% of 
the funds raised on Canadian stock exchanges for exploration across 
the country. These tax credits do not subsidise upstream companies 
directly, but serve to encourage equity investment during the high-
risk exploration phase.  
Policy implications 
Many of these policy intervention tools (outlined in the table at the 
end of this section) are intended to support national or regional 
strategies to decrease the geographic concentration of critical 
mineral supply chains. This can involve developments in either 
domestic projects or foreign projects with strategically aligned states.  
Government departments and policy banks typically focus their 
spending on domestic projects and firms. For those without domestic 
reserves, DFIs and ECAs are the preferred vehicle given their 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 230  
4. Implications 
specific mandate for foreign transactions. SWFs and policy banks 
with broad investment mandates are not common in advanced 
economies seeking to diversify their critical minerals supply chains, 
but there are examples elsewhere. For example, the Saudi Public 
Investment Fund, which has a wide-ranging mandate to actively 
invest over the long term to maximise sustainable returns, has taken 
an active position in global critical mineral supply chains as a financier 
of domestic and foreign projects.  
Financial support from public agencies and institutions not only 
directly supports investments in projects, but may also serve three 
important but indirect functions: intergovernmental policy signalling to 
mitigate potential geopolitical risks, crowding in private capital, and 
freeing up funds for redeployment.  
Given the financial challenges associated with supply chain 
diversification, there are several aspects to consider when countries 
introduce policy intervention tools to support financing. First, 
cross-agency coordination. The multiple risks associated with mineral 
value chains – geopolitical, financial, environmental, etc. – mean that 
the expertise of various departments and agencies is required to 
ensure that investments meet domestic and international guidelines. 
Furthermore, investment mandates of agencies such as government 
policy banks and DFIs often overlap but without a specific mandate 
to focus on mineral security. Coordination and information sharing 
between agencies can contribute to strategic alignment, ensuring 
efficient allocation of resources.  
Second, tailored, fit-for-purpose investments. Given the numerous 
policy options available, investments in critical mineral supply chains 
should be tailored to meet specific strategic objectives, such as 
reducing import dependency, improving environmental sustainability, 
and ensuring the economic viability of domestic resources. A wide 
range of investment structures should be evaluated for their ability to 
address the unique risks at each stage of the supply chain.  
Finally, financial incentives should aim to be synergistic across the 
whole value chain, rather than focusing narrowly on one sector. In 
particular, midstream processing of mined material into intermediate 
products is often lacking the support seen for end-use sectors. 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 231  
4. Implications 
While different public agencies and vehicles have distinct strengths and remits, political 
co-ordination is important in ensuring synergistic efforts  
Public institutions and vehicles that play a role in financially supporting critical minerals value chains 
 
Ministries and programmes 
Sovereign wealth funds 
Development finance 
institutions 
Export credit and insurance 
agencies 
Description 
Government departments that 
develop, implement, and 
finance policies 
State-owned investment funds 
designed to manage and invest 
national wealth 
Organisations that provide 
financial support and expertise 
to development projects, often 
focused on EMDE 
Financial institutions that 
support national exports and 
facilitate international trade and 
investment 
Relative 
risk 
tolerance 
Low-medium: political 
questions on public finances 
lead to greater scrutiny 
Medium-high: asset allocation 
strategies consider potential for 
higher returns 
Medium: EMDE investments 
are associated with higher 
expected loss rates 
Low: safeguarding domestic 
export industries is the priority, 
not returns 
Key use 
case 
Policy alignment and direct 
financial support: aligning 
industrial policies with national 
strategies via broad-based 
domestic investment, including 
in non-industry sectors  
Long-term investment in 
strategic assets: investing in 
domestic and international 
projects across the value chain 
as part of a diversified asset 
portfolio 
Achieving co-benefits in the 
minerals sector: advancing 
more socially and 
environmentally responsible 
supply chains that also 
contribute to policy priorities  
Export facilitation and trade 
financing: assisting domestic 
companies in competing 
internationally, securing supply 
chains, and accessing new 
markets 
Examples 
of 
institutions 
DOE LPO (US) 
Public Investment Fund (Saudi 
Arabia), Minerals Income 
Investment Fund (Ghana)  
KfW (Germany), US DFC, IFC 
Export Finance Australia 
(Australia), K-Sure (Korea) 
 
Note: EMDE = emerging market and developing economies; DOE = Department of Energy; IFC = International Finance Corporation. 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 232  
4. Implications 
A range of policy options can be deployed to address various financing challenges associated 
with each segment of the value chain  
Financial policy options available for promoting investment in critical mineral supply chains  
 
 
Policy option 
Description 
Typical size 
(USD million) 
Examples 
Capex financing 
1 
Grants 
Non-repayable awards, usually to 
support capital projects 
1-100 
Australia: International Partnerships in Critical Minerals 
Grants (AUD 40 million) 
US: DoD grants to Albermarle for lithium production (USD 
90 million) and processing plants (USD 150 million) 
2 
Concessional 
loans 
Loans with favourable rates and/or 
repayment terms 
100-1 000 
US: DOE LPO loan to Lithium Americas (USD 2.26 billion) 
3 
Equity 
investments 
Taking stakes in key minerals 
projects with risk-sharing 
10-100 
France: SGPI investment in equity fund (EUR 500 million) 
US: DFC stake in TechMet (USD 75 million) 
Germany: KfW raw materials fund (EUR 1 billion) 
Opex 
support 
4 
Tax credits 
Reductions in tax liability in 
exchange for investment or 
production targets 
N/A 
US: Inflation Reduction Act 45X (10% of production cost) 
5 
Reduced 
royalties 
Increasing the operating income 
margin of the asset 
Australia: Western Australia nickel royalty assistance 
programme (50% rebate for 18 months) 
Risk mitigation 
6 
Loan 
guarantees 
Sovereign guarantees on private 
loans to reduce lender risk 
10-100 
Canada: Indigenous loan guarantee programme (CAD 5 
billion) 
7 
Insurance 
products 
Protection against risks that may not 
be covered by commercial insurers 
10-100 
Japan: Loan insurance for procurement and equity 
investment 
8 
Interest rate 
reduction 
Directly lowering the cost of debt for 
borrowers 
N/A 
Korea: KEXIM to lower rates for strategic industries, 
including batteries, by up to 120 bps 
Note: AUD = Australian dollars; DoD = Department of Defense; KEXIM = Korea Export-Import Bank.
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 233  
4. Implications 
Recycling, innovation, and 
behavioural change 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 234  
4. Implications 
Recycled volumes from manufacturing scrap and end-of-life equipment contribute to reducing 
the requirements for primary supply 
Primary supply requirements and projected secondary supply for selected minerals in the NZE Scenario 
 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
Note: Secondary supply of copper does not include direct use of scrap. 
 10
 20
 30
 40
 50
2023
2030
2040
2023 refined product supply
Primary supply requirements (refined)
Secondary supply and reuse
Copper (Mt)
 2
 4
 6
 8
 10
2023
2030
2040
Nickel (Mt)
 400
 800
1 200
1 600
2 000
2023
2030
2040
Lithium (kt Li)
 100
 200
 300
 400
 500
2023
2030
2040
Cobalt (kt)
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 235  
4. Implications 
Technology innovation and demand-side measures can play significant roles in reducing 
mineral demand 
Mineral demand reduction potential for electric vehicle batteries and battery storage, 2030 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
Note: Technology change assumes a higher share of lithium-ion phosphate chemistries and sodium-ion batteries. 
-15%
-10%
-5%
0%
5%
Smaller battery
size
Technology
change
Copper
Silicon
Nickel
Lithium
Manganese
Graphite
Cobalt
Demand reduction in 2030
 200
 400
 600
 800
Supply
 in 2023
NZE demand
 in 2030
Smaller
battery size
Technology
change
Recycling
Case of lithium (kt)
-25%
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 236  
4. Implications 
Scaling up recycling, continued investment in technology innovation, and promoting consumer 
behavioural changes play a crucial role in ensuring the security of mineral supplies
Every country’s strategy on critical minerals will inevitably reflect its 
specific circumstances, but it would be a mistake for such strategies 
to focus only on increased exploration, mining and refining 
investment. A comprehensive approach to security and sustainability 
of supply needs to also address the demand side of the equation, 
which plays a crucial role in narrowing supply-demand gaps while 
simultaneously mitigating the potential environmental and social 
harms associated with resource extraction and use. This 
encompasses elements such as innovation, recycling, behavioural 
measures and rigorous sustainability standards. The importance of 
unlocking the power of technology and recycling has long been a 
theme of IEA analysis and this was one of the key takeaways from 
the first-ever IEA Critical Minerals and Clean Energy Summit in 
September 20231.  
Recycling 
Recycling creates a secondary supply of minerals that relieves the 
pressure on primary supply from mining and refining. A strong focus 
on recycling can deliver triple benefits: complementing primary 
 
 
1 The IEA will delve deeper into the topic of recycling – covering various topics 
such as battery recycling, industrial scrap and mine waste – in a forthcoming 
report for the Italian G7 presidency. 
mineral supplies, improving security of supply for regions with limited 
resource endowments and enhancing environmental performance 
and waste management.  
For base metals such as aluminium, recycling practices are well 
established, but this is not yet the case for many energy transition 
minerals such as lithium, nickel (from electric vehicle [EV] and 
storage batteries) and rare earth elements (from wind turbines and 
EV motors). For battery metals, today’s feedstock for recycling is 
dominated by electronic waste and scrap from manufacturing 
processes, but this is set to change by the end of the decade as the 
first generation of electric vehicles reach the end of their life. Globally, 
around 30 GWh of spent electric car batteries is expected to be 
available for recycling by the end of the decade. 
While recycling would not eliminate the need for continued 
investment in new supplies, we estimate that by 2040, recycled 
quantities of copper, lithium, nickel and cobalt from clean energy 
applications could reduce primary supply requirements for key 
minerals by 10-30%. The security benefits of recycling can be far 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 237  
4. Implications 
greater for regions with wider deployment of clean energy 
technologies due to greater economies of scale. A strong example of 
the environmental benefits comes from the aluminium industry, 
where recycling of post-consumer scrap has been shown to reduce 
emissions by 90% compared with primary aluminium. Furthermore, 
recent studies show that total GHG emissions for manufacturing a 
nickel-rich lithium-ion battery cell can be around 28% lower if made 
from recycled materials rather than virgin minerals. 
Recovering minerals from mine waste, also known as tailings 
reprocessing, is a growing area of interest. As ore grades decline, 
larger amounts of wastes are generated during mining, increasing the 
economic and environmental cost of tailings management. 
Advancements in processing technologies mean that some tailings 
have grades comparable to currently economical ore deposits. Thus, 
reprocessing can have various benefits: revenue opportunities, water 
recovery and environmental impact mitigation.  
Technology and innovation 
Technology advances also have a major role in alleviating potential 
supply strains. For example, significant reductions in the use of silver 
and silicon in solar cells over the past decade have contributed to a 
spectacular rise in deployment of solar PV. For grids, our projections 
indicate that deploying high-voltage direct current transmission lines 
more widely in electricity networks has the potential to shrink their 
material demand by 3% in 2030 and 10% in 2050. Similarly, a 
sensitivity case covering an accelerated global adoption of lithium-
iron phosphate chemistries and sodium-ion batteries could reduce 
mineral demand for EV batteries by around 13% in 2030 and 18% in 
2050 compared to the NZE Scenario’s base case. 
Behavioural changes 
Energy demand depends on the behavioural choices of millions of 
consumers worldwide. Behavioural changes are actions that energy 
consumers take to reduce wasteful or unnecessary energy 
consumption. Many of these changes take place as part of daily life, 
and involve using energy differently or using less of it. These changes 
depend in part on individual choices and evolving socio-cultural 
norms. However, it is systemic transformations brought about by 
targeted and well-designed policy interventions that count most in 
changing consumer behaviour, and these often depend on the 
availability of infrastructure of one kind or another. 
Behavioural changes in the NZE Scenario help to bring about a more 
equitable and just energy transition. But in terms of critical minerals, 
behavioural changes can also imply a more tempered demand that 
can help narrow the demand-supply gap, especially changes in 
behaviour related to transport needs. 
In 2022, electric SUVs accounted for over half of global electric car 
sales for the first time ever and took up 16% of total SUV sales. Such 
a consumer preference is contributing to a further increase in mineral 
demand as SUVs require larger batteries to power them. Behavioural 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 238  
4. Implications 
changes and targeted measures to tame the appetite for SUVs and 
other large vehicles could result in considerable demand reduction 
for battery metals. IEA projections based on these specific sensitivity 
cases show that measures to promote smaller electric cars lead to a 
more than 10% reduction in battery mineral demand by 2030 
projected in the NZE Scenario, compared with a counterfactual case 
where SUV demand continues to grow. In February 2024, the city of 
Paris took measures to moderate the average size of cars on the 
roads by voting for elevated parking tariffs for larger private vehicles. 
Other behavioural measures that can reduce car traffic and thereby, 
not just gasoline demand from internal combustion engine vehicles 
but also demand for battery metals for EVs, include increased share 
of carpooling, active modes of transportation and public transit in total 
road passenger transport. 
The IEA recently showed that, in the case of lithium, the combination 
of smaller EV battery sizes, alternative chemistries and recycling 
could reduce demand for lithium by 25% in 2030 in the NZE Scenario, 
saving an amount similar to today’s production volumes. With these 
reductions, new supplies would need to grow by 20% per year 
between today and 2030. The lithium industry managed to deliver this 
scale of growth in recent years. For example, lithium raw material 
supply grew by roughly 20% per year over the past five years. 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 239  
4. Implications 
Recycling rates for many materials have exhibited limited growth in the past, but growing 
policy attention and the rise of battery recycling are set to change the picture 
Share of secondary supply in total demand for selected materials in the NZE Scenario 
 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
Note: Secondary supply of copper excludes direct use of scrap. 
 
 10%
 20%
 30%
 40%
 50%
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
2035
2040
Aluminium
Copper
Cobalt
Lithium
Nickel
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 240  
4. Implications 
Without the uptake of recycling and reuse, mining capital requirements to meet demand would 
have been a third higher 
Reduced mining capital requirements due to higher recycling and reuse in the APS and NZE Scenario 
  
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
 200
 400
 600
 800
1 000
1 200
APS
NZE
Rare earths
Cobalt
Nickel
Lithium
Copper
Capital requirements
Billion USD (2023)
34%
35%
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 241  
4. Implications 
Much stronger efforts are needed to scale up recycling and ease the strains on mineral supply 
in a net zero pathway 
Global battery recycling capacity surpassed 300 GWh in 2023, of 
which more than 80% was located in China, far ahead of Europe and 
the United States with under 2% each. Many technology developers 
and industry actors are seeking to position themselves in the future 
market for end-of-life EV management and have announced 
considerable capacity expansions. If all announced projects are 
developed in full and on time, global battery recycling capacity could 
exceed 1 500 GWh in 2030, of which 70% is in China, and about 10% 
each in Europe and the United States. The main sources of supply 
for battery recycling plants in 2030 will be EV battery production 
scrap, accounting for half of supply, and retired EV batteries, 
accounting for about 20%. From 2030, end-of-life batteries surpass 
manufacturing scrap as the primary source of recycling. 
Policy measures, including standardisation and alignment of battery 
waste and transportation codes (e.g. for black mass handling and 
cross-border transport to high-quality recyclers), the implementation 
of extended producer responsibility principles for EV batteries, the 
development of comprehensive collection infrastructure, and the 
initiation of information and communication campaigns, all play 
pivotal roles in encouraging the uptake of battery recycling. 
Despite the undeniably significant role of batteries in total mineral 
demand, as the clean energy transition ramps up in almost every 
major region, recycling efforts will need to extend to technologies 
beyond batteries as well. In addition to scaling up recycling 
infrastructure, efforts also need to be directed towards the 
maintenance and repair of products that will enable longer use. 
The share of secondary supply in mineral demand has remained 
fairly stable for the last decade, but this changes rapidly in the NZE 
Scenario. The share of secondary supply for nickel needs to grow 
from around 1% today to 3% in 2030, and that of lithium from 3% to 
5% in the same period. By 2040, secondary supply share of most 
major critical minerals would need to reach at least 15% under the 
NZE Scenario. 
If the share of secondary supply were to stay at today’s levels, capital 
requirements for mining to meet demand in climate-driven scenarios 
would have been a third higher, highlighting the significance of 
recycling in alleviating pressure on primary supply.  
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 242  
4. Implications 
Policies and actions to mitigate increases in demand for critical minerals 
 
Policy area 
Description 
Examples 
Repair, refurbishment and 
remanufacturing 
Extending product lifetimes, reducing 
the need for new production 
• Siemens Gamesa’s lifetime extension programme 
for wind turbines 
Recycling  
Collecting, processing, and reusing 
materials that would otherwise be 
discarded as waste 
• Minimum recycled content requirements, extended 
producer responsibility regulations 
Substitution 
Replacing materials with renewable or 
more sustainable alternatives 
• Chemistry change for EV batteries 
• Adoption of alternative battery technologies 
Material efficiency  
Designing products and processes to 
minimise material use, waste, and 
environmental impact 
• Iridium loading reduction in proton exchange 
membrane electrolyser manufacturing 
• Reduced silicon use in solar PV 
Product-as-a-Service 
Business models that provide services 
instead of selling products 
• Vehicle-sharing schemes to increase utilisation of 
assets 
Behavioural changes 
Encouraging individuals to adopt more 
sustainable habits and practices such 
as reducing consumption 
• Opting for optimal size vehicles than larger cars 
• Reducing private car journeys via public transport 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 243  
4. Implications 
Market transparency 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 244  
4. Implications 
Market transparency brings important benefits to all aspects of the supply chain 
Despite strong expected increases in demand, market transparency 
of commodities such as cobalt, lithium, and rare earth elements 
remains limited, challenging price-hedging and discouraging 
investment and risk assessments. Market transparency covers both 
the question of pricing – including efficient market price discovery 
mechanisms and financial tools to hedge price risks – and 
information – the importance of publicly available data on 
consumption, supply, inventories, trade and ESG performance. 
Transparency of pricing and market information brings important 
benefits to all aspects of the supply chain: producers and consumers 
are able to hedge their price risk, plan their stocks and production, 
and negotiate fair contracts. Merchants and intermediaries are able 
to correct global supply and demand imbalances as efficiently as 
possible. Governments benefit by being able to plan ahead and 
ensure supply continuity. Information transparency enables the 
anticipation of potential risk areas, allowing policymakers to target 
support where it is most needed. 
Price transparency: Tailoring actions to each critical 
mineral’s market maturity level 
The primary element of a well-functioning market for minerals and 
metals is transparency of pricing. Efficient price discovery processes 
provide two main benefits to the market: first, they offer clearer 
market signals, aiding informed investment decisions; second, they 
facilitate the development of financial tools to mitigate risks, allowing 
for hedging by midstream operators (refining, recycling) and 
downstream consumers. 
In a developed, sophisticated market, this means that there is a clear 
“spot” price (i.e. for immediate delivery), as well as a futures price 
curve – i.e. information about prices for delivery months or years into 
the future. While some commodities such as copper and aluminium 
already benefit from established and regulated exchanges with ample 
liquidity, not all critical minerals benefit from such levels of market 
maturity. Many of their markets contend with market concentration, 
insufficient liquidity, and reliance on bilateral contracts. 
There are broadly four stages of development in price transparency. 
Some commodities, such as copper and nickel, are already traded on 
regulated exchanges, where both spot and future contracts can be 
publicly traded – but derivatives can also often be traded outside of 
these exchanges, as over-the-counter (OTC) forward contracts, 
where prices are less easily tracked (see figure below – “Stage 4. 
Established and regulated trading”). For others, such as lithium and 
cobalt, there are signs of growing trade activities at major exchanges, 
while remaining significantly less liquid (“Stage 3. Early-stage 
regulated trading”). Although traded derivatives markets are 
important in assessing market participants’ expectations, OTC 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 245  
4. Implications 
financial contracts are of particular utility in risk management, as they 
allow more effective price hedging.  
For the less liquid markets, market players rely on unregulated spot 
auction platforms (“Stage 2”) or surveys from price reporting agencies 
(PRAs) (“Stage 1”) or other key market actors, who may – or may not 
– meet the principles set out by the International Organization of 
Securities Commissions (IOSCO). The different stages of market 
maturity discussed here are indicative, and each element may face 
different circumstances.  
Market maturity levels for selected minerals 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
 
 
Price data are often much more limited for midstream processing than 
refined material. While for some commodities, such as copper, 
“treatment and refining charges” (the amount mines need to pay to 
smelt concentrate into cathodes) are tracked by agencies, data are 
less available for other commodities. The absence of data on refining 
costs and prices, as well as existing capacities and stockpiles, restricts 
further investments in midstream capacities, and thus their 
diversification. 
Some of the smaller commodities may have structurally insufficient 
liquidity pools for market-based price discovery mechanisms. In these 
cases, policymakers could consider various ways to incentivise or 
encourage contributions by market participants to PRAs’ platforms 
who adhere to the IOSCO principles or their equivalents, or to enhance 
data collection from businesses. Regulated markets also require deep 
liquidity pools for effective price discovery. In this context, 
governments could avoid actions that would further fragment liquidity 
pools. For cobalt and lithium in particular, there is a question as to 
whether physically-deliverable contracts could be possible. This would 
have the advantage of providing stocks data to the market, which gives 
some proxy data to the market as to supply and demand.  
Finally, there is a growing interest in pricing schemes that incorporate 
ESG performance. While many PRAs are introducing new price 
indices, it is uncertain whether these indices would achieve sufficient 
liquidity without policy and regulatory support to encourage consumers 
to consider sustainability aspects in their procurement decisions.  
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 246  
4. Implications 
Classification of commodity markets by maturity level 
 
Stage 1 
Stage 2 
Stage 3 
Stage 4 
 
Survey 
pricing 
Unregulated 
platforms 
Early stage 
regulated 
trading 
Established 
and 
regulated 
trading 
Price 
discovery 
mechanism 
PRAs and 
market 
participants 
PRAs and 
trading 
platform 
Exchange 
Exchange 
Reporting 
frequency 
Monthly 
Weekly-daily 
Instant 
Instant 
Risk 
management 
tools 
Limited to 
bilateral 
agreements 
Futures and 
options with 
financial 
inter-
mediaries 
Traded 
futures and 
options  
Active 
derivative 
markets 
Examples 
Rare earth 
elements, 
graphite 
Platinum, 
palladium  
Lithium, 
cobalt 
Aluminium, 
copper, zinc, 
nickel 
 
Market information transparency 
Understanding critical mineral production and refining also relies both 
on public data and on mining and supply chain actors, with multiple 
benefits: allowing more informed investment decisions, facilitating 
supply risk identification along the supply chain, enabling systematic 
tracking of ESG performance, informing due diligence efforts, 
facilitating audit and verification of claims and ensuring better 
accountability. 
However, information transparency faces significant challenges – 
insufficient publicly available data, particularly on the midstream, 
underlaid by a lack of consensus on what data could or should be 
shared through the supply chain, and further disclosed to the public 
and consumers. 
Some nations already disclose significant data on mining volumes, 
given the economic and social importance of this activity in their 
jurisdictions. Stock exchanges and their regulators, particularly in 
Canada (NI National Instrument 43-101 Standards of Disclosure for 
Mineral Projects) and Australia (Joint Ore Reserves Committee 
[JORC] reporting code), have also played a crucial role in making 
more data on production and reserves of publicly traded mining 
companies accessible. 
Public data initiatives have the potential to offer valuable insights to 
stakeholders in the market. While some disclosures have been made 
under the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI), 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 247  
4. Implications 
countries do not necessarily systematically disclose the information 
even if it is required under EITI. In addition to private disclosures from 
publicly traded companies, efforts are underway to classify and make 
data on resources more readily available, often held by geological 
surveys, with the United Nations Framework Classification for 
Resources (UNFC). 
For refining and trade, public statistics face challenges in portraying 
what is now becoming an essential section of many economies – 
even though they play a critical role in understanding complex supply 
chains. In particular, the Harmonised System (HS) codes can 
facilitate access to trade data for materials of growing importance. 
However, key commodities such as lithium ore, concentrate and 
chemicals or cobalt and manganese sulphates, essential to the EV 
battery, do not yet have harmonised codes, hindering efficient 
tracking of trade flows. 
Likewise, information about regional consumption is relatively lacking 
compared with production volumes, which hampers the granular 
understanding of market balances. All of these underscore the 
necessity of launching efforts to systematically collect reliable data 
consistently, beginning with identifying areas where publicly available 
data are most lacking. 
Traceability tools can also be a technical enabler, though not an end 
goal in themselves. There is a growing interest in decentralised 
databases, but the underlying challenge often lies in defining i) which 
data should be shared to achieve transparency objectives, in what 
frequency; ii) with whom this data should be shared; iii) how 
accountable data producers are; and iv) whether public enforcement 
is necessary to provide adequate incentives and ensure adherence 
to best practices. 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 248  
4. Implications 
Trade analysis is key to identifying bottlenecks in complex supply chains 
Lithium hydroxide supply chain, 2021 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0. 
Notes: Values in kt of elemental Li. Lithium hydroxide supply chain includes trade of lithium-containing commodities (carbonates, ore concentrates) used as inputs for 
hydroxide production.  
Sources: IEA analysis, based on UN Comtrade and Wood Mackenzie.
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 249  
4. Implications 
There is scope to improve codes for trade reporting to better track trade flows of raw and 
refined materials 
World Customs Organization HS codes for criticial mineral trades 
 
Copper 
Lithium 
Nickel 
Cobalt 
Graphite 
Rare earth 
elements 
Manganese 
Mined 
2603.00 (“Copper 
ores and 
concentrates”) 
Included in 2530.90 
("Mineral 
substances not 
elsewhere specified 
or included") 
2604.00 (“Nickel 
ores and 
concentrates”) 
2605.00 (“Cobalt 
ores and 
concentrates”) 
2504.10 and 
2504.90 (“Natural 
graphite”) 
Included in 2530.90 
("Mineral 
substances not 
elsewhere specified 
or included") 
2602.00 
(“Manganese ores 
and concentrates”) 
Processed 
2825.50, 2827.41, 
2833.25 (copper 
chemicals) and 
the complete 74 
chapter ("Copper 
and articles thereof") 
2825.20 (Li oxide 
and hydroxide) 
2836.91 (Li 
carbonates), also 
included in 2805.19 
(“Alkali metals, 
including lithium 
metal”), 2833.29 
(“Sulphates”) and 
2827.39 (“other 
chlorides”) 
2825.40, 2827.35, 
2833.24 (Nickel 
chemicals), 7202.60 
(Ferronickel) and 
the complete 75 
chapter ("Nickel and 
articles thereof") 
2822.00 (Co oxides 
and hydroxides), 
8105.20 (Co mattes) 
and also included in 
2833.29 
(“Sulphates”) 
3801.1 (synthetic 
graphite) and 
3801.2 (natural 
graphite) 
2805.30, 2846.10, 
2846.90 
2820.10, 2820.90 
(manganese oxide 
and dioxide), 
7202.11, 7202.19 
(ferro-manganese),  
8111.00 
(manganese metal) 
and also included in 
2833.29 (sulphates) 
Secondary 
(waste, 
scrap...) 
7404.00 (“Cu waste 
and scrap”) 
 
7503.00 (“Ni waste 
and scrap”) 
8105.30 (“Co waste 
and scrap”) 
 
 
Manganese waste 
and scrap is also 
included in 8111.00 
Notes 
 
EU imports lithium ores 
under domestic code 
25309040, China uses 
a ten-digit code for 
various lithium ores 
(2530909902 for 
spodumene…) 
 
 
No distinction between 
raw and refined 
battery-grade graphite 
in the HS code system. 
EU imports rare earth 
ores under domestic 
code 25309050, China 
under domestic code 
25309020. 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 250  
4. Implications 
Sustainable and responsible 
supplies  
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 251  
4. Implications 
Critical minerals cannot be truly secure, reliable and resilient unless they are also sustainably 
and responsibly produced
The foremost reason to address the ESG risks within the mineral 
supply chain is to protect people, communities and the environment. 
Robust efforts to ensure that supply chains are responsible and 
sustainable will be necessary to ensure that energy transitions are 
people-centred and that the benefits associated with mineral 
production, such as revenue and jobs, are captured in producer 
countries and communities. In parallel, improving the ESG 
performance of mineral supply chains can yield important security-of-
supply benefits.  
In fact, without serious efforts to mitigate the ESG risks associated 
with mineral supply chains, there may not be sufficient supplies to 
support the rapid scale-up of clean energy technologies that is 
needed to reach climate goals and to avert the worst effects of climate 
change. Governments and companies alike have a role in developing 
sustainable and responsible supply chains. While companies may 
champion sustainable and responsible practices and transparently 
monitor progress, governments play a crucial role in incentivising 
corporate action and creating a regulatory environment conducive to 
high ESG standards.  
While there are many ESG risks that can lead to supply disruptions, 
we have identified six priority areas that have particularly important 
implications for security of supply: water, GHG emissions, 
biodiversity, human rights, communities and corruption. Each of 
these risks impacts security of supply in a different way, but broadly, 
failures in these areas can limit market access, create legal barriers, 
discourage investment, damage reputation, increase the likelihood of 
opposition from local communities, and in some cases physically 
prevent projects from operating.  
Critical minerals are often situated in regions characterised by 
elevated water stress. Developing infrastructure that ensures secure 
water access for local communities can help companies prevent 
conflicts where water access is limited. Policy responses that 
encourage water stewardship include conditioning public investment 
to or establishing specific targets for water quality, use and effluents 
that improve over time. 
Companies that do not reduce and report GHG emissions face risks 
to market access and their reputation. Corporate reporting can build 
onto existing standards and external verification to provide 
transparent and credible data. Investment in on-site renewables and 
energy 
efficiency 
can 
help 
drive 
decarbonisation 
efforts. 
Governments can improve or expand GHG reporting requirements 
and ensure that data on emissions are publicly available. 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 252  
4. Implications 
Operations that fail to address biodiversity impacts may face 
regulatory barriers and reputational and investment risks – especially 
for mineral deposits located in key biodiversity areas. Companies can 
minimise land use and related impacts by working on project design 
and implementing technologies tailored to each site. Governments 
can strengthen biodiversity protections in mining regulations and 
permits and improve monitoring and disclosure of biodiversity data. 
Enhancing human rights standards in mining operations can mitigate 
operational disruptions and reduce divestment resulting from human 
rights violations, including child labour and forced labour. 
Corporations 
and 
governments 
can 
enable 
supply 
chain 
transparency by embedding human rights risks in due diligence 
systems or regulatory frameworks, while supporting the continued 
implementation and enforcement of protections.  
Meaningful engagement with local communities and Indigenous 
Peoples can help projects obtain and maintain a social licence to 
operate. This rests on credible local community and Indigenous 
Peoples-led consultation schemes. Free, prior and informed consent 
of Indigenous Peoples and potentially impacted communities is a 
best practice, where not already required by law. 
Reducing corruption and governance risks can facilitate investment 
and strengthen public confidence in mining operations. This can be 
supported by targeted policies and the disclosure of permits, 
licences, and contracts; company beneficial ownership; and 
payments to governments. 
Considering the available levers for action, we have developed five 
key recommendations for policy makers to ensure that critical mineral 
value chains are sustainable and responsible:  
 
Better regulations. Ensure legal and regulatory protections for the 
environment, workers, Indigenous Peoples and communities, backed by 
sufficient means of implementation and enforcement.  
 
Targeted public spending. Channel public spending to encourage the 
development of better practices and to incentivise good performance.  
 
Improved data. Strengthen the collection and reporting of granular and 
standardised data to enable benchmarking and progress tracking 
throughout the supply chain.  
 
Increased transparency. Improve transparency throughout the supply 
chain, including by enhancing traceability, undertaking due diligence and 
reporting publicly on risks and mitigation actions. 
 
Support sustainability standards. Support the development of initiatives 
that help companies demonstrate that their operations are sustainable and 
responsible while ensuring cross-compatibility and interoperability. 
Governments can play an important role in promoting improvements 
by incorporating the recommendations into their policy and 
investment decisions. These five recommendations are cross-cutting 
and can apply to all ESG risks
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 253  
Annex 
Annex 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 254  
Annex 
IEA Critical Minerals Data Explorer
The IEA has integrated critical minerals into its long-term energy 
modelling framework. Last year, alongside the Critical Minerals 
Market Review 2023, the IEA Critical Minerals Data Explorer was 
launched. The explorer is an interactive online tool that allows users 
to easily access the IEA's projection data. This year the data explorer 
has been updated to now include long-term supply projection data as 
well as demand projection data for the key energy transition minerals 
(copper, lithium, nickel, cobalt, graphite and rare earth elements). 
The tool provides users with access to the IEA's demand projection 
results under various energy scenarios and technology evolution 
trends (through various alternative technology cases). Users can look 
up total demand for key energy transition minerals and projected 
mineral demand in the clean energy sector by technology and 
commodity, scenario and technology case. Long-term supply 
projections for the key energy transition minerals are now accessible 
in the tool. Supply projections are based on the project pipeline for 
each mineral in a base case and high production case based on the 
project’s probablity of coming online. 
The numbers are regularly updated to align with the latest energy 
projections. 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 255  
Annex 
IEA Critical Minerals Policy Tracker
The IEA launched the Critical Minerals Policy Tracker in November 
2022, which monitors and analyses the development of policies 
concerning critical minerals. This tool tracks policies across over 35 
countries, starting from an initial dataset of 200 policies and 
expanded to 450 policies by 2023. Updated annually to ensure the 
inclusion of new policies and any amendments, the latest update was 
completed in December 2023. While not exhaustive, this data tool 
provides an overview of the evolving landscape in mineral supply 
chain governance in the context of clean energy transitions.  
The data for the Tracker is primarily sourced from the IEA Policies 
Database, which encompasses an array of government-issued 
policies, laws, and regulations relevant to the energy sector. The 
methodology for data collection for the Critical Minerals Policy 
Tracker includes desk research and stakeholder submissions to 
capture policies in place within each of the focus countries and 
regions. For the 2023 update, a questionnaire was circulated among 
all IEA member countries via the IEA’s Working Party on Critical 
Minerals. Feedback from country delegates and external researchers 
further refines and validates the database entries. 
Policies tracked by this tool are categorised into three key areas: 
ensuring supply reliability and resiliency, promoting exploration, 
production, and innovation, and encouraging sustainable and 
responsible practices. Within each category, policies are further 
divided into five subcategories. This categorisation aids in the IEA’s 
systematic analysis of policy trends and differences across various 
countries and regions, providing stakeholders with insights into the 
global policy approaches to managing critical mineral resources. 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 256  
Annex 
Methodology
Scope 
The critical minerals model, added as a permanent module in the 
Global Energy and Climate (GEC) Model during the 2022 modelling 
cycle, assesses the mineral requirements for the following clean 
energy technologies: 
• 
low-emissions power generation 
o solar PV (utility-scale and distributed) 
o wind (onshore and offshore) 
o concentrating solar power (parabolic troughs and central 
tower) 
o hydropower 
o geothermal 
o bioenergy for power 
o nuclear power 
• 
electricity networks (transmission, distribution, and transformer) 
• 
electric vehicles (battery electric and plug-in hybrid electric 
vehicles) 
• 
battery storage (utility-scale and residential) 
• 
hydrogen (electrolysers and fuel cells) 
All of these energy technologies require metals and alloys, which are 
produced by processing mineral-containing ores. Ores – the raw, 
economically viable rocks that are mined – are beneficiated to 
liberate and concentrate the minerals of interest. Those minerals are 
further processed to extract the metals or alloys of interest. 
Processed metals and alloys are then used in end-use applications. 
While this analysis covers the entire mineral and metal value chain 
from mining to processing operations, we use “minerals” as a 
representative term for the sake of simplicity.  
We focus specifically on the use of minerals in clean energy 
technologies, given that they generally require considerably more 
minerals than their fossil fuel counterparts. Our model also focuses 
on the requirements for building a plant (or making equipment) and 
not on operational requirements (e.g. uranium consumption in 
nuclear plants). 
Our model considers a wide range of minerals used in clean energy 
technologies. They include copper, major battery metals (lithium, 
nickel, cobalt, manganese and graphite), rare earth elements, arsenic, 
boron, cadmium, chromium, gallium, germanium, hafnium, indium, 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 257  
Annex 
iridium, lead, magnesium, molybdenum, niobium, platinum group 
metals, selenium, silicon, silver, tantalum, tellurium, tin, titanium, 
tungsten, vanadium and zinc. 
Steel and aluminium are widely used across many clean energy 
technologies, but we have excluded them from the scope of this 
analysis. Steel does not have substantial security implications and 
the energy sector is not a major driver of growth in steel demand. 
Aluminium demand is assessed for electricity networks only as the 
outlook for copper is inherently linked with aluminium use in grid lines, 
but is not included in the aggregate demand projections. 
For the six key energy transition minerals – copper, lithium, nickel, 
cobalt, graphite and rare earth elements – we model total demand 
including uses in clean energy applications and other segments. 
Consumption outside the clean energy sector has been estimated 
using historical consumption by end-use applications, relevant 
activity drivers (e.g. GDP, industry value added, steel production, 
etc.) and material intensities. 
Demand 
For each of the clean energy technologies, we estimate overall 
mineral demand using five main variables: 
• 
clean energy deployment trends under different scenarios 
• 
sub-technology shares within each technology area 
• 
mineral intensity of each sub-technology 
• 
mineral intensity improvements 
• 
material efficiency measures (recycling, reuse and behavioural 
change) 
Clean energy deployment trends under the Stated Policies Scenario 
(STEPS), the Announced Pledges Scenario (APS), and the Net Zero 
Emissions by 2050 (NZE) Scenario are taken from the projections 
from the World Energy Outlook 2023, adjusted by latest information 
from the Global EV Outlook 2024 and other sources. 
Mineral intensity assumptions were developed through extensive 
literature review and expert and industry consultations, including with 
IEA Technology Collaboration Programmes. The pace of mineral 
intensity improvements varies by scenario, with the STEPS generally 
seeing minimal improvement over time as compared with modest 
improvement (around 10% in the longer term) assumed in the APS 
and NZE Scenario. In areas that may particularly benefit from 
economies of scale or technology improvement (e.g. silicon and silver 
use in solar PV, platinum loading in fuel cells, rare earth elements 
use in wind turbines, copper in buildings), specific improvement rates 
have been applied based on the review of underlying drivers. 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 258  
Annex 
Supply 
For the six key energy transition minerals, primary supply 
requirements have been assessed by deducing projected secondary 
supply from projected total demand.  
Secondary production is estimated with two parameters: the average 
recycling rate and the lifetime of each end-use sector. The recycling 
rate is the combination of the end-of-life collection rate (the amount 
of a certain product being collected for recycling) and the yield rate 
(the amount of material a recycling process can actually recover). For 
emerging technologies such as lithium-ion batteries, we assume 
collection rates increase at a faster pace. For batteries, the collection 
rates gradually increase from around 45% in the early-2020s to 80% 
by 2040 in the NZE Scenario. The yield rate is assumed to vary 
according to the technical limitations for the extraction of each 
mineral using the currently available recycling methods. The reuse 
rates are much lower than the collection rate for recycling as the use 
of second-life batteries (in grid applications) faces many technical 
and regulatory obstacles. Losses from manufacturing processes are 
also taken into account. For primary supply requirements for mined 
materials, a certain level of loss ratio during refining processes is 
assumed. 
Supply projections for the key energy transition minerals are built 
using the data for the pipeline of operating and announced mining 
and refining projects by country. These projections are divided into a 
base case and a high production case, whose categorisation is 
assessed through their probability of coming online based on various 
factors such as the status of financing, permitting and feasibility 
studies. 
We acknowledge the use of data on mining and refining projects from 
various professional information sources such as S&P Global Market 
Intelligence, Wood Mackenzie, Benchmark Mineral Intelligence, and 
Project Blue.
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 259  
Annex 
Mineral-specific clean energy transition risk assessment – detailed evaluation criteria 
 
 
High
Medium
Low
Supply risks
Assessment
methodology
Weight
Expected pace of demand growth
Annual average demand growth rates 
in climate-driven scenarios vis-à-vis 
historical growth rates
10%
Expected pace of growth 
between 2023 and 2030 in the 
APS is over 2 times higher than 
historical growth rates
Expected pace of growth 
between 2023 and 2030 in the 
APS is more than 20% higher 
than historical growth rates
Expected pace of growth 
between 2023 and 2030 in the 
APS is similar or lower than 
historical growth rates
Short-term market balances
Balances between expected supply 
(base case) and primary supply 
requirements in 2026
20%
Expected supply (base case) 
falls short of STEPS primary 
supply requirements in 2026
Expected supply (base case) 
able to meet STEPS primary 
supply requirements in 2026, 
but falls short of APS needs
Expected supply (base case) is 
higher than APS primary supply 
requirements in 2026
Long-term market balances in climate-driven scenarios
Balances between expected supply 
and primary supply requirements in 
2040
30%
Expected supply (base case) 
meets less than 60% of APS 
primary supply requirements in 
2040
Expected supply (base case) 
meets 60-80% of the APS 
primary supply requirements in 
2040.
Expected supply (base case) 
meets over 80% of the APS 
primary supply requirements in 
2040.
Observed price volatility
Historical monthly price volatility 
between 2011 and 2023
20%
Standard deviation of indexed 
historical monthly prices above 
35
Standard deviation of 
historical monthly prices 
between 25 and 35 (range of oil 
and gas)
Standard deviation of 
historical monthly prices below 
25
Impact on clean energy cost
Share of a material in total cost of end-
use technologies
20%
Price spikes could hamper the 
deployment of final 
technologies
Modest impact on final clean 
energy cost
Limited impact on final clean 
energy cost
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 260  
Annex 
 
 
High
Medium
Low
Geopolitical risks
Assessment
methodology
Weight
Geographical concentration of mined supply
Expected share of top 3 producing 
mining countries in 2030
20%
Projected top 3 country share 
remains above 80% in 2030 or 
top 1 country controls more 
than two thirds of global 
l
Projected top 3 country share 
between 65% and 80% in 2030 
or top 1 country controls more 
than 50% of global supply
Projected top 3 country share 
remains below 65% and top 1 
country controls less than 50% 
of global supply
Geographical concentration of refined supply
Expected share of top 3 producing 
refining countries in 2030
30%
Projected top 3 country share 
remains above 80% in 2030 or 
top 1 country controls more 
than two thirds of global 
Projected top 3 country share 
between 65% and 80% in 2030 
or top 1 country controls more 
than 50% of global supply
Projected top 3 country share 
remains below 65% and top 1 
country controls less than 50% 
of global supply
N-1 supply and demand balances
Share of N-1 supply in N-1 material 
requirements in 2030 (refined product 
basis)
15%
N-1 supply serves less than 
35% of N-1 requirements in 
2030 in the APS
N-1 supply serves between 35% 
and 60% of N-1 requirements in 
2030 in the APS
N-1 supply serves over 60% of N-
1 requirements in 2030 in the 
APS
Export risks of major suppliers
Weighted average export restriction 
risk score of today's production 
portfolio both for mining and refining
15%
Weighted average country risk 
score above 4
Weighted average country risk 
score between 2.5 and 4
Weighted average country risk 
score below 2.5
Hurdles to develop new projects in diversified regions
Difficulties in building supply chains 
in geographically diverse regions 
(qualitative)
20%
New capacities involve 
considerably higher capital 
and operating costs (than 
incumbent players) and long 
lead time
Building new capacities needs 
to overcome modest capital, 
lead time and technological 
barriers
Manageable capital, lead time 
and technological barriers.
Barriers to respond to disruption
Assessment
methodology
Weight
Visible stock levels
Visible stock levels in major 
exchanges
25%
Limited visibility in stock levels Possible to monitor visible 
stock levels in major 
exchanges, but volumes are low 
compared to historical average. 
 
 
 
 
Ample visible stock in major 
exchanges
Transparency of pricing schemes
Qualitative assessment of market 
liquidity and transparency of pricing 
schemes
25%
Price reporting driven through 
survey pricing and unregulated 
platforms with limited liquidity
Early stage regulated market 
trading but with limited 
liquidity
Established regulated market 
trading with ample  liquidity
Availability of options to moderate demand
Availability of demand-side and 
technology switching options to 
moderate demand growth in case of 
supply tightness (qualitative)
25%
Limited opportunities to reduce 
demand without sacrificing 
performance
Scope for technology switching 
and behavioural change to 
reduce demand, but requires 
substantial time and cost 
commitment
Viable opportunities to reduce 
demand in a short period of 
time 
Status of secondary supply
Share of secondary supply in total 
supply and potential for growth
25%
Share of secondary supply 
remains low and is not 
improving significantly
Share of secondary supply 
remains low but is improving 
or share remains high but with 
limited improvement
Share of secondary supply 
remains high and is improving
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 261  
Annex 
 
High
Medium
Low
Exposure to ESG and climate risks
Assessment
methodology
Weight
Environmental performance: mining
Weighted average enviromental 
performance score of today's mined 
production
30%
Weighted average 
environmental performance 
score below 40
Weighted average 
environmental performance 
score between 40 and 65
Weighted average 
environmental performance 
score above 65
Environmental performance: refining
Weighted average grid carbon 
intensity of today's refined production
30%
Weighted average grid carbon 
intensity above 460 gCO2/kWh 
(world average)
Weighted average grid carbon 
intensity between  460 
gCO2/kWh and 380 gCO2/kWh
Weighted average grid carbon 
intensity below 380 gCO2/kWh 
(advanced economy average)
Social and governance performance
Weighted average corruption, human 
rights and conflict score of today's 
mined production (based on V-Dem)
20%
Weighted average social and 
governance score below 0.33
Weighted average social and 
governance score between 0.33 
and 0.66
Weighted average social and 
governance score above 0.66
Exposure to natural hazards and climate risks - water 
stress
Share of mines exposed to water 
stress risks
10%
Share of mine production 
located in high, extreme high 
and arid areas equal or above 
50%
Share of mine production 
located in high, extreme high 
and arid areas between 25% 
and 50%
Share of mine production 
located in high, extreme high 
and arid areas below 25%
Exposure to natural hazards and climate risks - 
earthquake
Share of mines exposed to earthquake 
risks
10%
Share of mine production 
located in high and very high 
earthquake risk areas equal or 
above 50%
Share of mine production 
located in high and very high 
earthquake risk areas between 
25% and 50%
Share of mine production 
located in high and very high 
earthquake risk areas below 
25%
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 262  
Annex 
Key projection results 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 263  
Annex 
Copper demand 
 
Historical 
Stated Policies 
Announced Pledges 
Net Zero by 2050 
Unit: kt Cu 
2021 
2023 
2030 
2040 
2050 
2030 
2040 
2050 
2030 
2040 
2050 
Clean energy 
5 380 
6 311 
10 314 
12 188 
12 972 
12 001 
16 343 
17 466 
14 842 
19 636 
19 416 
  Electricity networks 
4 030 
4 171 
5 922 
6 305 
6 124 
6 632 
8 327 
8 158 
7 816 
10 632 
9 471 
  Electric vehicles 
166 
396 
1 645 
3 131 
3 470 
1 870 
4 297 
4 804 
2 612 
4 642 
5 124 
  Solar PV 
694 
1 208 
1 691 
1 684 
1 959 
2 117 
2 049 
2 401 
2 564 
2 245 
2 390 
  Other 
490 
536 
1 055 
1 068 
1 419 
1 382 
1 670 
2 103 
1 850 
2 116 
2 430 
Other uses 
19 548 
19 543 
20 341 
21 997 
24 671 
19 127 
20 036 
22 046 
18 399 
19 434 
21 473 
Total demand 
24 928 
25 855 
30 655 
34 185 
37 643 
31 128 
36 379 
39 512 
33 241 
39 069 
40 889 
Share of clean energy 
22% 
24% 
34% 
36% 
34% 
39% 
45% 
44% 
45% 
50% 
47% 
Notes: Demand is based on refined copper and excludes direct use of scrap. Electric vehicles demand includes both EV batteries and EV motors demand. 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 264  
Annex 
Copper supply  
 
Mining 
 
Refining 
 
Historical 
Base case 
 
Historical 
Base case 
Unit: kt Cu 
2021 
2023 
2030 
2040 
 
2021 
2023 
2030 
2040 
  Chile 
5 660 
5 311 
5 211 
4 053 
  China 
10 383 
11 547 
14 788 
14 788 
  DRC 
2 014 
2 678 
3 183 
2 145 
  DRC 
1 562 
1 978 
2 235 
1 381 
  Peru 
2 282 
2 644 
2 377 
1 067 
  Chile 
2 270 
2 058 
1 719 
1 321 
  China 
1 828 
1 865 
2 128 
1 856 
  Japan 
1 514 
1 499 
1 614 
1 614 
  Russia 
862 
960 
1 215 
1 019 
  India 
497 
549 
1 060 
1 060 
  Indonesia 
753 
863 
948 
861 
  - 
  
  
  
  
  Rest of world 
8 026 
8 187 
7 350 
3 888 
  Rest of world 
8 747 
8 706 
10 506 
9 781 
World 
21 426 
22 508 
22 412 
14 889 
World 
24 973 
26 336 
31 922 
29 944 
Top 3 share 
46% 
47% 
48% 
54% 
Top 3 share 
57% 
59% 
59% 
59% 
 
Note: DRC = Democratic Republic of the Congo. 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 265  
Annex 
Lithium demand 
 
Historical 
Stated Policies 
Announced Pledges 
Net Zero by 2050 
Unit: kt Li 
2021 
2023 
2030 
2040 
2050 
2030 
2040 
2050 
2030 
2040 
2050 
Clean energy 
38 
92 
381 
868 
1041 
442 
1 203 
1 452 
616 
1 308 
1 573 
  Electric vehicles 
35 
83 
347 
808 
964 
398 
1 124 
1 353 
560 
1 206 
1 447 
  Battery storage 
2 
9 
35 
59 
77 
44 
79 
99 
56 
102 
126 
Other uses 
63 
73 
90 
123 
155 
90 
123 
155 
90 
123 
155 
Total demand 
101 
165 
471 
991 
1196 
531 
1 326 
1 607 
705 
1 431 
1 728 
Share of clean energy 
37% 
56% 
81% 
88% 
87% 
83% 
91% 
90% 
87% 
91% 
91% 
 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 266  
Annex 
Lithium supply 
 
Raw materials 
 
Chemicals 
 
Historical 
Base case 
 
Historical 
Base case 
Unit: kt Li 
2021 
2023 
2030 
2040 
 
2021 
2023 
2030 
2040 
  Australia 
50 
84 
146 
128 
  China 
70 
114 
213 
215 
  China 
17 
34 
103 
103 
  Chile 
25 
46 
56 
56 
  Chile 
28 
46 
56 
56 
  Argentina 
7 
9 
47 
40 
  Argentina 
6 
9 
47 
40 
  Australia 
0 
6 
30 
30 
  Zimbabwe 
2 
9 
34 
34 
  US 
0 
1 
17 
18 
  Canada 
0 
3 
20 
20 
  Korea 
0 
0 
4 
5 
  Rest of world 
4 
8 
44 
28 
  Rest of world 
0 
0 
6 
6 
World 
107 
194 
450 
408 
World 
102 
176 
373 
370 
Top 3 share 
89% 
85% 
68% 
70% 
Top 3 share 
100% 
96% 
85% 
84% 
Note: Raw materials cover extraction of lithium from hard rock ore, as well as from clays and brines. Lithium chemicals cover the first production of lithium carbonate, 
hydroxide, sulphates and chlorides, and excludes reprocessing.
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 267  
Annex 
Nickel demand 
 
Historical 
Stated Policies 
Announced Pledges 
Net Zero by 2050 
Unit: kt Ni 
2021 
2023 
2030 
2040 
2050 
2030 
2040 
2050 
2030 
2040 
2050 
Clean energy 
240 
478 
1 585 
2 411 
2 074 
1 953 
3 381 
3 132 
2 794 
3 584 
3 094 
  Electric vehicles 
148 
299 
1 184 
2 081 
1 799 
1 338 
2 862 
2 508 
1 825 
2 921 
2 634 
  Battery storage 
7 
12 
18 
0 
0 
22 
0 
0 
28 
0 
0 
  Other 
85 
166 
383 
329 
274 
593 
518 
624 
940 
662 
460 
Other uses 
2 519 
2 627 
2 866 
3 120 
3 354 
2 802 
2 857 
3 014 
2 776 
2 802 
2 935 
Total demand 
2 759 
3 104 
4 451 
5 531 
5 428 
4 754 
6 238 
6 146 
5 570 
6 386 
6 030 
Share of clean energy 
9% 
15% 
36% 
44% 
38% 
41% 
54% 
51% 
50% 
56% 
51% 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 268  
Annex 
Nickel supply 
 
Mining 
 
Refining 
 
Historical 
Base case 
 
Historical 
Base case 
Unit: kt Ni 
2021 
2023 
2030 
2040 
 
2021 
2023 
2030 
2040 
  Indonesia 
1 005 
1 787 
2 671 
3 278 
  Indonesia 
869 
1 414 
2 028 
2 365 
  Philippines 
390 
391 
345 
157 
  China 
882 
1 065 
965 
964 
  New Caledonia 
168 
210 
247 
201 
  Japan 
192 
204 
264 
230 
  Russia 
205 
194 
215 
191 
  Russia 
120 
158 
165 
165 
  Canada 
175 
194 
156 
97 
  Finland 
65 
138 
207 
207 
  China 
109 
114 
143 
126 
  Canada 
107 
136 
157 
147 
  Australia 
158 
111 
87 
67 
  Australia 
105 
132 
213 
213 
  Rest of world 
438 
450 
441 
322 
  Rest of world 
589 
550 
591 
577 
World 
2 649 
3 451 
4 304 
4 439 
World 
2 929 
3 796 
4 590 
4 867 
Top 3 share 
60% 
69% 
76% 
83% 
Top 3 share 
66% 
71% 
71% 
73% 
Note: Nickel refining includes nickel that is processed into either a metal, oxide, nickel pig iron, ferronickel, or sulphate and excludes outputs from intermediate 
production steps.
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 269  
Annex 
Cobalt demand 
 
Historical 
Stated Policies 
Announced Pledges 
Net Zero by 2050 
Unit: kt Co 
2021 
2023 
2030 
2040 
2050 
2030 
2040 
2050 
2030 
2040 
2050 
Clean energy 
36 
64 
155 
187 
216 
177 
260 
303 
243 
279 
323 
  Electric vehicles 
34 
62 
151 
187 
216 
171 
260 
303 
236 
279 
323 
  Battery storage 
2 
3 
4 
0 
0 
5 
0 
0 
7 
0 
0 
Other uses 
145 
150 
169 
198 
222 
167 
194 
218 
167 
193 
217 
Total demand 
181 
215 
324 
385 
438 
344 
454 
521 
410 
472 
539 
Share of clean energy 
20% 
30% 
48% 
49% 
49% 
51% 
57% 
58% 
59% 
59% 
60% 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 270  
Annex 
Cobalt supply 
 
Mining 
 
Refining 
 
Historical 
Base case 
 
Historical 
Base case 
Unit: kt Co 
2021 
2023 
2030 
2040 
 
2021 
2023 
2030 
2040 
  DRC 
121 
157 
215 
135 
  China 
130 
172 
231 
228 
  Indonesia 
3 
20 
50 
47 
  Finland 
14 
19 
20 
20 
  Russia 
6 
8 
8 
8 
  Japan 
5 
6 
13 
12 
  China 
7 
7 
8 
7 
  Indonesia 
0 
0 
9 
9 
  Australia 
8 
8 
6 
5 
  Canada 
7 
7 
8 
3 
  Philippines 
5 
6 
3 
3 
  Korea 
2 
3 
5 
5 
  Rest of world 
30 
36 
36 
20 
  Rest of world 
18 
18 
28 
28 
World 
179 
240 
326 
225 
World 
176 
224 
313 
305 
Top 3 share 
75% 
77% 
84% 
84% 
Top 3 share 
86% 
88% 
84% 
85% 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 271  
Annex 
Graphite demand 
 
Historical 
Stated Policies 
Announced Pledges 
Net Zero by 2050 
Unit: kt 
2021 
2023 
2030 
2040 
2050 
2030 
2040 
2050 
2030 
2040 
2050 
Clean energy 
532 
1 292 
5 179 
7 053 
4 839 
6 013 
9 839 
6 777 
8 407 
11 222 
7 879 
  Electric vehicles 
495 
1 147 
4 671 
6 148 
3 707 
5 375 
8 629 
5 318 
7 592 
9 668 
6 012 
  Battery storage 
37 
145 
508 
904 
1 133 
638 
1 210 
1 459 
815 
1 555 
1 867 
Other uses 
3 388 
3 340 
4 430 
6 047 
7 648 
4 406 
6 185 
7 955 
4 616 
6 650 
8 473 
Total demand 
3 920 
4 632 
9 609 
13 100 
12 487 
10 419 
16 023 
14 733 
13 023 
17 873 
16 352 
Share of clean energy 
14% 
28% 
54% 
54% 
39% 
58% 
61% 
46% 
65% 
63% 
48% 
Note: Demand is for raw natural flake graphite and synthetic graphite.
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 272  
Annex 
Graphite supply 
 
Mining (natural graphite) 
 
Refined battery-grade supply 
 
Historical 
Base case 
 
Historical 
Base case 
Unit: kt 
2021 
2023 
2030 
2040 
 
2021 
2023 
2030 
2040 
  China 
1 140 
1 320 
1 905 
2 160 
  China 
701 
1 852 
5 125 
6 892 
  Mozambique 
77 
97 
239 
339 
  Japan 
121 
124 
97 
123 
  Madagascar 
82 
66 
269 
223 
  United States 
12 
16 
69 
123 
  Russia 
28 
29 
34 
51 
  Canada 
0 
0 
31 
80 
  Tanzania 
0 
0 
33 
39 
  Sweden 
0 
0 
35 
56 
  Canada 
11 
5 
25 
25 
  Finland 
0 
0 
26 
54 
  Rest of world 
116 
100 
237 
215 
  Rest of world 
41 
45 
99 
153 
World 
1 455 
1 617 
2 742 
3 052 
World 
875 
2 037 
5 481 
7 481 
Top 3 share 
89% 
92% 
88% 
89% 
Top 3 share 
97% 
98% 
97% 
95% 
Note: Refined battery-grade supply includes spherical graphite made from natural flake graphite and synthetic anode production.
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 273  
Annex 
Rare earth elements demand 
 
Historical 
Stated Policies 
Announced Pledges 
Net Zero by 2050 
Unit: kt REE 
2021 
2023 
2030 
2040 
2050 
2030 
2040 
2050 
2030 
2040 
2050 
Clean energy 
11 
16 
40 
48 
57 
46 
64 
78 
62 
72 
80 
  Electric vehicles 
3 
7 
23 
36 
40 
25 
46 
51 
33 
48 
52 
  Wind 
8 
10 
17 
12 
17 
22 
19 
27 
29 
24 
28 
Other uses 
67 
76 
87 
105 
123 
87 
105 
123 
86 
104 
123 
Total demand 
78 
93 
127 
153 
180 
134 
169 
200 
148 
176 
202 
Share of clean energy 
14% 
18% 
31% 
32% 
32% 
35% 
38% 
39% 
42% 
41% 
39% 
Note: Rare earth elements refer only to four magnet rare earths, neodymium, praseodymium, dysprosium and terbium. 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 274  
Annex 
Rare earth elements supply 
 
Mining 
 
Refining 
 
Historical 
Base case 
 
Historical 
Base case 
Unit: kt REE 
2021 
2023 
2030 
2040 
 
2021 
2023 
2030 
2040 
  China 
32 
47 
58 
62 
  China 
53 
70 
81 
86 
  Australia 
4 
5 
19 
20 
  Malaysia 
4 
4 
13 
13 
  Myanmar 
6 
11 
10 
10 
  United States 
0 
0 
4 
4 
  United States 
6 
6 
7 
7 
  Australia 
0 
0 
4 
4 
  Rest of world 
6 
6 
13 
14 
  Rest of world 
2 
2 
5 
5 
World 
55 
75 
107 
114 
World 
59 
76 
106 
110 
Top 3 share 
81% 
85% 
81% 
81% 
Top 3 share 
98% 
98% 
92% 
93% 
Note: Rare earth elements refer only to four magnet rare earths, neodymium, praseodymium, dysprosium and terbium. 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.


Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024 
 
PAGE | 275  
Annex 
Acknowledgements
This report was prepared by the Office of the Chief Energy Economist 
of the Directorate of Sustainability, Technology and Outlooks, in co-
operation with other directorates of the International Energy Agency 
(IEA). Tae-Yoon Kim co-ordinated the work and was the lead author, 
and he designed and directed the report together with Tim Gould, 
Chief Energy Economist. 
The principal authors from across the agency were: Simon Bennett 
(venture capital investment), Eric Buisson (lithium, graphite, market 
transparency), Eléonore Carré (Chinese investment), Amrita 
Dasgupta (clean energy technology, rare earth elements, recycling), 
Shobhan Dhir (EV and batteries, copper, investment), Alexandre 
Gouy (modelling), Alexandra Hegarty (nickel, environmental and 
social issues, investment), Gyubin Hwang (investment, geospatial 
analysis), Yun Young Kim (cobalt, stock and trade), K.C. Michaels 
(environmental and social issues, uranium), Mari Nishiumi (Chinese 
investment), Tomás de Oliveira Bredariol (environmental and social 
issues), Ryszard Pospiech (data), Joyce Raboca (environmental and 
social issues, policy tracking), Jun Takashiro (investment, cost 
analysis) and Wonjik Yang (infographic). Eleni Tsoukala provided 
essential support. 
The report benefited greatly from contributions from other experts 
within the IEA: Laura Cozzi, Pascal Laffont, Joel Couse, Milosz 
Karpinski, Teo Lombardo, Christophe McGlade, Deniz Ugur and 
Michael Waldron. 
Thanks also to Jethro Mullen, Poeli Bojorquez, Curtis Brainard, Astrid 
Dumond, Merve Erdil, Julia Horowitz, Clara Vallois, Lucile Wall, and 
Therese Walsh of the Communications and Digital Office. Erin Crum 
edited the manuscript and Lorenzo Squillace designed the cover. Jon 
Custer and Ivo Letra provided support for the web-based data tool. 
This analysis has been supported by the Clean Energy Transitions 
Programme, the IEA’s flagship initiative to transform the world’s 
energy system to achieve a secure and sustainable future for all, 
particularly through the financial assistance of the Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs of Japan. Thanks also go to the IEA Working Party on Critical 
Minerals and the IEA Critical Minerals Expert Advisory Group who 
provided valuable input to the design of the report. Emissions 
intensity data was provided by courtesy of Skarn Associates. 
Many experts from outside of the IEA provided essential input and/or 
reviewed preliminary drafts of the report. Their comments and 
suggestions were of great value. They include: 
Siyamend Al Barazi 
BGR Germany 
Kwasi Ampofo 
BloombergNEF 
IEA. CC BY 4.0.