U NI T E D NAT I O NS CO NFE R E N C E  ON  T R A D E  A N D  D E VE L OP M E N T
Investment facilitation 
and digital government
2024
World  
investment 
report


2024
World  
investment 
report
U NI T E D NAT I O NS CO NFE R E N C E  ON  T R A D E  A N D  D E VE L OP M E N T
Investment facilitation
and digital government
Geneva, 2024



 
Mention of any firm or licensed process does not imply the endorsement of the United Nations.
 
This publication has been edited externally.
United Nations publication issued by UN Trade and Development.
UNCTAD/WIR/2024
ISBN 978-92-1-003134-9
PDF ISBN 978-92-1-358973-1
   EPUB ISBN 978-92-1-358974-8
Print ISSN 1020-2218
Online ISSN 2225-1677 
Sales no. E.24.II.D.11


World Investment Report 2024
Investment facilitation and digital government
iii
Preface
Investment is the fuel for sustainable development. Closing the SDG and climate financing 
gap will require an estimated $500 billion of international public finance and $500 billion of 
international private finance per year, much of which would be in the form of foreign direct 
investment.
But many developing countries are running on empty. Global and regional crises, trade tensions 
and tighter financing conditions have had a chilling effect on foreign direct investment, which 
remained subdued in 2023 for a second year in succession. Global flows of foreign direct 
investment stagnated at $1.3 trillion. Notably, foreign direct investment in new industrial and 
infrastructure projects in developing countries declined, while new investment in sectors relevant 
to the Sustainable Development Goals fell by more than 10 per cent.
Stagnant SDG investment and insufficient funding is severely hindering implementation of the 
2030 Agenda and the SDGs, particularly in least developed countries. We need urgent action 
to remove obstacles and provide a transparent, streamlined investment climate for sustainable 
development.
This World Investment Report shows that the lacklustre financial flows to developing countries 
are not due to a lack of investment policy efforts. Investment facilitation has become a prominent 
feature of national policies and international agreements. Digital government solutions are 
proliferating, aiding investors and strengthening governance and institutions.
But despite these efforts, finance is not flowing at sufficient scale, due to high interest rates and 
geopolitical conditions. That means we must redouble our efforts.
I urge all decision makers to prioritize the mobilization of sustainable finance at scale. The SDG 
Stimulus we have proposed is a practical and achievable means of delivering this. Our call for 
reform and scaling up of multilateral development banks is intended to significantly increase the 
crowding in of private investment.
I also encourage policymakers to prioritize strengthening investment governance in developing 
countries, to ensure financial flows are directed towards the SDGs. UNCTAD’s recommendations 
for the use of business facilitation and digital government to ease sustainable investment can 
play an important part in achieving these goals.
António Guterres  
Secretary-General of the United Nations


World Investment Report 2024
Investment facilitation and digital government
iv
Foreword
In a world grappling with global and regional crises, the delicate balance of foreign direct 
investment (FDI) hangs precariously. This World Investment Report (WIR) serves as a stark 
reminder that investment, the lifeblood of sustainable development, is not merely a statistic 
but a lifeline for developing nations. It is the fuel that powers progress towards the 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and the  2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.     
The challenges we face are multifaceted and interconnected. Geoeconomic fragmentation 
is reshaping the landscape of global investment. Trade networks are fragmenting, regulatory 
environments are diverging and international supply chains are being reconfigured. These 
shifts create both obstacles and isolated opportunities, with some countries benefiting from 
investments in global value chain-intensive manufacturing while others struggle to participate 
in the global economy.
Overall, however, these trends are leading to a further deterioration of the international investment 
landscape as seen from the developing world. Last year, FDI fell by more than 10 per cent 
globally, and by 7 per cent in the developing world. International project finance, crucial for 
infrastructure development, was particularly hard hit, falling by 26 per cent. Prospects for 2024 
remain challenging, with weakening growth prospects and continuing trade and geopolitical 
tensions.
Furthermore, the WIR reveals a crisis in SDG investment, with a more than 10 per cent decrease 
in 2023. Two sectors, agrifood systems and water and sanitation, registered fewer internationally 
financed projects in 2023 than in 2015, when the SDGs were adopted. This decline, driven by 
tighter financing conditions and a slowdown in sustainable finance markets, underscores the 
need for concerted action to steer investments towards projects that genuinely contribute to a 
sustainable future.
Meanwhile, the mobilization of funds for SDG investment through sustainable finance products 
in global capital markets is still growing but slowing down. Sustainable bonds showed marginal 
growth in 2023, and new inflows in sustainable investment funds dropped by 60 per cent. 
Greenwashing concerns are increasingly affecting investor demand. More broadly, policy action 
is needed to mitigate the risk of a widening backlash against sustainable investment strategies. 
The world needs a robust and credible sustainable finance industry, and no effort must be spared 
to fortify it before it is too late.
But the way we do that must be carefully considered. Policymakers should be mindful of the 
spillover effects of international sustainability reporting standards, particularly on small and 
medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) in developing countries. These SMEs, the engines of inclusive 
growth and job creation, are precisely the ones that need sustainable finance flows the most. 
However they may struggle to meet increased disclosure requirements, potentially affecting their 
market access and participation in global supply chains. Striking a balance between promoting 
transparency and avoiding undue burdens on businesses will be crucial for a sustainable and 
inclusive investment landscape.
Against this complex backdrop, the WIR underscores the importance of investment facilitation 
and digital government as tools to attract and retain investment. By streamlining procedures, 
enhancing transparency and leveraging digital tools such as online single windows, we can 


World Investment Report 2024
Investment facilitation and digital government
v
foster a more conducive investment climate, particularly in developing countries. Furthermore, 
the report emphasizes that digital business and investment facilitation is not merely a technical 
solution; it is a stepping stone towards wider digital government implementation, which can 
address underlying weaknesses in governance and institutions that often hinder investment and 
impede progress towards sustainable development. 
Investment facilitation, while essential, is not a panacea for the challenges facing global 
investment flows. However, it is an undeniable prerequisite for fostering an environment conducive 
to sustainable investment. The proliferation of digital solutions for investment facilitation, as 
highlighted in this report, exemplifies the WIR’s commitment to providing tangible and actionable 
policy recommendations even in the most challenging of times.
As we navigate the complexities of the 21st century, the WIR reminds us that investment is 
not just about capital flows; it is about human potential, environmental stewardship and the 
enduring pursuit of a more equitable and sustainable world. Let us embrace this vision with 
renewed determination, recognizing that the choices we make today will shape the world we 
leave behind for generations to come.
Rebeca Grynspan
Secretary General of UN Trade and Development


World Investment Report 2024
Investment facilitation and digital government
vi
Acknowledgements
The World Investment Report 2024 was prepared by a team at UNCTAD led by Richard Bolwijn. 
UNCTAD team members included Dafina Atanasova, Vincent Beyer, Stephania Bonilla, Julien 
Bornon, Bruno Casella, Joseph Clements, Mathilde Closset, Tiffany Grabski, Frank Grozel, 
Natalia Guerra, Hamed El Kady, Anastasia Leskova, Massimo Meloni, Anthony Miller, Bita 
Mortazavi, Abraham Negash, Yongfu Ouyang, Marios Pournaris, Ian Richards, Diana Rosert, 
Amelia U. Santos-Paulino, Changbum Son, Astrit Sulstarova, Yihua Teng, Claudia Trentini and 
Kee Hwee Wee.
Research support and inputs were provided by Ciman Araleh, Gregory Allan Auclair, Weijia Hu, 
Oktawian Kuc, Corli Le Roux, Noé Michon, Elisa Navarra, Nelson Pérez, Lucas Ricardo, Lauren 
Satterthwaite, Prachi Sharma, Kjartan Sorensen, Rick van der Maas and Vanina Vegezzi. 
Comments and contributions were provided by colleagues in UNCTAD: Kiyoshi Adachi, 
Rodrigo Carcamo, Marco Fugazza, Ebru Gökçe-Dessemond, Poul Hansen, Igor Paunovic, 
Luisa Rodriguez, Mesut Saygili, Dawei Wang and Anida Yupari, as well as the Office of the 
Secretary-General. 
Statistical assistance was provided by Mohamed Chiraz Baly, Kerem Bayrakceken and Bradley 
Boicourt. IT assistance was provided by Chrysanthi Kourti.
The manuscript was copy-edited by Lise Lingo. The design of the charts and infographics, and 
the typesetting of the report were done by Maria Teresa Arrigoni and Matteo Oldani. Production 
of the report was supported by Elisabeth Mareschal and Katia Vieu.
At various stages of the preparation of the theme chapter, including the peer review, brainstorming 
meetings and discussions in the margin of the UNCTAD Investment and Enterprise Commission 
meeting on Investment Facilitation for Sustainable Development, the team benefited from 
comments and inputs received from external experts: Yasser Abbas, Isiaka Abdulqadir Imam, 
Axel Berger, Alejandro Encinas Nájera, Najwa Halaseh, Archie Kariuki, Olga Lucia Lozano, Victor 
Matassi, Ugo Panizza, Deniz Susar, Camilo Trigueros, Chhime Tshering, Ingmar Vali, Christian 
Volpe Martincus, Dana Akram Abdallah Al Zoubi, and Juwang Zhu.
The team is grateful for advice, input and comments received from numerous officials in central 
banks, national government agencies, international organizations and non-governmental 
organizations.


World Investment Report 2024
Investment facilitation and digital government
vii
Explanatory notes
The terms country and economy as used in this report also refer, as appropriate, to territories 
or areas. In addition, the designations of country and economy groupings are intended solely 
for statistical or analytical convenience and do not necessarily express a judgement about the 
stage of development reached by a particular country or area in the development process. The 
major country and economic groupings used in this report follow the classification of the United 
Nations Statistical Office: 
•	
Developed economies: the member countries of the OECD (other than Chile, Colombia, 
Costa Rica, Mexico and Türkiye), European Union member countries that are not OECD 
members (Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus, Malta and Romania) plus Albania, Andorra, Belarus, 
Bermuda, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Liechtenstein, Monaco, Montenegro, North Macedonia, 
the Republic of Moldova, the Russian Federation, San Marino, Serbia and Ukraine, plus the 
territories of Faroe Islands, Gibraltar, Greenland, Guernsey and Jersey. 
•	
Developing economies: in general, all economies not specified above. For statistical 
purposes, the data for China do not include those for Hong Kong Special Administrative 
Region (Hong Kong SAR), Macao Special Administrative Region (Macao SAR) or Taiwan 
Province of China. 
Throughout the report, data on investment trends for the Netherlands refer only to the 
Netherlands; information for Aruba, Curaçao and Sint Maarten is reported separately. 
Methodological details on FDI and MNE statistics can be found on the report website (https://
unctad.org/topic/investment/world-investment-report). 
The following symbols have been used in the tables: 
•	
Two dots (..) indicate that data are not available or are not separately reported. Rows in 
tables have been omitted in those cases where no data are available for any of the elements 
in the row. 
•	
A dash (–) indicates that the item is equal to zero or its value is negligible. 
•	
A blank in a table indicates that the item is not applicable, unless otherwise indicated. 
•	
A slash (/) between dates representing years, e.g., 2020/21, indicates a financial year. 
•	
Use of a dash (–) between dates representing years, e.g., 2020–2021, signifies the full period 
involved, including the beginning and end years. 
•	
Reference to “dollars” ($) means United States dollars, unless otherwise indicated. 
Annual rates of growth or change, unless otherwise stated, refer to annual compound rates. 
Details and percentages in tables do not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.


World Investment Report 2024
Investment facilitation and digital government
viii
Abbreviations
AfCFTA
African Continental Free Trade Area
ASEAN
Association of Southeast Asian Nations 
ASYCUDA
Automated System for Customs Data
AIFF
ASEAN Investment Facilitation Framework
BIT
bilateral investment treaty
CDP
Carbon Disclosure Project
CEPA
Comprehensive Economic Partnership 
Agreement
COVID-19
coronavirus disease 2019
ECT
Energy Charter Treaty
EGDI
eGovernment Development Index
ESG
environmental, social and governance
EVs
electric vehicles
FDI
foreign direct investment
FTA
free trade agreement
GDP
gross domestic product 
GER
Global Enterprise Registration
GHG
greenhouse gas
GSFO
Global Sustainable Finance Observatory
GVC
global value chain
ICC
International Chamber of Commerce
ICSID
International Centre for Settlement of Investment 
Disputes
ICT
information and communications technology
IFD
Investment Facilitation for Development
IFRS
International Financial Reporting Standards
IIA
international investment agreement
IMF
International Monetary Fund
IPA
investment promotion agency
IPFSD
Investment Policy Framework for Sustainable 
Development
ISDS
investor–State dispute settlement
ISSB
International Sustainability Standards Board 
IT
Information technology
LDC
least developed country 
LLDC
landlocked developing country
M&As
mergers and acquisitions
MNE
multinational enterprise
MSMEs
micro-, small and medium-sized enterprises
NAFTA
North American Free Trade Agreement
OECD
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development
OFDI
outward FDI
OFIO
Office of the Foreign Investment Ombudsman
OHCHR
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for 
Human Rights 
OIC
Organisation of Islamic Cooperation
PPF
public pension fund
PPP
public–private partnership
SDGs
Sustainable Development Goals
SEZ
special economic zone
SIDS
small island developing States
SIFA
sustainable investment facilitation framework
SMEs
small and medium-sized enterprises
SPAC
special purpose acquisition company
SWF
sovereign wealth fund
TIP
treaty with investment provision
TNI
Transnationality Index 
UN DESA
United Nations Department of Economic and 
Social Affairs
UNCITRAL
United Nations Commission on International 
Trade Law
UNCTAD
United Nations Conference on Trade and 
Development
UNEP
United Nations Environment Programme 
UNIDROIT
International Institute for the Unification of Private 
Law
UNODC
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
USMCA
United States–Mexico–Canada Agreement
WASH
water, sanitation and hygiene
WIR
World Investment Report
WTO
World Trade Organization


World Investment Report 2024
Investment facilitation and digital government
ix
Table of contents
Executive summary.
.......................................................................... xi
Chapter I
International investment trends.
....................................................... 1
A. Foreign direct investment......................................................... 3
1. Global trends.
................................................................................. 3
2. Trends by geography.
..................................................................... 5
3. Trends by project type and sector.
............................................... 21
B. Investment in the Sustainable Development Goals.
................ 29
C. International production.
......................................................... 34
1. Key indicators of international production.
................................... 34
2. Internationalization trends of the largest MNEs.
........................... 36
3. Shifting investment patterns among the top 100 MNEs.
.............. 38
Chapter II
Investment policy trends................................................................. 45
A. National investment policies................................................... 47
1. Overall trends.
.............................................................................. 47
2. Policy measures more favourable to investors.
............................ 50
3. Policy measures less favourable to investors.
.............................. 55
4. Outward foreign direct investment policies.................................. 60
B. International investment policies............................................ 65
1. Trends in international investment agreements............................ 65
2. Trends in investor–State dispute settlement.
................................ 73
Chapter III
Sustainable finance trends.
............................................................. 77
A. Sustainability-themed capital market products.
...................... 79
1. Sustainable bond markets........................................................... 79
2. Sustainable funds.
........................................................................ 85
B. Sovereign and public institutional investors.
........................... 88
1. Sustainability integration strategies and practices.
...................... 90
2. Sustainability disclosure.
.............................................................. 93
C. Policies, regulations and standards........................................ 96


World Investment Report 2024
Investment facilitation and digital government
x
ONLINE ONLY: Regional Trends
Africa
Developing Asia
Latin America and the Caribbean
Structurally weak, vulnerable and small economies:
Least developed countries (LDCs) 
Landlocked developing countries (LLDCs) 
Small island developing States (SIDS)
1. International sustainability reporting standards.
........................... 96
2. Policymaking at national and regional levels .
............................ 102
Chapter IV
Investment facilitation and digital government........................... 107
A. Introduction.
.......................................................................... 109
B. Progress on digital investment facilitation worldwide........... 113
1. The wider digital government context........................................ 113
2. The spread and quality of business portals.
............................... 115
3. Foreign investor-specific online procedures.
.............................. 119
4. Portal ownership and the role of IPAs........................................ 122
C. Facilitation in national and international investment policies.
125
1. National policies.
........................................................................ 125
2. International investment agreements......................................... 129
D. The impact of investment facilitation and digital government.134
E. From online business facilitation to digital government........ 140
1. The basic architecture of digital government services............... 140
2. Effective implementation.
........................................................... 142
3. Connecting with wider digital government................................. 145
F. Conclusions and policy implications.
..................................... 150
References..................................................................................... 153
Annex tables.
.................................................................................. 156


World Investment Report 2024
Investment facilitation and digital government
xi
Executive summary
International investment trends
Global foreign direct investment (FDI) in 2023 decreased marginally, by 2 per cent, to $1.3 trillion. 
This headline figure was affected by wild swings in financial flows through a small number of 
European conduit economies; excluding the effect of these conduits, global FDI flows were more 
than 10 per cent lower than in 2022.
The global environment for international investment remains challenging in 2024. Weakening 
growth prospects, economic fracturing trends, trade and geopolitical tensions, industrial policies 
and supply chain diversification are reshaping FDI patterns, causing some multinational enterprises 
(MNEs) to adopt a cautious approach to overseas expansion. However, MNE profit levels remain 
high, financing conditions are easing and increased greenfield project announcements in 2023 
will positively affect FDI. Modest growth for the full year appears possible.
International project finance and cross-border mergers and acquisitions (M&As) were especially 
weak in 2023. M&As, which mostly affect FDI in developed countries, fell by 46 per cent in value. 
Project finance, important for infrastructure investment, was down 26 per cent. Tighter financing 
conditions, investor uncertainty, volatility in financial markets and – for M&As – tighter regulatory 
scrutiny were the principal causes of the decline.
Greenfield investment project announcements provided a bright spot. Project numbers increased 
by 2 per cent, with the growth concentrated in manufacturing, interrupting a decade-long trend 
of gradual decline in the sector. Furthermore, growth was concentrated in developing countries, 
where the number of projects was up by 15 per cent. In developed countries new project 
announcements were down 6 per cent.
In developed countries, the 2023 trend was strongly affected by MNE financial transactions, 
partly caused by moves to implement a minimum tax on the largest MNEs. FDI flows in Europe 
jumped from negative $106 billion in 2022 to positive $16 billion because of volatility in conduit 
economies. Inflows to the rest of Europe were down 14 per cent. Inflows in other developed 
countries also stagnated, with a 5 per cent decline in North America and sizeable falls elsewhere. 
FDI flows to developing countries fell by 7 per cent to $867 billion, mainly due to an 8 per 
cent decrease in developing Asia. Flows fell by 3 per cent in Africa and by 1 per cent in Latin 
America and the Caribbean. The number of international project finance deals fell by a quarter. 
Greenfield project announcements in developing countries increased by more than 1,000, but 
these projects were highly concentrated; South-East Asia accounted for almost half, West Asia 
for a quarter and Africa registered a small increase, while Latin America and the Caribbean 
attracted fewer projects.
•	
FDI inflows to Africa declined by 3 per cent in 2023 to $53 billion. Greenfield announcements 
included several megaprojects, including the largest announcement worldwide – a green 
hydrogen project in Mauritania. International project finance fell by a quarter in number of 
deals and by half in value, negatively affecting prospects for infrastructure investment.
•	
FDI in developing Asia fell by 8 per cent to $621 billion. China, the second largest FDI 
recipient in the world, saw a rare decline in inflows. Sizeable declines were recorded in India 
and in West and Central Asia. Only South-East Asia held steady. Industrial investment in 


World Investment Report 2024
Investment facilitation and digital government
xii
Asia remains buoyant, as shown by greenfield announcements, but the global downturn in 
project finance also affected the region.
•	
Flows to Latin America and the Caribbean were down 1 per cent, at $193 billion. The number 
of international project finance and greenfield investment announcements fell, but the value 
of the latter increased because of large projects in commodity sectors and critical minerals, 
as well as in renewable energy, green hydrogen and green ammonia.
•	
FDI flows to the structurally weak and vulnerable economies increased. FDI inflows to the 
least developed countries (LDCs) rose to $31 billion, or 2.4 per cent of global FDI flows. 
Landlocked developing countries and small island developing States also saw increased 
FDI. In all three groups, FDI remains concentrated among a few countries. International 
project finance is relatively more important in the poorest countries, which are therefore 
disproportionally affected by the global downturn in this form of investment.
Industry trends showed lower investment in the infrastructure and digital economy sectors, but 
strong growth in the global value chain-intensive sectors of manufacturing and critical minerals. 
Weak project finance markets negatively affected infrastructure investment, and digital economy 
sectors continued their slowdown after the boom ended in 2022. Global value chain-intensive 
sectors, including the automotive, electronics and machinery industries, grew strongly, showing 
the effect of supply chain restructuring pressures. In critical minerals extraction and processing, 
investment project numbers and values nearly doubled.
Global economic fracturing trends are affecting the investment strategies of manufacturing 
MNEs. The investment behaviour of the top 100 non-financial MNEs shows that, since 2019, the 
geographical distribution of manufacturing projects, especially in strategic sectors, has shifted 
towards locations closer to major MNE home markets in Europe and the United States. West 
Asia, North Africa and Central America are emerging as strategic locations for manufacturing 
MNEs. 
International investment in sectors relevant for the Sustainable Development Goals in developing 
countries declined in 2023. Growth in greenfield project announcements, especially in renewable 
energy, power and transportation, pushed up the numbers. In value terms, Goals investment 
in developing countries fell because of the downturn in international project finance, used for 
larger projects in infrastructure sectors. Project numbers in agrifood systems and in water and 
sanitation were lower than they were in 2015 when the Goals were adopted. Goals investment is 
also unequally distributed. The shares of global Goals investment projects attracted by Africa and 
by Latin America and the Caribbean are smaller than their shares in all projects. Only developing 
Asia attracts above-average Goals investment.
Investment policy trends
The number of investment policy measures adopted in 2023 was 25 per cent lower than in 
2022 but still in line with the five-year average. Most measures, 72 per cent, were favourable to 
investors. The overall balance between favourable measures (liberalization, promotion, facilitation) 
and less favourable ones (restrictions on entry and operation) was unchanged.
Developing countries mostly aim to promote and facilitate investment, whereas developed 
countries lean towards more restrictive measures. In developing countries, 86 per cent of 
measures were favourable to investors. In developed countries, 57 per cent of measures were 
less favourable to investors. Most of these concerned restrictions to address national security 
concerns. 
Investment facilitation and incentives were the main types of measures favourable to investors 
in both developed and developing countries. Facilitation measures reached almost 40 per cent 


World Investment Report 2024
Investment facilitation and digital government
xiii
of favourable measures and 30 per cent of all measures – a record. For incentives, the services 
sector and renewable energy were the primary focus in 2023.
Heightened caution towards foreign investments in critical sectors persisted in 2023. The 
introduction or expansion of FDI screening mechanisms accounted for nearly half of the measures 
less favourable to investors. Four additional countries implemented FDI screening in 2023, with 
several more expected to follow in 2024. Countries that conduct FDI screening now account 
for over half of global FDI flows and three quarters of FDI stock.
FDI restrictions also increasingly affect outward FDI. Outward FDI policies have evolved over 
the past decade, reflecting the growing importance of both sustainability and geopolitical 
considerations in shaping investment policies. 
In 2023, countries and regions concluded 29 new international investment agreements (IIAs). 
Traditional bilateral investment treaties accounted for fewer than half of the new treaties; most 
were broad economic agreements with investment provisions. 
Efforts to reform the IIA regime are continuing. New treaties tend to include features aimed at 
safeguarding the right to regulate and they increasingly cover a broader range of issues, including 
investment facilitation. The recent finalization of the Investment Facilitation for Development 
Agreement by participating members of the World Trade Organization may provide further 
impetus for this trend.
Reform of the stock of old-generation IIAs continues to be slow. About half of the global stock 
of FDI is still covered by IIAs that have not been reformed, which expose countries to higher 
risk of investor–State dispute settlement cases. This share is about two thirds for developing 
countries and closer to three quarters for LDCs. Only 16 per cent of global FDI stock is today 
covered by a new-generation IIA; reform efforts have so far had a limited effect on mitigating the 
risk of ISDS, especially in the poorest countries.
The total ISDS case count reached 1,332, with 60 new arbitrations initiated in 2023. About 
70 per cent of new cases were brought against developing countries, including three LDCs. 
International investors in the construction, manufacturing and extractive sectors accounted for 
over half of the claims in 2023.
UNCTAD continues to play a leading role in facilitating IIA reform. It launched the Multi-Stakeholder 
Platform for IIA Reform during the UNCTAD World Investment Forum to chart the way forward 
towards an investment regime that puts sustainable development at its core.
Sustainable finance trends
The sustainable finance market continues to grow, but there are clear signs of a slowdown. In 
2023, the value of sustainable investment products, encompassing bonds and funds, increased 
by 20 per cent to more than $7 trillion. However, much of the increase was driven by cumulative 
issuance and rising valuations, and some segments of the market struggled.
Sustainable bonds showed marginal growth. Issuance climbed 3 per cent to $872 billion, bringing 
the outstanding value of the market to more than $4 trillion. Green bonds were the main driver 
of growth, while issuance in other segments, especially social bonds, fell.
Sustainable funds experienced strong headwinds. Despite continued growth in the number of 
funds and asset values, net inflows dropped from $161 billion in 2022 to $63 billion in 2023. In 
the principal markets, funds in Europe lost growth momentum and those in the United States 
saw significant net outflows, exceeding those of the broader fund market.
Greenwashing poses the most significant challenge to the sustainable fund market. The average 
net exposure of green funds to climate-positive assets (low-carbon assets minus fossil fuels) is 


World Investment Report 2024
Investment facilitation and digital government
xiv
only about 20 per cent, and fewer than 5 per cent of these funds are free from oil and gas assets. 
Further systemic efforts are needed to tackle greenwashing, including well-defined product 
standards, robust sustainability disclosures, external auditing and third-party ratings.
Institutional investors made progress on sustainability reporting, but significant gaps remain. 
In 2023, 58 of the top 100 sovereign wealth and public pension funds monitored by UNCTAD 
reported on their sustainability performance, up from 55 in 2022. Only a quarter of reporting 
funds used third-party verification.
Institutional investors are not moving fast enough to reorient portfolios. Most reporting funds 
have set out strategies to address climate change. However, only one in three have set a target 
for fossil fuel divestment and investment in renewables.
Governments in both developed and developing economies are accelerating sustainable finance 
policymaking. In 2023, 35 economies tracked by UNCTAD, covering the world’s largest financial 
markets, introduced 94 new measures and initiatives, up from 63 in 2022. Policy measures 
mostly concerned disclosure rules, new national strategies, frameworks and guidelines, and 
(financial) sector- and product-specific requirements. 
Developing countries are becoming increasingly active in sustainable finance policymaking. They 
accounted for about 60 per cent of new policy measures in 2023. These measures were mostly 
concentrated in the largest developing economies or financial centres. Developing countries 
as a group continue to face challenges in leveraging sustainable finance, as evidenced by the 
persistently low sustainable investment flows.
International standards will have significant spillover effects. The new disclosure standards issued 
by the International Sustainability Standards Board and the European Union will affect firms 
based outside the main financial markets for which they were primarily developed. Companies in 
developing countries that are part of the supply chains of firms in those markets will face greater 
pressure to meet higher sustainability standards, and compliance may become a prerequisite 
for market access.
A key policy challenge is to avoid widening resistance to sustainable investment strategies in 
financial markets and – more broadly – to sustainability and disclosure requirements. In the 
United States, 17 states have passed legislation prohibiting fund managers from considering 
environmental, social and governance factors in their investment decisions or prohibiting states 
from contracting with asset managers that exclude certain industries, such as fossil fuels, from 
their portfolios. For firms worldwide, the complexity and compliance costs associated with 
sustainability reporting are a growing concern.
Investment facilitation and digital government
Investment facilitation has emerged as a top priority for investment policymakers worldwide. 
Since the publication of the UNCTAD Global Action Menu on Investment Facilitation in 2016, 
an international agreement on investment facilitation for development has been negotiated, 
facilitation has become a mainstay in regional and bilateral trade and investment agreements, 
and national implementation efforts have proliferated. 
Business and investment facilitation have become central to both private sector development 
and FDI attraction in developing countries. Making it easier to establish and operate a business 
not only attracts foreign investors but also improves the business environment for local firms, 
supporting the formalization and growth of micro, small and medium-sized enterprises.


World Investment Report 2024
Investment facilitation and digital government
xv
At the core of facilitation efforts are information provision, transparent rules and regulations, and 
streamlined administrative procedures. Because these elements revolve around information and 
procedures, digitalization is central to their effective implementation.
Business and investment facilitation have thus led to a wave of digital government initiatives, 
including information portals and online single windows. Such initiatives now make up a 
significant share of national investment policy measures monitored by UNCTAD; modern IIAs 
also increasingly encourage digitalization to implement commitments. 
The number of digital facilitation tools has grown significantly in recent years, and their quality 
has improved. UNCTAD data show that the number of national government information portals 
for business and investor registration in developing countries increased from 82 in 2016 to 124; 
in developed countries, it increased from 43 to 48. In developing countries, the number of online 
single windows – which allow for multiple procedures to be carried out online – increased from 
13 to 67 in the same period; in developed countries it increased from 12 to 28. The quality of 
portals has also improved, with some in LDCs rivaling those in developed countries, showing 
that leapfrogging opportunities exist. 
Challenges remain in building, maintaining and enhancing digital platforms. Despite progress, 
issues such as outdated information, portal closures and “single window dressing” persist. 
Continuous updates, clear ownership and adequate resources are essential for the long-term 
success of digital facilitation platforms. Technical support for developing countries is important; 
the highest-rated portals in LDCs often were created through development assistance.
Digital government tools can have a positive impact on FDI attraction. On average, for each 
additional point in the quality of digital business and investment facilitation portals (in the rating 
methodology of the UNCTAD Global Enterprise Registration initiative), developing countries 
gain about 8 per cent more FDI. This effect is not automatic; it is part of the impact of broader 
investment climate improvements.
Digital business and investment facilitation also boosts formalization and inclusivity. Countries 
that implement digital single windows see substantial increases in small business registrations. 
Many new businesses are established by women, young entrepreneurs and populations outside 
urban centres, indicating that platforms improve access to services, even in countries with a 
significant digital divide.
Governments should adopt a comprehensive approach to digital investment facilitation, avoiding 
dedicated processes for investment procedures. Progressively incorporating all mandatory 
procedures for business establishment, such as business registration, tax and social security, 
and operating licenses, helps capture economies of scale and scope and ensures that benefits 
extend to all firms, foreign and domestic, large and small. 
Digital business and investment facilitation can be a stepping stone for wider implementation 
of digital government. Because the basic architecture of digital government solutions is 
fundamentally the same across many types of services, platforms can gradually extend 
beyond the core mandatory procedures for investor entry and business establishment. Other 
administrative procedures affecting business operations may be sector specific or cover policy 
areas ranging from the environment to health and safety, labour and social issues. 
Business and investment facilitation provides a bottom-up avenue to digital government 
development. Such an approach, starting from basic services for business – usually the first 
government services to be digitized – and gradually expanding to adjacent policy areas can 
begin in one or a very few public sector entities, does not necessarily depend on major legislative 
interventions, is relatively low cost, and adds immediate value to users and revenue-generating 
potential for government.


World Investment Report 2024
Investment facilitation and digital government
xvi
Such a bottom-up approach provides a valuable complementary route for developing countries. 
The prevailing guidance on digital government implementation favours a top-down approach 
based on a national strategy and supported by a digital government authority. Although central 
steering is necessary to push enabling legislation, budget support and stakeholder engagement, 
it can lead to lengthy and complex programmes that are often too costly for developing countries 
to pursue. Online single windows for businesses and investors can add value quickly and cheaply, 
and gradually expand coverage of services and institutions.
Wider implementation of digital government is a natural complement to investment policy. Online 
information and streamlined processes alone cannot bring the sea change in investment potential 
that is needed in many developing countries. Surveys of investors and investment promotion 
agencies consistently show that weaknesses in governance and institutions are among the 
most important challenges in attracting foreign investment. Digital government, by increasing 
transparency, improving efficiency and reducing corruption, helps address those weaknesses 
and support investment for sustainable development objectives.
The digital tools for business and investment facilitation included in the UNCTAD Digital 
Government Platform are operational in more than 60 countries. Looking ahead, UNCTAD 
will continue to support developing countries and – in collaboration with other international 
organizations – look for opportunities to maximize the benefits of digital government for the 
promotion of investment in sustainable and inclusive development.


Chapter I
International 
investment 
trends


2022
2023
-2%
Europe
North America
Africa
Developing Asia
Latin America and 
the Caribbean
16
361
53
621
193
Regions
FDI value (Billions of dollars)
Growth rates
Greenfeld
projects
FDI
International
project
fnance
..
-5%
-3%
-8
-1%
-8%
0
+7%
+22%
-4%
-25%
-6%
-26%
-25%
-30%
FDI
value
Growth
rates
464
867
31
Developed
Developing
LDCs
Greenfeld projects
(mostly industry)
FDI
International project
fnance (mostly
infrastructure)
Income groups
+9%
-6%
-21%
-7%
+15%
-26%
+17%
+51%
-32%
Infrastructure
 
 
Renewable  energy
 
 
WASH 
 
 
Agrifood systems
 
 
Health and education
+8%
-5%
-17%
+13%
+6%
Infrastructure
 
 
GVC-intensive industries
Semiconductors
Digital economy
 
 
Extractives
0%
+27%
-1%
-46%
-9%
Greenfeld projects
(Number)
Cross-border M&As
(Value)
Industries
(Project numbers)
SDG sectors
(Developing economies, project numbers)
International project fnance
(Number)
FDI
(Value)
2022
2023
-23%
2022
2023
+2%
2022
2023
-46%


Chapter I
International investment trends
3
A. Foreign direct investment
Global foreign direct investment (FDI) flows declined in 2023. 
Investor uncertainty about the state of the economy and the 
potential impact of economic fracturing trends affected flows 
in both developed and developing economies. Tighter financial 
conditions depressed international project finance deals and 
cross-border mergers and acquisitions (M&As). Greenfield project 
announcements increased, potentially signalling better prospects 
going forward. Combining these trends with stabilizing costs of 
finance makes expectations for 2024 moderately positive.
1. Global trends
FDI flows in 2023 amounted to $1.33 
trillion, 2 per cent less than in 2022. The 
headline number was affected by wild 
swings in a small number of European 
conduit economies. Excluding the 
effect of these conduits, global inflows 
declined by more than 10 per cent. 
FDI inflows to developing economies, which 
have been robust over the past few years, 
declined by 7 per cent in 2023. Flows to 
developed economies, net of conduits, 
fell by 15 per cent. They were affected 
by corporate financial reconfigurations 
– driven in part by moves to introduce a 
global minimum tax for large multinational 
enterprises (MNEs) – and by a big drop 
in the value of cross-border M&As. 
M&As, which especially affect FDI in 
developed countries, ended 2023 at 
just over half the value seen in 2022. 
International project finance was also 
weak, with both the number and the value 
of deals down by about a quarter. Tighter 
financing conditions, investor uncertainty, 
volatility in financial markets and – for 
M&As – greater regulatory scrutiny were 
the principal causes of the decline. 
Conversely, greenfield project 
announcements increased marginally, 
in both number and value terms. The 
growth was largely due to increased 
announcements in manufacturing industries, 
in a break with a decade-long trend of 
gradual decline in the sector. Manufacturing 
project announcements by Chinese 
firms were a big contributing factor. The 
gains in greenfield investment occurred 
only in developing countries, where the 
number of projects announced was up 
by 15 per cent (table I.1). In developed 
countries, in contrast, new project 
announcements were down 6 per cent.
Diverging movements in greenfield projects 
and international project finance deals 
reflect the different drivers of investment 
in international production and industry 
(greenfield), on the one hand, and 
infrastructure industries (project finance) on 
the other. They also reflect the sensitivity of 
different investor pools to current financial 
conditions. MNEs have realized large 
profits over the past few years (figure I.1), 
boosting their capacity to finance asset 
expansions, which also explains the rising 
greenfield numbers. Project finance is 


World Investment Report 2024
Investment facilitation and digital government
4
Figure I.1
The profits of the largest multinational enterprises remain high 
Profits and profitability level of the largest firms
Profts (Billions of dollars)
Proftability (Percentage)
1 000
2 000
3 000
4 000
9
6
3
2016
2015
2018
2019
2017
2020
2021
2023
2022
Source: UNCTAD, based on data from Refinitiv.
Notes: Covers 4,388 MNEs for which data were available for every year in the range. Profitability calculated as 
the ratio of net income to total sales.
Value 
(Billions of dollars)
Number 
Economic grouping
Type of investment
2022
2023
Growth (%)
2022
2023
Growth (%)
Developed economies
Greenfield projects
 687
 631
-8
11 112
10 435
-6
International project finance
 728
 562
-23
1 720
1 357
-21
Cross-border M&As
 599
 302
-50
6 710
5 862
-13
Developing economies
Greenfield projects
 622
 749
 20
6 949
8 007
 15
International project finance
 573
 396
-31
1 138
 839
-26
Cross-border M&As
 107
 76
-29
1 053
 855
-19
Table I.1	
Announced greenfield projects, international project finance deals and 
cross-border M&As
Source: UNCTAD, based on information from The Financial Times, fDi Markets (www.fDimarkets.com) and 
Refinitiv.
Abbreviations: M&As = mergers and acquisitions.


Chapter I
International investment trends
5
more dependent on institutional investors 
and on debt financing, both of which are 
more sensitive to capital costs and financial 
market trends. Higher interest rates may also 
lead governments to delay large projects 
as they wait for more favourable terms.
The global environment for international 
business and cross-border investment 
remains challenging in 2024. Economic 
growth is expected to slow (table I.2). 
Global economic fracturing trends, 
trade and geopolitical tensions, 
industrial policies affecting strategic and 
manufacturing sectors, and moves by 
corporates to diversify supply chains 
are reshaping international production 
and FDI patterns. These trends are 
causing some MNEs to adopt a cautious 
approach to overseas expansion. 
Nevertheless, profit levels of the largest 
MNEs remain high, which will continue 
to be reflected in reinvested earnings – a 
significant component of FDI. Furthermore, 
financing conditions are easing after a 
period of high interest rates, which could 
support renewed growth of international 
project finance. The market for M&As 
is expected to recover, although cross-
border transactions may take longer to 
react. The growth in greenfield project 
announcements in 2023 will also affect FDI 
flows as projects are realized over time. 
Overall, although early indicators for the 
first quarter of 2024 are still weak, modest 
growth for the full year appears possible. 
Variable
2021
2022
2023
2024a
Gross domestic product
 6.2
 3.0
 2.7
 2.6
Trade in goods
 10.0
 3.8
-0.6
 2.0
Gross fixed capital formation
 7.4
-2.9
 1.3
 2.8
Foreign direct investment
 64.7
-16.4
-1.8
Memorandum: 
Foreign direct investment value 
(Trillions of dollars) 
 1.6
 1.4
 1.3
Table I.2	
Growth rates of global gross domestic product, gross fixed capital 
formation, trade and foreign direct investment
(Percentage)
Sources: UNCTAD for foreign direct investment, gross domestic product and trade, and IMF for gross fixed 
capital formation.
a Forecast.
2. Trends by geography
a. FDI inflows
In developed economies, financial 
transactions by MNEs led to volatility in 
FDI. Including the effect of conduit flows, 
the headline number for FDI inflows shows 
an increase of 9 per cent (net of conduits, 
FDI declined by 15 per cent) (figure I.2). 
Developed countries accounted for 35 
per cent of global FDI flows. Their share 
has been in gradual decline. The first 
time that they registered less than half 
of global flows was as recent as 2019. 
Nevertheless, developed economies still 
attract the majority of greenfield projects 
and international project finance deals.


World Investment Report 2024
Investment facilitation and digital government
6
Inflows to Europe shifted dramatically, 
from -$106 billion in 2022 to $16 billion in 
2023. Several economies, including Ireland, 
Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Switzerland 
and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and 
Northern Ireland, reported large negative 
numbers when the 2022 and 2023 inflows 
are taken into consideration together. Lower 
negative flows in 2023 had a net positive 
effect on FDI flows of about $180 billion. 
Excluding these countries, inflows to the 
rest of Europe declined by 14 per cent. 
FDI inflows to North America fell, as did 
those to most other developed countries. 
All developed regions experienced a 
sharp downturn in M&A activity, with the 
value of cross-border M&As dropping 
by $300 billion in 2023. The number 
of greenfield project announcements 
decreased by 6 per cent in developed 
economies and the number of project 
finance deals fell by 21 per cent (table I.3).
FDI flows to developing economies 
decreased by 7 per cent, to $867 billion, 
or 65 per cent of global flows. Developing 
Asia, the largest FDI recipient, experienced 
an 8 per cent decline in inflows, driving the 
overall result. Inflows to Africa dropped 
by 3 per cent, while in Latin America 
and the Caribbean they remained flat. 
Figure I.2
Foreign direct investment declined in most regions
Inflows by economic grouping and region
(Billions of dollars and percentage change)
Source: UNCTAD, FDI/MNE database (www.unctad.org/fdistatistics).
2023
1 332
464
16
361
867
1 356
426
-106
379
930
53
54
World
Developed
economies
Europe
North America
Developing
economies
Africa
Per cent
-2
+9
..
-5
-7
-3
7
193
196
Latin America and
the Caribbean
-1
7
621
678
Asia
-8
2022


Chapter I
International investment trends
7
In contrast, inflows to least developed 
countries (LDCs) increased; their share in 
global FDI grew from 2 to 2.4 per cent. 
Greenfield investment in developing 
countries was a bright spot in 2023, with the 
number of announcements increasing by 15 
per cent and values climbing by 20 per cent. 
This partially offset declines in international 
project finance deals, which fell by 26 per 
cent in number and 31 per cent in value. 
The overall number of greenfield projects 
increased by 2 per cent (table I.3). Among 
developed regions, the number of greenfield 
projects held only in North America, which 
was less affected by the downturn in project 
finance deals as well. In other developed 
regions, greenfield project numbers were 
lower. In contrast, almost all developing 
regions saw growth in greenfield projects.
Table I.3	
Number of announced greenfield projects and international project 
finance deals, by economic grouping and region
(Number and percentage)
Announced greenfield projects
International project finance deals
Region/economic grouping
2021
2022
2023
Growth, 
2022–2023 
(%)
2021
2022
2023
Growth, 
2022–2023 
(%)
World
 15 514
 18 061
 18 442
2
 2 500
 2 858
 2 196
-23
Developed economies
 10 438
 11 112
 10 435
-6
 1 496
 1 720
 1 357
-21
Europe
 7 545
 7 676
 7 041
-8
  899
 1 121
  840
-25
European Union
 5 913
 5 990
 5 419
-10
  637
  833
  671
-19
Other Europe
 1 632
 1 686
 1 622
-4
  262
  288
  169
-41
North America
 2 084
 2 491
 2 499
0
  372
  398
  376
-6
Other developed countries
  809
  945
  895
-5
  225
  201
  141
-30
Developing economies
 5 076
 6 949
 8 007
15
 1 004
 1 138
  839
-26
Africa
  558
  775
  830
7
  138
  178
  132
-26
Asia
 3 275
 4 749
 5 798
22
  489
  624
  469
-25
Central Asia
  53
  49
  158
222
  24
  19
  18
-5
East Asia
  713
  597
  703
18
  90
  95
  42
-56
South-East Asia
  861
 1 103
 1 568
42
  157
  237
  135
-43
South Asia
  512
 1 093
 1 167
7
  150
  223
  180
-19
West Asia
 1 136
 1 907
 2 202
15
  68
  50
  94
88
Latin America and the 
Caribbean
 1 241
 1 417
 1 366
-4
  370
  334
  235
-30
Oceania
  2
  8
  13
63
  7
  2
  3
50
Source: UNCTAD, based on information from The Financial Times, fDi Markets (www.fDimarkets.com) and 
Refinitiv. 


World Investment Report 2024
Investment facilitation and digital government
8
The recent pickup in greenfield 
announcements in developing countries 
follows a long period of sluggishness 
and signals a potential recovery (figure 
I.3). Developing countries accounted for 
almost half of all announcements at the 
start of the last decade, but their share 
had gradually fallen to one third by 2020. 
However, developing regions have regained 
momentum over the past few years and 
the number of projects has grown rapidly 
following the pandemic, almost doubling 
from their recent nadir. Developing 
countries now account for 43 per cent 
of greenfield project announcements.
FDI inflows declined for most reporting 
economies. About two thirds of developed 
economies saw declines and about half 
of developing ones. The United States of 
America remained the largest FDI recipient, 
accounting for almost a quarter of the global 
total (figure I.4). China and Hong Kong, 
China account for a further 21 per cent. 
Among the top 20 host economies, the 
largest absolute drops were registered in 
France, Australia, China, the United States 
and India, in that order. Only Singapore 
registered a significant gain. The United 
States was the top destination for both 
greenfield projects and international project 
finance deals. India and the United Kingdom 
also appear in the top five destinations 
for both kinds of FDI. The United Arab 
Emirates gained two places in the ranking 
of top destinations for greenfield projects, 
after entering the top five in 2022.
Figure I.3
Greenfield projects in developing economies are regaining lost ground
Announcements by economic grouping
(Number and percentage)
Source: UNCTAD, based on information from The Financial Times, fDi Markets (www.fDimarkets.com).
Developed
Developing
Share, developing (per cent)
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
0
2 000
4 000
6 000
8 000
10 000
12 000
14 000
47
33
43


Chapter I
International investment trends
9
Figure I.4
Inflows declined in more than half of the top 20 recipients 
Foreign direct investment inflows, top 20 host economies
(Billions of dollars)
Source: UNCTAD, FDI/MNE database (www.unctad.org/fdistatistics) and based on information from The 
Financial Times, fDi Markets (www.fDimarkets.com) and Refinitiv. 
2023
2022
Top fve recipients by number of projects
Greenfeld project announcements
United States (1)
311
332
China (2)
163
189
Singapore (3)
160
141
Hong Kong, China (4)
113
110
France (5)
42
76
Brazil (6)
66
73
Australia (7)
30
63
India (8)
28
49
Canada (9)
50
46
Spain (10)
36
45
Sweden (11)
29
45
Mexico (12)
36
36
Japan (13)
21
34
Poland (15)
29
31
Germany (17)
37
27
Indonesia (18)
22
25
United Arab Emirates (21)
31
23
Chile (26)
21
17
Argentina (27)
23
15
Belgium (31)
23
12
(x) = 2022 ranking
United States
United Arab Emirates
United Kingdom
India
Germany
2 152
1 323
1 184
1 058
1 036
International project fnance deals
United States
India
Italy
Spain
United Kingdom
334
163
116
107
104


World Investment Report 2024
Investment facilitation and digital government
10
i. Developed economies
FDI flows to developed countries increased 
by 9 per cent in 2023, to $464 billion. 
However, large fluctuations and negative 
FDI realizations in several European 
countries with significant conduit FDI flows 
over the past two years complicate the 
picture (figure I.5). Moves to implement 
a minimum tax on large MNEs in 2024 
coincided with a wave of corporate financial 
restructurings and divestments. Net of the 
effect of conduit flows, FDI in developed 
countries was down by about 15 per cent. 
In the United States, FDI inflows declined 
by 6 per cent to $311 billion, with a sharp 
reduction in cross-border M&As, which 
fell by 40 per cent to $81 billion – half 
of the average over the past 10 years. 
Lower deal values in the information 
and communication technology (ICT) 
sector explained much of the decline. 
FDI in Canada increased by 9 per cent 
to $50 billion, but FDI in other developed 
countries, including Australia, Japan and 
the Republic of Korea, dropped sharply. 
In 2023, the value of M&A sales in 
developed countries declined by 50 per 
cent to $302 billion. Most transactions 
were concentrated in a small group of 
countries. Almost half of the M&A targets 
were based in the United States and 
the United Kingdom. Germany, Canada, 
Switzerland and France accounted for 
an additional 30 per cent of deal values. 
Among the top 10 cross-border M&A 
transactions, 6 involved acquisitions by 
investor groups, either with the intent to list 
companies publicly through special-purpose 
acquisition company (SPAC) transactions 
or as part of private equity deals. The 
financial nature of these deals illustrates 
the importance that financing conditions 
have for cross-border M&A trends.
Figure I.5
Foreign direct investment inflows turned negative in parts of Europe due 
to financial restructurings
Inflows to developed economies
(Billions of dollars and percentage change)
Source: UNCTAD, FDI/MNE database (www.unctad.org/fdistatistics).
2023
464
59
-42
361
87
426
-85
-21
379
154
Developed
economies
Other
Europe
European
Union
North America
Other developed
countries
Per cent
+9
..
..
-5
-44
2022


Chapter I
International investment trends
11
The value of greenfield announcements 
in developed economies fell by 8 per 
cent. Notably, after a period of very high 
investment, ICT saw a significant drop 
in project numbers. Conversely, project 
numbers in most other sectors increased, 
particularly in energy and gas supply, 
which rose by more than half. The largest 
greenfield projects are illustrative of 
major trends in international investment. 
Five projects of the top ten relate to 
semiconductor and electronics production, 
reflecting efforts to diversify or de-risk 
supply chains and to promote domestic 
production; firms based in Taiwan Province 
of China were the main investors in three of 
these projects. Four projects pertained to 
renewable energy, three of them in battery 
production. Canada and Japan emerged 
as top destinations for the largest projects, 
accounting for 5 of the 10 largest.
The downturn in international project 
finance deals was widespread across 
most developed economies and industries. 
However, about 80 per cent of the total 
drop in deal values was attributed to just 
three sectors: industrial real estate, power 
and telecommunication. Renewable energy, 
typically the largest sector, registered a 
small gain of 2 per cent, with deal values 
reaching nearly $250 billion out of a total 
of $562 billion. The 10 largest international 
project finance deals in developed 
economies accounted for more than 20 
per cent of the total value of all deals. Most 
of these were in the energy sector, which 
is capital-intensive. The top three deals 
related to renewable energy production, 
but deals for oil and gas projects were also 
significant, constituting another 3 of the 
top 10. Australia emerged as the second 
largest destination for project finance 
deals, by value, after the United States.
ii. Developing economies
FDI inflows to developing economies 
decreased by 7 per cent in 2023, 
mainly owing to a rare downturn in Asia. 
Despite this decline, FDI remained the 
leading source of external financing 
for developing economies, accounting 
for 44 per cent of total financial 
inflows in 2023, with remittances, 
development assistance and portfolio 
investment flows making up the rest. 
Although the number and value of 
announced greenfield projects increased, 
these gains were offset by a sharp drop in 
project finance deals, with their value falling 
by almost $200 billion compared with 2022. 
Cross-border M&A sales typically represent 
a much smaller share of FDI in developing 
countries than in developed ones. Still, 
the value of M&A sales in developing 
economies in 2023 dropped by $31 billion 
(to $76 billion), which explains about half of 
the overall decline in FDI inflows. Despite 
the drop, several large transactions took 
place. The largest M&A sale in 2023 
was a $23 billion stock swap between a 
Vietnamese electric vehicle maker and a 
United States-based SPAC. Singapore 
also registered several multibillion-dollar 
M&A sales, including SPAC transactions.
Most of the growth in greenfield projects 
in developing economies was in 
manufacturing, in terms of both project 
values and numbers. Over the past 
two decades, project numbers in the 
manufacturing sector have gradually 
declined and the services sector has 
become more prominent. The increase in 
2023 was a welcome break in the trend, 
given the importance of manufacturing 
projects for economic growth, industrial 
development and the participation of 
developing countries in global value chains 
(GVCs). In particular, the automotive 
sector registered strong growth. Notable 
projects included a $10 billion expansion 
of Malaysian automaker Proton (foreign 
owned in part by Geely (China)), a $9 billion 
joint venture to establish a battery supply 
chain in Indonesia and a $6.4 billion electric 
vehicle production facility in Morocco. 
While most investment was in Asia, the 
value and number of manufacturing project 
announcements in Africa and in Latin 
America and the Caribbean also grew.
Regional 
trends and 
factsheets on 
developing 
regions 
available 
online


World Investment Report 2024
Investment facilitation and digital government
12
The downturn in international project 
finance deals was widespread across most 
regions and industries. Renewable energy 
projects continued to account for a large 
share of deals in developing economies, 
comprising almost 45 per cent of all 
projects announced. Still, as in developed 
economies, there was a notable decline in 
such deals in developing economies, with 
a 24 per cent drop in the number and a 
31 per cent drop in value. The downturn 
also affected megaprojects. In 2022, five 
renewable energy projects valued at more 
than $5 billion were announced; in 2023, 
there were no deals of this magnitude.
(a) Africa
FDI inflows to Africa declined by 3 per 
cent in 2023, to $53 billion (figure I.6). 
The number and value of project finance 
deals fell, while outcomes for greenfield 
announcements were mixed across 
countries. Cross-border M&A sales, which 
accounted for about 15 per cent of FDI 
inflows to Africa in recent years, remained 
flat at $8.5 billion. European investors 
remain the largest holders of FDI stock in 
Africa, holding three of the top four spots 
(the Netherlands at $109 billion, France at 
$58 billion, the United States at $46 billion 
and the United Kingdom at $46 billion).
The value of greenfield projects announced 
in Africa fell to $175 billion, from $196 billion 
in 2022. However, most countries registered 
increases in project numbers, with the 
overall number of project announcements 
in the region rising by 7 per cent to more 
than 800. If executed, these projects could 
generate an additional 200,000 jobs in the 
region. The largest year-to-year increases 
in project value were in chemicals (to $13 
billion) and electronics (to $7.6 billion), while 
Figure I.6
Foreign direct investment to most regions in Africa declined
Inflows to Africa
(Billions of dollars and percentage change)
Source: UNCTAD, FDI/MNE database (www.unctad.org/fdistatistics).
2023
53
13
13
6
11
7
54
15
13
7
12
9
7
Africa
North Africa
West Africa
Central Africa
East Africa
Southern Africa
Per cent
-3
-12
-1
-17
-3
+22
2022


Chapter I
International investment trends
13
project values for electricity and gas supply 
projects dropped by $33 billion compared 
with 2022. This drop alone explains much 
of the overall decline in greenfield values. 
The region attracts a growing share of 
global megaprojects, with six valued at 
more than $5 billion. The largest greenfield 
announcement for any country in 2023 was 
a green hydrogen project in Mauritania, 
expected to generate $34 billion in 
investment (several multiples of the country’s 
gross domestic product). Several other large 
hydrogen projects were also announced: 
The Suez Canal Economic Zone completed 
agreements for green ammonia and 
green hydrogen projects in Egypt totalling 
$10.8 billion. Three energy producers 
separately announced green hydrogen 
projects in South Africa totalling $7.1 billion, 
and there was substantial investment in 
Morocco as well. Value chains for electric 
vehicles have also prompted investment 
in Africa. Among the largest deals, a 
Chinese manufacturer announced plans 
to establish a $6.4 billion electric vehicle 
battery manufacturing facility in Morocco.
The estimated value of international project 
finance deals in Africa declined by 50 per 
cent in 2023, to $64 billion, following a 20 
per cent drop in 2022. Industries related to 
renewable energy and power generation 
registered large drops in both values and 
numbers. However, momentum continued 
in some parts of the sector. Along with the 
green energy projects mentioned earlier, an 
investor group announced a deal for green 
hydrogen production totalling $4 billion 
in Egypt, and another group is planning 
a $2 billion hydrogen project in Morocco. 
Africa also attracted $10.8 billion in project 
finance for wind and solar electricity 
production, with the largest projects located 
in Egypt, South Africa and Zimbabwe.
The African Continental Free Trade 
Agreement (AfCFTA) Investment Protocol 
adopted in 2023 is expected to contribute 
to growing intraregional FDI. The share 
of intraregional projects, though still 
relatively low, is higher in services and 
selected manufacturing industries (with 
20 per cent of projects by investors from 
Africa) than in resource-based processing 
industries (with only 13 per cent of 
projects originating from the region). This 
indicates the pool of investors undertaking 
projects within the region is large for some 
sectors. Also, there is an opportunity 
to expand intraregional investment in 
processing industries as part of the 
general drive to increase value addition.
(b) Developing Asia
FDI flows to developing Asia receded in 
2023 but remained elevated, at $621 billion 
(figure I.7). The region was by far the largest 
recipient of FDI, accounting for nearly one 
half of global inflows. East and South-
East Asia were the main recipients. Flows 
declined in East Asia, with a significant drop 
in China breaking a decade-long growth 
trend. In South-East Asia, inflows remained 
stable as a result of robust economic growth 
and extensive GVC linkages. The decline in 
flows to West Asia was moderate, whereas 
South and Central Asia registered sizeable 
declines, especially in India and Kazakhstan. 
M&A sales, which usually constitute 10 
to 15 per cent of FDI in developing Asia, 
declined by almost $30 billion in 2023 to 
$57 billion, representing about half of the 
total drop in FDI inflows to the region.
The overall value and the number of 
greenfield project announcements in 
developing Asia increased significantly in 
2023, by 44 per cent and 22 per cent, 
respectively. South-East Asia saw a 42 per 
cent increase in announcements, particularly 
in electronics and vehicle production. 
Projects in these sectors are expected to 
create nearly 145,000 jobs in the region (out 
of an estimated 1.4 million jobs expected to 
be created in developing Asia as a whole). 
Asia continued to attract megaprojects, 
with 6 of the 10 largest projects worldwide 
located in developing Asia, including 4 
in South-East Asia. Indonesia was a top 
destination for announced greenfield 
projects by value. Notable projects 
included upstream investments 


World Investment Report 2024
Investment facilitation and digital government
14
by Chinese glass and solar manufacturer 
Xinyi Group totalling $11 billion. In addition, 
a consortium of European and Indonesian 
companies is developing a $9 billion 
battery supply chain for electric vehicles.
The number of international project finance 
deals in developing Asia declined by 25 per 
cent. West Asia was the only exception; 
total deals there increased to 94 in 2023 
from 50 in 2022, with values growing by 32 
per cent to $57 billion. Saudi Arabia, Türkiye 
and the United Arab Emirates all saw higher 
numbers of deals. Elsewhere in Asia, most 
countries registered lower numbers. An 
important trend in the region as a whole was 
the decline in international project finance in 
renewable energy (along with most industrial 
sectors) and the increase in petrochemicals.
(c) Latin America and the Caribbean
In 2023, FDI in Latin America and the 
Caribbean remained stable, totalling $193 
billion (figure I.8). There was considerable 
heterogeneity across countries. In South 
America, FDI in Argentina, Chile and Guyana 
accelerated. This offset lower values in 
Brazil and Peru. Brazil remains the largest 
recipient in South America. In Central 
America, Mexico accounted for the bulk of 
foreign investment, with stable FDI inflows. 
In the Caribbean, the Dominican Republic 
continued its growth trend, with inflows 
rising 7 per cent year on year. M&A sales, 
which typically account for only a small share 
of FDI in Latin America and the Caribbean, 
declined by $4 billion in 2023, to $11 billion.
The number of announced greenfield 
projects decreased by 4 per cent in 2023, 
and the number of project finance deals 
dropped by 30 per cent. However, the 
estimated value of announced greenfield 
projects increased, primarily driven by 
large projects in Brazil and Chile. Demand 
for commodities and critical minerals 
Figure I.7
Foreign direct investment inflows declined across most of Asia
Inflows to developing Asia
(Billions of dollars and percentage change)
Source: UNCTAD, FDI/MNE database (www.unctad.org/fdistatistics).
2023
2022
621
286
226
36
65
7
678
315
223
58
72
10
Developing Asia
East Asia
South-East Asia
South Asia
West Asia
Central Asia
Per cent
-8
-9
+1
-37
-9
-27


Chapter I
International investment trends
15
continues to drive a large share of 
greenfield investment in the region. The 
primary sector accounted for 23 per cent 
of project values over the past two years, 
compared with less than 10 per cent in 
other developing regions. Investment 
in these industries can be sensitive to 
swings in commodity prices. Investment in 
renewable energy was prominent, with 4 of 
the top 10 announced projects (by value) 
in production of green hydrogen or green 
ammonia. Overall, greenfield projects are 
expected to create more than 300,000 
jobs in the region. Most large projects 
are undertaken by investors from outside 
the region. Only 2 of 19 megaprojects 
valued at more than $1 billion were 
undertaken by MNEs based in the region.
The global slowdown in international project 
finance deals affected most subregions 
and countries in Latin America and the 
Caribbean. Among major FDI recipients, 
only Chile posted higher project numbers 
than in 2022. The downturn affected 
several industries, with renewable energy 
among the worst affected: there were 
40 per cent fewer deals and a $16 billion 
drop in the value of announced projects 
in renewables compared with 2022. 
(d) Structurally weak, vulnerable 
and small economies
While FDI to middle-income developing 
countries has been robust, low-income 
countries and vulnerable groups receive 
a comparatively small share of global FDI 
inflows. They face pressing infrastructure 
needs, so mobilizing external investors 
could help these countries make faster 
progress towards achieving the Sustainable 
Development Goals. In 2023, FDI inflows 
to LDCs increased to $31 billion, or 2.4 
per cent of global FDI flows (figure I.9). 
Comparing that with the LDC share 
in the world population of 14 per cent 
implies large disparities in per capita 
terms. The same is true of landlocked 
developing countries (LLDCs), which 
accounted for 7 per cent of the global 
population but only 1.8 per cent of FDI.
Figure I.8 
Foreign direct investment to Latin America and the Caribbean remained 
stable
Inflows to Latin America and the Caribbean
(Billions of dollars and percentage change)
Source: UNCTAD, FDI/MNE database (www.unctad.org/fdistatistics).
2023
2022
193
143
47
4
196
146
46
4
Latin America and
the Caribbean 
South America
Central America
Caribbean
Per cent
-1
-2
+1
+6


World Investment Report 2024
Investment facilitation and digital government
16
Although project finance deals are a 
small share of all FDI, the typical project 
financed is large. An analysis comparing 
the relative contribution of greenfield 
projects, M&As and project finance deals 
to total announcement values over the 
past 10 years shows that LDCs and 
LLDCs are relatively more dependent 
on international project finance than are 
other developing economies, in terms 
of both numbers and values. For this 
reason, they are more exposed to the 
recent downturn in project finance deals.
(e) Least developed countries
FDI to the 45 LDCs increased 17 per cent 
in 2023, to $31 billion. Flows remained 
concentrated, with the top five recipients 
(Cambodia, Ethiopia, Bangladesh, Uganda 
and Senegal, in that order) accounting for 
about 50 per cent of the total. The growth of 
FDI in LDCs has lagged that of other sources 
of external finance over the last decade, and 
the shares of official development assistance 
and remittances are significantly higher than 
in developing economies overall (figure I.10). 
Nonetheless, FDI is an important source of 
finance for LDCs, as it is often more directly 
targeted to productive capacity creation, 
infrastructure assets and economic activities 
that can support industrial transformation 
and greater participation in GVCs.
The number and value of greenfield 
project announcements in LDCs increased 
substantially in 2023 (by 51 per cent and 
almost 300 per cent, respectively). A large 
part of the jump in values is explained by 
the $34 billion green hydrogen project 
in Mauritania. Excluding this outlier, 
announced greenfield project values rose 
by 51 per cent, to $42 billion. As with 
FDI, just a few countries explain the bulk 
of greenfield project announcements and 
expenditures. Guinea, the Democratic 
Republic of the Congo, Ethiopia, 
Mozambique and Bangladesh (in that 
order) were the leading destinations in 
terms of project values. Combined, these 
countries accounted for about 60 per cent 
of the total project values for LDCs in 2023 
(excluding the outlier deal in Mauritania).
The primary sector has accounted for 
about one fourth of greenfield project 
values in LDCs over recent years. For 
developing countries overall, its share is 
Figure I.9
Inflows in structurally weak, vulnerable and small economies increased
Inflows to least developed countries, landlocked developing countries and small island 
developing States
(Billions of dollars and percentage change)
Source: UNCTAD, FDI/MNE database (www.unctad.org/fdistatistics).
Abbreviations: LDCs = least developed countries, LLDCs = landlocked developed countries, SIDS = small 
island developing States.
2023
2022
31
24
8
27
24
7
LDCs
LLDCs
SIDS
Per cent
+17
+3
+15


Chapter I
International investment trends
17
only about 10 per cent. This highlights 
that LDCs are significantly exposed 
to global commodity cycles, not only 
for trade but also for investment.
International project finance deals in 
LDCs fell by 24 per cent in value and 32 
per cent in number in 2023. The lack of 
project financing for sectors relevant to 
the Sustainable Development Goals was 
particularly acute, with a total of just $14 
billion – a significant drop compared with 
previous years. Over the past decade, 
the number of project finance deals has 
gradually increased, while the number 
of announced greenfield projects has 
declined (figure I.11). Some 32 per cent 
of international investment projects in 
LDCs were initiated using project finance 
in 2022, compared with less than 15 per 
cent in other developing countries. As a 
consequence, although the 2023 downturn 
in project finance affected all countries, 
LDCs were among the worst affected.
Figure I.10	
The composition of financial flows to least developed countries differs 
from that of flows to other developing economies
Shares across categories of external financial flows, 2023
(Percentage)
Sources: UNCTAD FDI/MNE database (www.unctad.org/fdistatistics), IMF balance-of-payments statistics, 
World Bank KNOMAD (Global Knowledge Partnership on Migration and Development) database and OECD.
20
40
60
80
100
44
11
12
34
20
39
41
Foreign direct investment
 
 
Remittances
Developing economies
LDCs
Foreign portfolio investment
Offcial development assistance


World Investment Report 2024
Investment facilitation and digital government
18
(f) Landlocked developing countries
FDI inflows to the 32 landlocked developing 
countries (LLDCs) rose by 3 per cent 
in 2023, to $24 billion. Flows remained 
concentrated in a few economies, with the 
top five recipients (Ethiopia, Kazakhstan, 
Uganda, Mongolia and Uzbekistan, in that 
order) accounting for about 55 per cent of 
total FDI to the group. A large share of FDI 
to LLDCs originates from just a few investor 
countries. China was the home country 
of the largest investors by far in 2022, at 
about $20 billion (with $7 billion of FDI stock 
in Kazakhstan alone); it was followed by 
Thailand, Canada and the Netherlands.
The increase in announced greenfield 
project values was most pronounced in 
manufacturing, where the total jumped 
by $20 billion, in large part because of 
a single $7.7 billion project announced 
for a polyethylene production project in 
Kazakhstan. Overall, the gains in greenfield 
announcements for LLDCs outweighed 
the downturn in international project 
finance deals. Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan 
were the top destinations for greenfield 
projects in 2023, receiving together a 
large share of the total value (53 per cent) 
and number (40 per cent). In addition 
to the polyethylene production project, 
Kazakhstan entered into a power purchase 
agreement with TotalEnergies (France) for a 
$1.4 billion onshore wind farm and battery 
energy storage system. The Uzbekistan 
Government awarded contracts for 
several solar projects, which are expected 
to generate $4 billion in investment. 
The global downturn in the number and 
value of international project finance deals 
affected LLDCs. Overall, the number of 
such deals declined by 33 per cent and 
values were 13 per cent lower than in 
2022. There were a few exceptions. Activity 
picked up in Latin America, mainly in the 
Plurinational State of Bolivia with a string of 
deals for lithium extraction and processing 
that totalled $3.7 billion. In addition, the 
value of deals in renewables increased by 
24 per cent to $15 billion, with projects in 
Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan accounting 
for about half of the total. The largest 
projects in Africa were in copper mining, 
with a $2 billion expansion in Zambia and 
a $1.9 billion acquisition in Botswana. 
Figure I.11	
International project finance deals have become relatively more 
important in least developed countries
Types of international investment in least developed countries
(Number)
Source: UNCTAD, based on information from The Financial Times, fDi Markets (www.fDimarkets.com) and 
Refinitiv.
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
a. Greenfeld projects
Linear trend
b. International project fnance deals
Linear trend


Chapter I
International investment trends
19
(g) Small island developing States
FDI inflows to the 29 small island developing 
States (SIDS) rose by 15 per cent to $8.3 
billion in 2023 – about 0.6 per cent of 
global FDI. Divestments and the resulting 
negative inflows in several countries 
affected outcomes in 2022 more than in 
2023. Putting these cases aside, actual 
growth in 2023 was about 10 per cent. The 
Dominican Republic accounted for more 
than half of FDI inflows to SIDS in 2023. 
Greenfield project announcements were 
up for most SIDS. There were strong gains 
for the transportation and storage sector, 
with project values up by $350 million and 
the number of projects doubling to 10. 
Hospitality accounted for about 30 per 
cent of greenfield projects announced over 
recent years, but values fell by almost 50 
per cent to $930 billion in 2023, with a large 
drop in project numbers as well (down 33 
per cent). Volatility in some sectors reflects 
unusually high investment in 2022 as project 
backlogs resolved following the pandemic.
The number of international project finance 
deals in SIDS increased by 18 per cent in 
2023, and their value also increased strongly. 
With the small number of deals (49 from 
2021 to 2023), a few large deals caused 
major fluctuations. Three distinct investment 
streams explained most deals: renewable 
energy, leisure and hospitality, and oil and 
gas (along with petrochemicals). Maldives 
accounts for most projects in the hospitality 
sector. Other projects were more distributed. 
b. FDI outflows
In 2023, FDI flows from developed 
economies increased by 4 per cent to 
$1.1 trillion. As with FDI inflows, corporate 
restructurings in Europe affected FDI 
outflows. Several investment-hub countries 
with significant conduit FDI reported large 
negative outflows, albeit less negative 
than in 2022 (i.e. a net positive gain). 
Excluding the effect of these conduits, global 
outflows were about 10 per cent lower. 
The United States and Japan were the 
home countries of the largest investors. 
Outward FDI increased by 10 per cent from 
the United States and by 14 per cent from 
Japan, going against the overall trend for 
developed countries. Outward investment 
from European countries fell by 11 per cent 
(excluding five conduit countries). Germany, 
Sweden and Spain are home to large 
outward investors, and outflows declined 
from all three (figure I.12). Conversely, 
FDI outflows from France, another top 
home country for investors, increased by 
about one third. Looking at the 20 largest 
economies by outward FDI flows, those in 
Asia now account for almost half (9 total), 
with the relative ranks of India and Taiwan 
Province of China both rising in 2023.
The value of cross-border M&As originating 
from developed countries dropped by 53 
per cent in 2023 due, in part, to tighter 
financial conditions. The downturn was 
general across developed economies, 
including in Europe, Australia, Canada and 
the United States. Results for greenfield 
projects were more heterogeneous. 
MNEs based in North America reduced 
their number of projects by 18 per cent. 
Numbers were flat in Europe but increased 
for other developed economies.
FDI outflows from developing economies 
slowed by 11 per cent in 2023, to $491 
billion. The decrease was general across 
most regions, except South-East Asia. 
Prospects appear stronger, as greenfield 
projects announced by MNEs based in 
developing countries increased by 23 
percent in number and by 35 per cent in 
value. The value of cross-border M&As 
originating from developing countries – 
which amount to only about one quarter 
of those originating in developed countries 
– was resilient, increasing by 25 per cent. 
In large part, these results were driven by 
a rebound in activity by Chinese MNEs.


World Investment Report 2024
Investment facilitation and digital government
20
Figure I.12
Nine economies in Asia are among the top 20 home economies of 
outflows
Foreign direct investment outflows, top 20 home economies
(Billions of dollars)
Source: UNCTAD, FDI/MNE database (www.unctad.org/fdistatistics).
Note: Negative outflows result from divestments and the repayment of intracompany loans.
2023
2022
(x) = 2022 ranking
184
162
Japan (3)
148
163
China (2)
105
-74
Switzerland (157)
104
106
Hong Kong, China (6)
101
146
Germany (4)
90
83
Canada (8)
72
53
France (11)
63
52
Singapore (12)
47
62
Sweden (10)
35
66
Republic of Korea (9)
30
43
Spain (13)
30
32
Brazil (15)
29
12
Russian Federation (29)
25
16
Taiwan Province of China (22)
22
25
United Arab Emirates (17)
21
25
Malta (18)
16
27
Saudi Arabia (16)
15
6
Denmark (36)
13
15
India (23)
404
366
United States (1)


Chapter I
International investment trends
21
The number of greenfield projects 
announced by Chinese MNEs almost 
doubled compared with 2022, explaining 
half of the total increase for developing 
countries. In part, this doubling reflects the 
project backlog following the pandemic, but 
investment patterns also changed in 2023. 
Most of the increase in projects announced 
by Chinese MNEs were in South-East 
Asia and concentrated in manufacturing 
industries, particularly computers, 
electrical equipment, motor vehicles and 
other transport. The number of greenfield 
projects by Chinese MNEs in developed 
economies was stable, at a relatively low 
level compared with earlier years. Other 
developing countries also contributed 
to the rise in greenfield announcements. 
Greenfield project numbers increased by 
21 per cent for MNEs based in Africa and 
by 18 per cent for those in developing Asia 
(excluding China). The number of greenfield 
projects announced by MNEs in Latin 
America and Caribbean fell 19 per cent.
3. Trends by project type and sector
Greenfield project announcements – 
mostly concentrated in industrial sectors 
– increased in both value and number in 
2023 (figure I.13). The increase in value 
followed already strong growth in 2022, 
fuelled by a few very large announcements, 
including in renewable energy projects. 
Values in both years ended well above the 
average for the last decade. Project finance 
– mostly in infrastructure sectors – declined. 
Greenfeld projects
 International project fnance deals
Cross-border M&As
2014
2016
2018
2020
2022
0
5 000
10 000
15 000
20 000
6 717
18 442
2 196
2014
2016
2018
2020
2022
0
200
400
600
800
1 000
1 200
1 400
1 600
a. Value (Billions of dollars)
b. Number
Figure I.13	
Announced greenfield projects have regained momentum in recent years
Types of investment projects
Source: UNCTAD, based on information from The Financial Times, fDi Markets (www.fDimarkets.com) and 
Refinitiv.
Abbreviations: M&As = mergers and acquisitions.


World Investment Report 2024
Investment facilitation and digital government
22
Infrastructure projects have a significant debt 
component and are thus more sensitive to 
interest rate changes. Total values remained 
high compared with the average before 
2021, when international project finance 
took off. Fewer deals in services, particularly 
in the ICT sector, explain a large part of 
the drop in cross-border M&A values.
a. Project types
i. Greenfield investment
The overall increase in greenfield 
announcements was powered by 
a significant rise in the number of 
manufacturing projects (table I.4). This 
marked a notable departure from the 
long-term decline in manufacturing share. 
Supply chain diversification pressures 
explained much of the increase, with most 
GVC-intensive sectors registering growth. 
Announcements of manufacturing projects 
by Chinese investors in South-East Asia 
accounted for one third of the total increase. 
The announced value of greenfield projects 
rose by 5 per cent to $1.4 trillion – the 
highest level ever recorded – again mostly 
due to the expansion of manufacturing 
projects among developing economies. 
The automotive, metals, petroleum, and 
chemicals sectors all expanded. Only the 
ICT sector registered lower project numbers 
and values, after a period of unusually 
rapid growth between 2020 and 2022.
ii. International project finance
In 2023, the number of international project 
finance deals declined by 26 per cent to 
$958 billion (table I.5). Nevertheless, project 
finance deals have grown over the past 10 
Table I.4	
Announced greenfield projects by sector and top industries
Sector/industry
Value 
(Billions of dollars)
Growth (%)
Number
Growth (%)
2022
2023
2022
2023
Total
1 309
1 380
5
18 061
18 442
2
Primary
 108
 66
-39
 128
 149
16
Manufacturing
 485
 611
26
6 142
7 521
22
Services
 715
 703
-2
11 791
10 772
-9
Top 10 industries in value terms
Energy and gas supply
 381
 365
-4
 586
 879
50
Electronics and electrical equipment
 215
 183
-15
1 200
1 408
17
Information and communication
 129
 110
-14
5 131
3 339
-35
Automotive
 61
 91
50
 729
 977
34
Construction
 69
 72
4
 218
 358
64
Basic metal and metal products
 49
 70
42
 241
 336
39
Transportation and storage
 57
 69
20
 997
1 306
31
Extractive industries
 107
 65
-40
 97
 117
21
Coke and refined petroleum
 18
 58
216
 41
 78
90
Chemicals
 27
 57
111
 488
 590
21
Source: UNCTAD, based on information from The Financial Times, fDi Markets (www.fDimarkets.com).


Chapter I
International investment trends
23
years and are well above their 2015 nadir 
of $400 billion. Following a boom in 2022, 
the number and value of announcements 
in industrial real estate fell sharply, though 
they remain at historically high levels. The 
average cost of debt has substantially 
increased. The most common reference 
rates for deals all increased sharply over 
the course of 2022 and early 2023.
International project finance deals in 
renewable energy – the biggest sector – 
also declined, with a 12 per cent drop in 
announced values in 2023. This mostly 
occurred in developing countries, where 
declines in oil and gas and in transport 
infrastructure were also severe. Both the 
number and the value of public–private 
partnership announcements fell in 2023, 
further contributing to the decline. Over 
the past 10 years, the value of such 
announcements averaged about $65 billion, 
whereas in 2023 the total was $6 billion. 
Similarly, their share in the number of total 
project finance deals averaged about 5 per 
cent but fell to less than 1 per cent in 2023.
iii. Cross-border mergers and 
acquisitions
Cross-border M&A sales were down by 46 
per cent (table I.6). This decline primarily 
derives from the services sector, where 
values dropped by more than half and 
numbers fell by one fifth. A significant part 
of the decline in services occurred in the 
ICT sector, which experienced a boom 
during the pandemic. Both the number 
and the value of cross-border M&As in 
manufacturing remained flat. M&A values 
for the primary sector also normalized after 
quintupling in 2022. The number of M&A 
sales decreased across all major industries 
except for extraction and automobiles. 
The $23 billion reverse merger of VinFast 
Auto in Viet Nam with a SPAC based in 
the United States accounts for a large part 
of the uptick in the automobile sector.
Table I.5	
International project finance deals by top industries
Industry
Value 
(Billions of dollars)
Growth (%)
Number
Growth (%)
2022
2023
2022
2023
Total
1 301
 958
-26
2 858
2 196
-23
Top 10 industries by number
Renewable energy
 418
 368
-12
1 454
1 177
-19
Industrial real estate
 266
 146
-45
 308
 231
-25
Power
 134
 79
-41
 193
 149
-23
Residential/commercial real estate 
 67
 43
-36
 228
 129
-43
Telecommunication
 119
 82
-31
 140
 111
-21
Oil and gas
 93
 72
-22
 114
 103
-10
Transport infrastructure
 52
 33
-36
 111
 81
-27
Petrochemicals
 69
 59
-15
 83
 77
-7
Mining
 42
 47
11
 88
 51
-42
Water and sewerage
 18
 12
-37
 35
 27
-23
Source: UNCTAD, based on data from Refinitiv.


World Investment Report 2024
Investment facilitation and digital government
24
Several factors explain the drop in 
M&A activity overall, including tight 
financial conditions and uncertainty in 
financial markets. Greater scrutiny from 
antitrust bodies and foreign investment 
regulators also affected M&As in the 
United States, the biggest market. 
b. Selected industries
i. Infrastructure
International project finance is the main 
funding source for infrastructure industries, 
and the decline in the value and number of 
project finance deals in 2023 affected this 
sector in particular (table I.7). The number of 
announced greenfield infrastructure projects 
rose, driven by renewables. However, across 
infrastructure industries, the drop in the 
value of project finance deals outweighed 
the gains in greenfield project values.
Most infrastructure projects were in 
renewable energy, constituting more 
than 45 per cent of announcements and 
accounting for 65 per cent of estimated 
project outlays. Both the number of projects 
and the total project value have grown 
rapidly in this category, from fewer than 
700 announcements in 2015 to more 
than 2,000 in 2023. There is evidence that 
investors switch between project finance 
and greenfield FDI as financial conditions 
change. When debt finance is costlier and 
project finance is below trend, greenfield 
project announcements tend to increase.
Table I.6	
Net cross-border M&A sales by sector and top industries
Sector/industry
Value 
(Billions of dollars)
Growth (%)
Number
Growth (%)
2022
2023
2022
2023
Total
 707
 378
-46
7 763
6 717
-13
Primary
 122
 36
-71
 389
 505
30
Manufacturing
 142
 141
-1
1 406
1 431
2
Services
 442
 201
-54
5 968
4 781
-20
Top 10 industries in value terms
Information and communication
 166
 67
-60
1 799
1 432
-20
Extractive industries
 121
 33
-73
 216
 400
85
Chemicals
 15
 32
108
 147
 132
-10
Pharmaceuticals
 36
 31
-12
 169
 129
-24
Automotive
 8
 31
273
 59
 62
5
Professional services
 23
 29
25
 730
 594
-19
Utilities
 18
 18
-5
 279
 229
-18
Trade
 27
 17
-35
 592
 523
-12
Food, beverages and tobacco
 21
 13
-41
 157
 156
-1
Finance and insurance
 88
 12
-87
 602
 539
-10
Source: UNCTAD, based on data from Refinitiv.


Chapter I
International investment trends
25
ii. Global value chain-intensive 
industries
GVC-intensive industries registered a 
significant increase in investment projects 
(table I.8). Greenfield project announcements 
for the automotive, machinery and textile 
sectors were all up. Project values for 
semiconductors declined, but mainly 
after exceptionally high numbers in 2021 
and 2022 as MNEs responded to global 
semiconductor shortages and concerns 
about supply chain bottlenecks. In the 
automotive sector, growth is driven 
by strong demand for hybrid and fully 
electric vehicles, and by several new 
firms entering global markets. The GVCs 
needed to build electric vehicles (EVs) are 
also spurring new investment in mining, 
processing and battery production.
A recent UNCTAD analysis examines how 
economic fracturing is affecting international 
production in GVCs (UNCTAD, 2024d). 
Since the 2010s, GVCs have undergone 
significant restructuring, partially reversing 
the earlier trend towards offshoring. This 
shift has been driven by several factors, 
including technological advancements, 
policy changes, sustainability concerns and 
Table I.7	
Investment project announcements in infrastructure
(Millions of dollars, number and percentage) 
Industry
Announced greenfield projects 
International project finance deals
2021
2022
2023
Growth, 
2022–2023 
(%)
2021
2022
2023
Growth, 
2022–2023 
(%)
Infrastructure industries
Value
265 712
497 837
506 811
 2
848 256
722 677
562 380
-22
Number of projects
2 179
2 377
2 775
 17
1 724
1 898
1 518
-20
Powera
Value
6 538
8 775
13 537
 54
199 493
134 319
78 977
-41
Number of projects
 50
 52
 70
 35
 154
 193
 149
-23
Renewable energy
Value
141 198
372 441
352 883
-5
506 693
417 889
367 815
-12
Number of projects
 515
 560
 859
 53
1 355
1 454
1 177
-19
Transportb
Value
36 579
53 335
68 421
 28
61 549
51 959
33 229
-36
Number of projects
 763
 988
1 298
 31
 105
 111
 81
-27
Telecommunicationc
Value
81 397
63 287
71 970
 14
80 521
118 511
82 359
-31
Number of projects
 851
 777
 548
-29
 110
 140
 111
-21
Source: UNCTAD, based on information from The Financial Times, fDi Markets (www.fDimarkets.com) and 
Refinitiv.
a Excluding renewable energy. 
b Transport services for greenfield projects and transport infrastructure for project finance. 
c Including information services activities.


World Investment Report 2024
Investment facilitation and digital government
26
supply chain resilience needs. Robotics 
and automation are reducing the share of 
labour in total production costs, enabling 
the reshoring of production processes. 
Rising trade and investment interventionism 
is evident, along with a shift towards 
regional economic cooperation. Large-scale 
public interventions, such as the Inflation 
Reduction Act of the United States and 
the Recovery and Resilience Facility of the 
European Commission, are reshaping the 
FDI landscape with numerous incentives 
for investment in targeted industries. Finally, 
sustainability concerns, including carbon 
border adjustments, are also likely to affect 
trade flows and investment decisions.
iii. Digital industries
Following the pandemic, digital industries 
expanded rapidly. In 2023, the number of 
greenfield project announcements returned 
to close to pre-pandemic levels (table I.9). 
The number of greenfield projects fell by 
half. Declines were general across all digital 
industry subgroups. The introduction of 
advanced large language models over the 
past two years has led firms in some digital 
industries to pause investment as they 
adjust to the new technology. Developing 
countries that rely on offshore digital services 
(e.g. call centres or software programming) 
face the growing risk that automation could 
harm prospects for new investment projects. 
Table I.8	
Announced greenfield projects in global value chain-intensive industries
(Millions of dollars, number and percentage)
Industry
2021
2022
2023
Growth, 
2022–2023 (%)
Global value chain-intensive industries
Value
255 426
302 371
314 039
 4
Number of projects
3 264
3 505
4 441
 27
Electronics and electrical equipment
Value
192 678
214 518
182 574
-15
Number of projects
1 116
1 200
1 408
 17
Semiconductors
Value
125 161
109 478
55 231
-50
Number of projects
 114
 142
 140
-1
Automotive
Value
40 846
60 567
90 979
 50
Number of projects
 725
 729
 977
 34
Machinery and equipment
Value
9 490
14 815
23 424
 58
Number of projects
 656
 751
 985
 31
Textiles, clothing and leather
Value
12 411
12 470
17 062
 37
Number of projects
 767
 825
1 071
 30
Source: UNCTAD, based on information from The Financial Times, fDi Markets (www.fdimarkets.com).


Chapter I
International investment trends
27
Digitalization is also a factor in reshaping 
GVCs. Along with the growth of services, the 
growth of digital industries is transforming 
manufacturing. Data-driven tools allow 
for real-time analysis and optimization of 
maintenance and logistics. E-commerce 
platforms blur the line between physical 
products and services, facilitating the 
sale of both and often bundling them 
together. Finally, digital technologies 
enable the remote provision of service, 
reducing the need for a physical presence 
close to manufacturing facilities or 
final sales points. These factors have 
increased the share of services activities 
within manufacturing, and lead to more 
asset-light international investment. 
iv. Extractive sectors and critical 
minerals
Greenfield project announcements in 
mining and critical minerals (including 
processing) increased significantly in 2023 
(table I.10), doubling in both their number 
and their value. The growth in investment 
in critical minerals for the energy transition 
and the decline in new investment in oil 
and gas extraction show how climate 
goals are reshaping investment patterns.
One third of greenfield projects in critical 
minerals were invested in by Chinese firms, 
mostly for the extraction, processing and 
production of materials for the battery supply 
chain. Australia, the Republic of Korea, 
Table I.9	
Greenfield project announcements in digital industries
(Millions of dollars, number and percentage)
Source: UNCTAD, based on information from The Financial Times, fDi Markets (www.fdimarkets.com).
Note: For the classification of digital industries see WIR 2017 (UNCTAD, 2017).
2021
2022
2023
Growth, 
2022–2023 (%)
Digital industries
Value
33 035
34 518
20 382
-41
Number of projects
 378
 344
 187
-46
Digital content
Value
2 084
 515
 121
-77
Number of projects
 44
 37
 12
-68
Digital solutions
Value
3 090
3 842
2 262
-41
Number of projects
 48
 61
 51
-16
E-commerce
Value
25 229
23 935
17 178
-28
Number of projects
 232
 190
 102
-46
Internet platforms
Value
2 632
6 226
 822
-87
Number of projects
 54
 56
 22
-61


World Investment Report 2024
Investment facilitation and digital government
28
Canada and the United Kingdom were 
other important investor home countries.
The United States, Indonesia and Canada 
attracted the most projects overall. The 
highest project values were in Indonesia, 
Chile and the United States, in that 
order. Three quarters of projects were in 
developing countries; about half were in 
processing or production of materials. 
Ten projects were announced in LDCs, 
two of which including a processing 
or manufacturing component.
International project finance in the extractive 
sector is generally deployed for larger 
projects. The average estimated value of 
these projects in 2023 was close to $1 
billion, which compared with an average 
value of about $500 million for greenfield 
projects. The highest total values of 
international project finance deals were 
announced in Chile, Indonesia, Zambia, 
Botswana and Argentina, in that order.
Table I.10	
Investment project announcements in extractives and critical minerals
(Millions of dollars and percentage)
Source: UNCTAD, based on information from The Financial Times, fDi Markets (www.fDimarkets.com) and 
Refinitiv.
Announced greenfield projects 
International project finance deals
2021
2022
2023
Growth, 
2022–2023 
 
(%)
2021
2022
2023
Growth, 
2022–2023 
 
(%)
Extractive industries
Value
12 655
107 256
64 589
-40
242 825
134 906
118 652
-12
Number of projects
 61
 97
 117
 21
 246
 202
 154
-24
Oil and gas
Value
6 112
89 567
25 850
-71
198 306
92 756
72 072
-22
Number of projects
 23
 58
 47
-19
 124
 114
 103
-10
Mining
Value
6 542
17 689
38 740
 119
44 519
42 150
46 580
 11
Number of projects
 38
 39
 70
 79
 122
 88
 51
-42
Memorandum:
Critical minerals 
(including processing)
Value
13 106
30 396
57 964
 91
19 553
24 430
23 230
-5
Number of projects
 56
 61
 114
 87
 28
 27
 28
 4


Chapter I
International investment trends
29
B. Investment in the Sustainable 
Development Goals
The drop in international project finance will exacerbate the 
$4 trillion gap in investment needed to meet the Sustainable 
Development Goals in developing countries. Several sectors 
important for such investment saw a decline in project numbers 
in 2023; two of them, agrifood systems and water and sanitation, 
attracted fewer projects in 2023 than in 2015 when the Goals were 
adopted.
The past year marked the mid-point of the 
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. 
WIR 2023 updated the estimate for the 
Goals investment gap for developing 
countries to $4 trillion, from $2.5 trillion in 
2015 (UNCTAD, 2023f). Between 2015 
and 2023, the overall number of projects 
in Goals-relevant sectors grew about 4 per 
cent annually, outpacing overall growth in 
numbers of deals (at 3 per cent). However, 
these gains occurred in just a few Goals-
relevant sectors, mainly infrastructure and 
renewable energy (table I.11). Furthermore, 
investment has been unequal across 
countries and LDCs still account for only a 
small share of Goals-relevant investment.
Table I.11	
Developing countries: investment in sectors relevant to the Sustainable 
Development Goals
(Number and percentage)
2015
2022
2023
Growth, 
2015–2023 (%)
Growth, 
2022–2023 (%)
Infrastructurea
730
945
1 022
40
8
Renewable energy
372
687
655
76
-5
Water, sanitation and 
hygiene (WASH)
32
36
30
-6
-17
Agrifood systemsb
368
305
346
-6
13
Health and education
277
317
337
22
6
Source: UNCTAD, based on information from The Financial Times, fDi Markets (www.fdimarkets.com) and 
Refinitiv.
a Including transport infrastructure, power generation and distribution (except renewables) and 
telecommunication.  
b Including agricultural production and processes; fertilizers, pesticides and other chemicals; research and 
development; and technology.


World Investment Report 2024
Investment facilitation and digital government
30
Most Goals-relevant investment is 
in infrastructure sectors, which were 
heavily exposed to the global decline in 
international project finance in 2023. This 
had a significant negative effect on total 
Goals investment flows. International 
project finance deals in Goals-relevant 
sectors in developing economies fell by 
36 per cent in value and 28 per cent in 
number (table I.12). Declines in renewable 
energy, power generation and transport 
infrastructure were the main contributors. 
Collectively, the value of project finance 
deals in these sectors fell by almost $100 
billion compared with 2022, marking the 
second consecutive year of declines.
Table I.12
Sectors relevant to the Sustainable Development Goals: announced 
international project finance deals in developing economies
(Millions of dollars, number and percentage)
Goals-relevant sector
Developing economies
Least developed countries
2021
2022
2023
Growth, 
2022–2023 
(%)
2021
2022
2023
Growth, 
2022–2023 
(%)
Total
Value
442 629
313 161
200 064
-36
55 102
26 742
14 154
-47
Number of projects
 641
 724
 524
-28
 55
 55
 36
-35
Powera
Value
145 722
63 548
40 632
-36
42 148
4 764
 766
-84
Number of projects
 60
 67
 50
-25
 6
 8
 1
-88
Renewable energy
Value
217 440
175 502
121 623
-31
7 800
11 849
10 078
-15
Number of projects
 443
 500
 378
-24
 34
 31
 28
-10
Transport infrastructure
Value
29 408
28 514
8 858
-69
3 637
5 103
..
..
Number of projects
 58
 58
 26
-55
 7
 5
..
..
Telecommunicationb
Value
25 013
21 009
14 356
-32
 749
 320
2 367
 639
Number of projects
 38
 43
 35
-19
 3
 2
 4
 100
Water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH)
Value
11 947
14 475
9 942
-31
 179
2 458
 522
-79
Number of projects
 16
 21
 19
-10
 2
 5
 1
-80
Food and agriculture
Value
9 678
7 452
2 974
-60
..
2 231
 421
..
Number of projects
 12
 22
 11
-50
..
 3
 2
..
Health
Value
2 253
1 300
1 678
 29
..
 16
..
..
Number of projects
 6
 5
 5
 0
..
 1
..
..
Education
Value
1 167
1 360
..
..
 589
..
..
..
Number of projects
 8
 8
..
..
 3
..
..
..
Source: UNCTAD, based on data from Refinitiv.
a Excluding renewable energy. 
b Including information services activities.


Chapter I
International investment trends
31
Greenfield investment provided some 
counterweight, as the value of cross-
border greenfield project announcements 
for Goals-relevant sectors grew by 14 per 
cent in 2023 (table I.13). Project numbers 
increased even more, to 19 per cent. Still, 
a few sectors explain most of the growth. 
Transport services accounted for about one 
half of the increase in project numbers and 
values. Renewable energy accounted for 
about one quarter. At the same time, the 
estimated value of international investment in 
agrifood, health and education, and WASH 
(water, sanitation and hygiene) declined 
compared with 2022. Raising investment 
in these sectors is key to achieving the 
Goals, and the needs are substantial.
Table I.13	
Sectors relevant to the Sustainable Development Goals: announced 
greenfield projects in developing economies
(Millions of dollars, number and percentage) 
Goals-relevant sector
Developing economies
Least developed countries
2021
2022
2023
Growth, 
2022–2023 
(%)
2021
2022
2023
Growth, 
2022–2023 
(%)
Total
Value
126 820
261 481
297 746
 14
10 147
9 437
49 157
 421
Number of projects
1 312
1 566
1 866
 19
 73
 66
 91
 38
Powera
Value
4 173
4 080
7 155
 75
2 000
1 865
 671
-64
Number of projects
 20
 17
 29
 71
 1
 3
 1
-67
Renewable energy
Value
56 040
176 342
183 327
 4
4 809
4 824
41 614
 763
Number of projects
 149
 187
 277
 48
 13
 13
 24
 85
Transport services
Value
14 438
23 347
39 730
 70
 436
 776
4 849
 525
Number of projects
 275
 435
 599
 38
 22
 18
 31
 72
Telecommunicationb
Value
29 441
25 672
39 502
 54
2 018
 917
1 359
 48
Number of projects
 295
 325
 283
-13
 20
 12
 13
 8
Water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH)
Value
4 127
1 619
1 208
-25
 136
 139
 75
-46
Number of projects
 19
 15
 11
-27
 1
 1
 1
 0
Food and agriculture
Value
11 900
19 829
17 041
-14
 426
 739
 437
-41
Number of projects
 275
 283
 335
 18
 7
 14
 14
 0
Health
Value
5 679
9 668
8 866
-8
 187
 171
 109
-36
Number of projects
 194
 207
 227
 10
 3
 4
 3
-25
Education
Value
1 021
 925
 916
-1
 136
 7
 44
 535
Number of projects
 85
 97
 105
 8
 6
 1
 4
 300
Source: UNCTAD, based on information from The Financial Times, fDi Markets (www.fdimarkets.com).
a Excluding renewable energy. 
b Including information services activities.


World Investment Report 2024
Investment facilitation and digital government
32
LDCs accounted for only a small share 
of Goals-relevant investment among 
developing countries. The combined value 
of Goals-relevant greenfield investment 
and international project finance deals in 
developing countries reached $500 billion 
in 2023. Of this, $63 billion went to LDCs 
(about 13 per cent). A $34 billion green 
hydrogen project in Mauritania accounted 
for more than half the total. The downturn in 
project finance deals also disproportionately 
affected LDCs and the number of projects 
fell by 35 per cent compared to 2022. Still, 
a few Goals-relevant sectors performed 
well: renewable energy saw net gains in 
project values and numbers in LDCs, as 
did telecommunication, where numbers 
and values increased for both greenfield 
investment and project finance deals.
The distribution of Goals investment across 
developing regions is also unequal; only 
developing Asia attracts above-average 
greenfield projects and international 
project finance in Goals-relevant sectors 
– the share of the region in the global 
number of Goals projects was higher in 
2023 than its share in all projects (figure 
I.14). Other developing regions not only 
attract less investment overall, but even 
lower levels of Goals investment.
Africa remains one of the most underserved 
regions and its share of international 
investment projects is low. However, it has 
attracted sizeable investment in power, 
infrastructure and renewable energy; over 
the last three years, it accounted for about 
30 per cent, on average, of all Goals-
relevant investment values in developing 
countries. In 2023, the region’s share was 
only slightly lower (27 per cent). Yet there is 
less progress in other Goals-relevant sectors 
in Africa. This is particularly true for health 
(about 5 per cent of total value in developing 
countries), but also for more capital-intensive 
sectors such as telecommunication and 
transport (about 15 per cent for each).
Figure I.14	
Only developing Asia attracts above-average investment for the 
Sustainable Development Goals
Shares in numbers of investment projects, by region and economic grouping
(Percentage)
Source: UNCTAD, based on information from The Financial Times, fDi Markets (www.fDimarkets.com) and 
Refinitiv.
Note: Shares are calculated by sector.
Share in total projects
Share in Goals projects
5.4
25.4
4.8
30.4
2.2
1.6
9.6
7.8
Africa
Developing Asia
Latin America and
the Caribbean
Least developed 
countries


Chapter I
International investment trends
33
WIR 2023 identified gaps of $500 billion 
in annual investment for WASH and $300 
billion for agrifood systems (UNCTAD, 
2023f). As mentioned, the number of 
deals in these sectors is less than in 
2015. The lack of foreign participation 
in WASH projects is a particular area of 
concern. It hampers progress towards 
Goal 6, which targets universal access 
to safe drinking water, sanitation and 
hygiene. In 2023, there were only 11 
greenfield project announcements related 
to WASH, amounting to $1.2 billion 
in developing countries, and only one 
announcement in LDCs. Project finance 
and public–private partnerships are more 
important in WASH, but there were large 
declines in the value of WASH-related 
international project finance deals in 2023, 
including public–private partnerships, 
with only one deal among LDCs.


World Investment Report 2024
Investment facilitation and digital government
34
C. International production
International production continues to expand, but investment 
patterns and GVCs are shifting under the influence of economic 
fracturing trends. The overall transnationality of the top 100 MNEs 
still increased marginally in 2023. However, they are beginning 
to alter their international footprint, bringing strategic activities 
closer to home and considering options to de-risk supply chains. 
1. Key indicators of international production
Despite the lacklustre growth of international 
investment in the last decade, international 
production through the networks of MNEs 
remains an important part of the globalized 
economy (table I.14). The value of FDI 
flows is about 5 per cent of gross fixed 
capital formation, production of foreign 
affiliates as a share of global output is 
more than 6 per cent, and the sales of 
foreign affiliates are higher than the value of 
global exports, confirming the importance 
of FDI as a modality to reach overseas 
markets. Furthermore, the global production 
networks of MNEs are estimated to govern 
about 80 per cent of global trade. 
However, significant changes in the global 
economy are reshaping international 
production networks and GVCs. A recent 
UNCTAD report on global economic 
fracturing and shifting FDI patterns 
(UNCTAD, 2024d) identifies several key 
trends. First, it shows three types of 
divergence. The growth of FDI and GVCs 
has lost pace with GDP and trade – their 
growth paths have disconnected. There 
is a widening gap in investment trends 
between the manufacturing and services 
sectors. And investment patterns in China 
have delinked from the rest of the world. 
Second, it points out that, in recent years, 
geopolitical differences and global crises 
have led to a transition from divergence 
to fracturing. This leads to more volatile 
investment patterns and shifting home- 
and host-country relationships, and it 
causes geopolitical factors to become 
increasingly important in investment 
decisions, at times overriding economic 
considerations. Third, it shows that the 
sustainability imperative and the drive to 
stimulate investment in the Sustainable 
Development Goals are opening up new 
opportunities for investment-driven industrial 
development, particularly in environmental 
technologies. However, it also shows that 
these opportunities are available to only a 
small group of countries with larger markets. 
In many smaller developing countries, 
and especially LDCs, marginalization 
and vulnerability continue to grow. 


Chapter I
International investment trends
35
Table I.14	
Selected indicators of foreign direct investment and international 
production
(Billions of dollars at current prices and number)
Sources: UNCTAD, FDI/MNE database, IMF (2024), information from The Financial Times, fDi Markets (www.
fDimarkets.com) and Refinitiv.
Notes: Not included are the value of worldwide sales by foreign affiliates associated with their parent firms 
through non-equity relationships and the value of sales of parent firms themselves. Worldwide sales, gross 
product, total assets, exports and employment of foreign affiliates are estimated by extrapolating worldwide 
data of foreign affiliates of MNEs from countries for which data are avaiable, on the basis of three-year average 
shares of those countries in worldwide outward FDI stock.
Abbreviations: FDI = foreign direct investment, M&As = mergers and acquisitions.
a Based on data from 168 countries for income on inward FDI and 142 countries for income on outward FDI in 
2023, in both cases representing more than 90 per cent of global inward and outward stocks. 
b Calculated only for countries with both FDI income and stock data. The stock is measured in book value.
Item
1990
2005–2007 
(average)
2020
2021
2022
2023
FDI inflows
 205
1 415
 985
1 622
1 356
1 332
FDI outflows
 244
1 464
 780
1 882
1 575
1 551
FDI inward stock
2 196
14 573
41 893
47 156
44 375
49 131
FDI outward stock
2 255
15 296
40 718
43 386
40 570
44 381
Income on inward FDIa
 82
1 123
2 173
2 883
3 002
2 498
Rate of return on inward FDIb
5.4
9.6
6.8
8.2
8.2
6.0
Income on outward FDIa
 128
1 235
1 954
2 857
2 923
2 516
Rate of return on outward FDIb
8.4
10.7
5.8
7.7
7.8
6.4
Announced greenfield projects
..
..
 641
 830
1 309
1 380
International project finance deals
..
..
 585
1 440
1 301
 958
Cross-border M&As
 98
 729
 475
 737
 707
 378
Sales of foreign affiliates
4 801
19 758
31 298
33 194
..
..
Value added (product) of foreign affiliates
1 074
4 662
6 547
7 030
..
..
Total assets of foreign affiliates
4 649
47 065
97 467
91 386
..
..
Employment by foreign affiliates (thousands)
20 449
49 780
82 405
74 402
..
..
Memorandum:
Gross domestic product
22 612
52 680
84 961
96 488
100 135
104 476
Gross fixed capital formation
5 838
12 482
22 055
25 270
26 142
27 161
Charges for the use of intellectual property, 
receipts
 31
 191
 507
 615
 590
 460


World Investment Report 2024
Investment facilitation and digital government
36
2. Internationalization trends of the largest MNEs
The average transnationality index of the 
top 100 non-financial MNEs – the weight of 
their overseas assets, sales, and employees 
in their global operations – increased 
marginally in 2023 (table I.15). This increase 
was driven by MNEs in the automotive 
industry, where the transition to EVs and 
new technologies attracted more foreign 
investment. Falling revenues in other sectors 
and several MNEs’ divestments in the 
Russian Federation held back the index.
The 12 car producers in the top 100 
significantly expanded their international 
Table I.15	
Internationalization levels of top 100 MNEs increased marginally in 2023  
Internationalization statistics of 100 largest non-financial MNEs, worldwide and from 
developing economies
Source: UNCTAD.
Notes: Data refer to fiscal year results reported between 1 April of the base year and 31 March of the following 
year. Complete 2023 data for the 100 largest MNEs from developing economies are not yet available.
Abbreviations: MNEs = multinational enterprises, TNI = Transnationality Index.
a Revised results 
b Preliminary results.
Variable
100 largest MNEs, global
100 largest MNEs,  
developing economies
2021a
2022a
Growth, 
2021–2022 
 
(%)
2023b
Growth, 
2022–2023 
 
(%)
2021a
2022
Growth 
(%)
Assets (Billions of dollars)
Foreign
 10 449
 10 127
-3.1
 10 230
1.0
 2 953
 2 896
-1.9
Domestic
 8 902
 10 566
18.7
 10 665
0.9
 7 054
 8 694
23.3
Total
 19 351
 20 693
6.9
 20 895
1.0
 10 007
 11 590
15.8
Foreign as share of total (%)
  54
  49
  49
  30
  25
Sales (Billions of dollars)
Foreign
 6 703
 7 438
11.0
 6 965
-6.4
 2 272
 2 490
9.6
Domestic
 4 949
 6 744
36.3
 6 596
-2.2
 4 094
 5 523
34.9
Total
 11 651
 14 182
21.7
 13 562
-4.4
 6 366
 8 013
25.9
Foreign as share of total (%)
  58
  52
  51
  36
  31
Employment (Thousands)
Foreign
 8 998
 9 096
1.1
 9 553
5.0
 4 064
 4 150
2.1
Domestic
 11 102
 11 316
1.9
 10 606
-6.3
 9 265
 9 665
4.3
Total
 20 100
 20 413
1.6
 20 159
-1.2
 13 328
 13 815
3.7
Foreign as share of total (%)
  45
  45
  47
  30
  30
Unweighted average TNI
  62
  61
  62
  48
46
Median TNI
  63
  63
  66
  47
45


Chapter I
International investment trends
37
networks, focusing on the United States 
and China, the two largest EV markets. 
Since passage of the Inflation Reduction 
Act of 2022 in the United States, top 
automotive MNEs have announced 
greenfield projects in the EV and battery 
supply chain amounting to nearly $17 
billion. In China, the competitiveness 
of local brands led some, such as Ford 
(United States) and Honda Motors (Japan), 
to scale back investment. However, 
other MNEs such as Stellantis (Italy) and 
Volkswagen (Germany) started more joint 
ventures to leverage local technological 
advancements. For instance, in 2023, 
Stellantis invested $1.5 billion in Chinese 
EV start-up Leapmotor, and Volkswagen 
invested $1 billion in Horizon Robotics, a 
Beijing-based manufacturer of electronic 
components, to strengthen its position in 
the autonomous driving and EV markets.
The number of technology MNEs in the 
top global rankings remained steady at 
14 companies, with S&P Global (United 
States) entering the list as Legend Holdings 
(China) exited. S&P Global bolstered its 
capabilities by merging with IHS Markit 
(United Kingdom) in a $43 billion transaction. 
Key trends driving investment in the 
technology industry are the competition 
to acquire expertise in artificial intelligence 
and machine learning and to consolidate 
market presence across neighbouring 
industries, resulting in more deals. While 
most of these deals occurred within 
home economies, larger ones implied an 
increase in foreign assets. The $75 billion 
acquisition of video game maker Activision 
Blizzard by Microsoft (both United States) 
led to a 22 per cent increase in Microsoft’s 
foreign assets. Not all technology MNEs 
have expanded their foreign operations. 
Apple (United States) scaled down its 
operations in China, diversifying its supply 
chain. SAP (Germany) divested its stake in 
Qualtrics (United States) of approximately 
$12 billion to focus on its core services.
In 2023, the pharmaceutical industry saw 
a modest expansion of its international 
footprint, with 10 MNEs driving growth 
through strategic acquisitions. Similar to 
developments in the technology sector, 
many of these transactions occurred 
within the United States but significantly 
influenced the international profile of the 
acquiring companies. For instance, the $43 
billion merger of Pfizer (United States) with 
Seagen (United States) led to a 15 per cent 
increase in foreign assets. The $7.1 billion 
acquisition of Telavant (United States) by 
Roche (Switzerland) reinforced the position 
of Roche in the United States market.
The internationalization rate of the remaining 
21 manufacturing MNEs in the top 100 (light 
and heavy industry) remained stable. British 
American Tobacco (United Kingdom) 
reduced its foreign assets by 20 per cent, 
while Philip Morris International (United 
States) bolstered its global presence with 
a $15 billion acquisition of Swedish Match 
(Sweden). Siemens (Germany) led in digital 
transformation, acquiring Brightly Software 
(United States) for nearly $1.9 billion.
In the extractive industries, most of the 
15 MNEs in the top 100 held back from 
pursuing large-scale international investment 
in 2023. Notable exceptions were Rio Tinto 
and Shell (both United Kingdom), which 
actively engaged in strategic acquisitions 
and new ventures. Rio Tinto finalized the 
acquisition of copper and nickel miner 
Turquoise Hill (Canada) for nearly $3.3 
billion, to enhance its portfolio of critical 
minerals for the energy transition. Rio 
Tinto announced initiatives to increase its 
production of copper and lithium for the 
same reason. Shell has also expanded 
operations in view of the energy transition, 
exemplified by its acquisition of Sprng 
Energy (India), which develops and operates 
renewable energy facilities, for about $1.5 
billion. The latter part of 2023 and early 2024 
saw several more announcements from 
mining companies about deals intended 
to boost investment in critical minerals. 
The telecommunication sector saw 
significant portfolio shifts in foreign 
assets. Vodafone (United Kingdom) exited 
markets in Ghana and Hungary and sold 
its operations in Italy. Deutsche Telekom 
Supply chain 
restructuring 
is affecting the 
international 
footprint of 
technology 
MNEs


World Investment Report 2024
Investment facilitation and digital government
38
(Germany) and Orange (France) focused 
on expansion in more profitable regions, 
including North America, Africa and the 
Middle East. The utilities sector experienced 
several reconfigurations that affected its 
internationalization rate. EDF (France) was 
fully nationalized, and Enel (Italy) continued 
strategic divestments, generating $1.3 billion 
from the sale of its business in Romania. 
Among construction companies, Vinci 
(France) moved up the ranking of the top 
100 with strategic expansions in airport 
concessions and energy ventures. A.P
. 
Møller–Maersk (Denmark) exited the ranking 
after reshuffling operations in East Asia.
Finally, the ranking of the top 100 MNEs 
was also affected by divestments or 
exits from the Russian Federation. OMV 
(Austria) dropped out of the ranking after 
suffering losses due to the expropriation 
of its stake in the Yuzhno-Russkoye oil 
and gas field. Between 2022 and 2023, 
MNEs in the ranking made 36 significant 
divestments from the Russian Federation, 
with the largest write-downs and charges 
concentrated among MNEs in the oil 
and gas and extractive industries.
Emerging-economy MNEs favoured 
greenfield investment over equity 
acquisitions. TSMC (Taiwan Province of 
China), CATL (China) and Zijin Mining Group 
(China) – in that order by investment size – 
announced large-scale projects in developed 
economies. Starting in 2021, TSMC has 
launched greenfield projects first in the 
United States, then in Japan and Germany. 
In 2020 CATL invested over $5 billion in 
Indonesia and almost $7.5 billion in Hungary, 
forming multiple joint ventures with top 
automotive MNEs. Zijin Mining Group has 
invested more than $5 billion in Serbia and 
expanded its global footprint by developing 
mines in Argentina and Kazakhstan.
3. Shifting investment patterns among the top 100 MNEs
UNCTAD recently published a diagnostic 
of 10 major trends in global FDI patterns, 
examining the effects of long-term structural 
changes in international production and 
the more recent pressures caused by 
economic fracturing (box I.1). This section 
looks at how the trends observed in that 
diagnostic are reflected in the investment 
behaviours of the top 100 MNEs.
The main drivers of the structural 
changes in FDI patterns are technological 
developments, most visible in high-
technology industries; sustainability 
trends, evident in intense investment 
activity in environmental technologies 
and critical minerals; the push for supply 
chain resilience, which affects most GVC-
intensive industries; and geopolitical and 
trade tensions, felt across all strategic 
sectors. These sectors include industries 
such as high-technology, semiconductors, 
pharmaceuticals, instruments and machinery 
manufacturing, environmental technologies 
and other activities deemed essential for 
the future competitiveness of countries 
and which therefore play a key role in their 
industrial and trade policies (IMF, 2023).
Over the last 10 years, two thirds of 
greenfield investment by the top 100 MNEs 
related to setting up services subsidiaries 
(figure I.15). Even within manufacturing 
sectors often considered strategic such 
as automotive and pharmaceuticals, more 
than half of the greenfield projects focused 
on establishing sales and marketing offices, 
support and technical services centres, or 
other professional services, thus making 
these projects less sensitive. The effects of 
fracturing are mostly seen in the remaining 
projects, in physical manufacturing activities. 
The deceleration of global FDI after 2010 
is also reflected in the decreasing total 
number of deals and projects undertaken 
by top MNEs. The number of greenfield 
projects announced in the last five years 
(2019–2023) was about 10 per cent 
lower than in the preceding five years 
(2014–2018). While the overall number 
of projects has declined, notable shifts in 
their regional distribution have emerged.
Critical 
minerals are 
driving major 
cross-border 
investment 
deals among 
top MNEs


Chapter I
International investment trends
39
Trend 1: Long-term FDI stagnation
The long-term trend in cross-border investment shows that a slowdown in global FDI started in about 2010. It no 
longer keeps pace with global trade and GDP
. Trade within global value chains (GVCs) also slowed, confirming 
the close link between FDI and GVCs.
Trend 2: The increasing weight of services
The overall stagnation in FDI conceals sectoral differences. Cross-border investment in services flourishes while 
manufacturing lags. This reflects a global shift towards more services-centric and asset-light investment. 
Trend 3: The deglobalization of manufacturing (from an FDI perspective)
Manufacturing FDI, stagnant for two decades, showed negative growth after the outbreak of the COVID-19 
pandemic. Although global manufacturing activity and investment remain robust, their international component is 
shrinking, suggesting a trend towards deglobalization. 
Trend 4: The growing ends of the smile curve
The transition from manufacturing to services is part of a broader change in the role of FDI in global value creation. 
Cross-border investment is moving from the centre to the two ends of the “smile” curve, most notably towards 
services in business and information and communication technology upstream and in marketing downstream. 
Trend 5: Convergence of sectoral patterns across regions
All regions are feeling the effects of the transition towards services-oriented, asset-light FDI. Consequently, traditional 
differences in sectoral patterns between developed and developing regions are increasingly blurring.
Trend 6: The diminishing role of FDI in China
The regional rebalancing of global FDI has been significantly influenced by the declining share of China as a recipient 
country. Despite waning interest from multinational corporations in initiating investment projects in China, the 
country continues to maintain a dominant position in global manufacturing and trade, signifying a transformation 
in its global production model.
Trend 7: Unstable investment relationships
Heightened geopolitical tensions are exacerbating the volatility of investment sources and destinations, and the 
susceptibility of traditional investment links to disruptions. Instability in investment relationships limits the capacity 
of developing countries to strategically capitalize on diversification opportunities arising from shifts in investment 
patterns.
Trend 8: Fracturing along geopolitical lines
Geopolitical differences are causing a fracturing trend in global FDI, with the reduction in investment between 
geopolitically distant countries highlighting the significant influence of such differences on investors’ location 
choices, overshadowing traditional determinants of FDI.
Trend 9: The sustainability imperative driving new FDI sectors
FDI in environmental technologies stands out as the main pocket of growth outside services. Since 2010, while 
manufacturing investment stagnated across all industries, the number of greenfield projects along the entire value 
chain of environmental technologies sectors has increased steadily.
Trend 10: The increasing concentration of FDI and marginalization of developing countries
Amid historical shifts and economic fracturing, the share of greenfield projects in smaller developing countries 
and least developed countries is diminishing. This trend exacerbates the marginalization and vulnerability of those 
countries, as FDI becomes increasingly concentrated in developed and emerging economies.
Source: UNCTAD (2024d).
Box I.1	
Global economic fracturing and shifting FDI patterns: 10 major trends


World Investment Report 2024
Investment facilitation and digital government
40
Until 2018, manufacturing projects were 
predominantly directed towards developing 
economies, with East Asia and South-East 
Asia being key destinations. In services, 
however, more than a third of projects 
were concentrated in Europe. Within the 
manufacturing sector, strategic projects 
– often involving high-value activities 
– were relatively more concentrated in 
developed economies and East Asia.
Since 2019, the geographical distribution of 
manufacturing projects has shifted towards 
locations closer to MNE home markets, 
especially in strategic sectors (figure I.16). 
Europe and North America have emerged 
as primary destinations – unsurprisingly, 
considering that the majority of MNEs in 
the ranking are from the United States (19), 
Europe (53) and Japan (10) – with Central 
America (including Mexico), North Africa, 
and West and Central Asia also gaining 
traction. This trend reflects a strategic pivot 
towards regionalization and nearshoring, 
driven by the need to enhance supply chain 
resilience and reduce geopolitical risks. 
Figure I.15	
Manufacturing activities represent about one third of projects by top 100 
multinational enterprises
Greenfield projects, by type and industry, 2014–2023
Source: UNCTAD, based on information from the Financial Times, fDi Markets (www.fDimarkets.com).
Notes: Refers to the ranking of top 100 multinational enterprises in WIR 2023. Manufacturing includes 
several activities normally classified as services but physical asset-heavy in nature, in the construction, 
electricity, extraction and infrastructure segments. Strategic manufacturing includes activities in environmental 
technologies, explaining their presence in extractive industries and utilities. “Services” includes all remaining 
services-related business activities and services activities in typical manufacturing industries (e.g. sales offices 
of car manufacturers).
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Strategic manufacturing
Other manufacturing
Services
Automotives
Sector
Number of
enterprises
Number of
projects
Pharmaceuticals
Heavy industry
Extractives
Technology
Utilities
Trade
Light industry
Transport and logistics
Telecommunication
Other
Total
48
52
12
1 826
9
 527
9
1 035
16
1 035
14
2 720
11
 835
6
 491
9
 769
4
 798
6
 761
4
 256
100
10 787
43
57
41
13
46
9
49
42
9
91
7 65
28
19
3
2
1
79
56
42
99
100
27
15
58
18
15
66


Chapter I
International investment trends
41
Figure I.16	
Manufacturing projects by top 100 multinational enterprises moved 
closer to headquarters
Shares of selected regions/subregions in types of manufacturing projects, difference 
between 2019–2023 and 2014–2018
(Percentage points)
Source: UNCTAD, based on information from The Financial Times, fDi Markets (www.fDimarkets.com).
Notes: Refers to the ranking of top 100 multinational enterprises in WIR 2023. Manufacturing includes several 
activities normally classified as services but physical asset-heavy in nature, in the construction, electricity, 
extraction and infrastructure segments. Caribbean economies are included in Central America. Other regions 
and subregions (developed Asia and Oceania) are not included as there were no significant changes in the 
share of projects attracted.
Strategic manufacturing
Non-strategic manufacturing
Africa
East Asia
South-East Asia
South Asia
West and Central Asia
Europe
Central America
South America
North America
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
0.3
-5
-5
-2
-4
-7
-2
-3
0.2
-0.1
7
13
1
-5
-0.3
4
3
5


World Investment Report 2024
Investment facilitation and digital government
42
In contrast, the number of strategic 
manufacturing projects in East Asia 
decreased. Among the top MNEs, the 
largest manufacturing investors in China 
include the electronics company Hon 
Hai Precision Industry (Taiwan Province 
of China), the chemicals company BASF 
(Germany) and a range of car manufacturers 
such as Toyota (Japan), Volkswagen and 
BMW (both Germany) and Samsung 
Electronics (Republic of Korea). These 
companies have historically maintained 
significant manufacturing operations in 
China. However, since 2019 they have 
halved their greenfield investment in the 
country in favour of partnerships with local 
manufacturers, especially in the EV market. 
Among these companies, Hon Hai 
Precision Industry and Samsung Electronics 
have reassessed their manufacturing 
footprint in China because of trade 
tensions. A significant portion of their 
products, especially chips and high-
technology electronics, are produced in 
fabrication plants in China and exported 
to the United States. Hon Hai reduced its 
greenfield projects in China from 23 to 6, 
while Samsung reduced its from 9 to 1. 
Both companies have started investing 
in new manufacturing facilities in their 
home markets and in other countries 
such as Viet Nam, India and Mexico 
– in order of investment size. Hon Hai 
Precision Industry tripled the number of 
manufacturing projects in Viet Nam.
The share of strategic manufacturing 
investment in Central America has 
increased. Manufacturers in the automotive 
industry, such as Robert Bosch (Germany), 
Toyota Motor (Japan) and Volkswagen 
(Germany), have chosen to invest in Mexico, 
largely for its proximity to the United 
States and its market access under the 
United States–Mexico–Canada Agreement 
(USMCA). MNEs in the pharmaceutical and 
medical instrument industries, including 
Bayer (Germany), Medtronic (Ireland) and 
Johnson & Johnson (United States), have 
targeted Costa Rica for investment projects.
North Africa and West and Central Asia 
have also emerged as strategic locations 
for manufacturing MNEs, offering proximity 
to both European and Asian markets. In 
North Africa, Morocco and Egypt stand out 
as key investment destinations. Morocco 
has attracted projects by automotive MNEs 
including Stellantis (Italy) and Renault 
(France). Egypt has attracted not only 
automotive MNEs such as BMW and Robert 
Bosch (both Germany) and Nissan (Japan) 
but also pharmaceutical companies such 
as GlaxoSmithKline (United Kingdom) and 
electronics producers such as Samsung 
Electronics (Republic of Korea). In West 
and Central Asia, Türkiye attracted the 
largest share of manufacturing projects.
The decreasing share of manufacturing 
projects in South-East and South Asia might 
seem counterintuitive. However, the top 100 
MNEs had already established a significant 
presence in ASEAN by the early 2010s. 
This is the case, for example, for the two 
leading investors in manufacturing MNEs in 
South-East Asia: Toyota Motors (Japan) and 
Samsung (Republic of Korea). From 2011 to 
2013, Toyota announced 23 manufacturing 
projects in South-East Asia. This number 
declined to 13 projects during 2014–2019 
and dropped farther to only 5 projects 
since then. Similarly, Samsung experienced 
a peak of 10 projects in South-East Asia 
during 2014–2019, but this number fell to 
4 projects in the following years. Of the top 
manufacturing investors in South-East Asia, 
only Hon Hai Precision Industry (Taiwan 
Province of China) started reconfiguring its 
supply chain in the last five years, increasing 
its number of projects in the region from 
3 during 2011–2019 to 12 since then.
Greenfield projects in services activities 
have also shifted closer to home economies 
(figure I.17) with one notable exception. 
Over the last 10 years, about 10 per cent 
of services projects have been aimed at 
establishing regional headquarters and 
back-office functions. MNEs from Europe 
and North America have increasingly 
established regional headquarters 
throughout developing Asia, particularly 
Investment 
projects by 
top 100 MNEs 
in strategic 
manufacturing 
sectors are 
moving closer 
to home


Chapter I
International investment trends
43
Figure I.17	
Top multinational enterprises are establishing regional headquarters 
closer to key markets
Shares of selected regions/subregions in types of services projects, difference between 
2019–2023 and 2014–2018
(Percentage points)
Source: UNCTAD, based on information from The Financial Times, fDi Markets (www.fDimarkets.com).
Notes: Projects aimed at setting up headquarters include the following business activities: headquarters, 
business services, shared and technical services. Caribbean economies are included in Central America. Other 
regions (developed Asia and Oceania) are not displayed as there were no significant changes in the share of 
projects attracted.
Headquarters and back offce functions
All other services
Africa
East Asia
South-East Asia
South Asia
West and Central Asia
Europe
Central America
South America
North America
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
2.2
-1.6
2.7
-5.4
-5.5
-3.4
-4.7
-3.4
-0.4
1.5
6.5
6.3
1
-0.4
-0.1
2.3
0.8
-0.4


World Investment Report 2024
Investment facilitation and digital government
44
in East Asia. These regional hubs provide 
essential services and can help mitigate 
risks to local operations from geopolitical 
and trade tensions as well as supply chain 
disruptions. Specifically for investment in 
large markets, many MNEs are establishing 
almost autonomous subsidiaries that 
produce for the domestic rather than 
the global market. For example, the 
pharmaceutical MNE AstraZeneca (United 
Kingdom) announced five projects in China 
to set up headquarter offices and back-office 
functions. Its business there would become 
a legal entity listed in Hong Kong, China 
or Shanghai and controlled by the MNE. 
Consistent with the global FDI slowdown 
and similar to the trend observed in 
greenfield investment, the number of 
equity acquisitions since 2019 also 
decreased, by a little more than 10 per 
cent. M&As often respond to different 
drivers than greenfield investment. 
Importantly, acquisitions can be subject 
to screening and approval procedures. 
M&A deals traditionally are more prevalent 
in developed economies, and this 
concentration has only increased in the 
last five years, particularly for MNEs in 
strategic industries. Trends in M&As are 
consistent with those seen in greenfield 
projects. MNEs have decreased their shares 
of equity acquisitions in manufacturing 
companies in East Asian economies. 
However, the value of deals in the subregion 
has increased, driven largely by significant 
investment in the automotive sector, 
targeting Chinese producers. Although 
the number of transactions has fallen, 
their strategic importance and associated 
financial commitment have risen.
Divestment trends among the top 100 MNEs 
do not reveal any clear relocation strategy. 
On the contrary, the number of divestments 
from China has decreased since 2019, 
indicating that MNEs recognize the strategic 
importance of maintaining a presence in 
the world’s second-largest economy, not 
only to tap into its large market but also to 
benefit from its advanced manufacturing 
capabilities and extensive supply chains.
Regional 
headquarters 
functions are 
proliferating 
to increase 
regional 
autonomy and 
mitigate risks 


Chapter II
Investment policy 
trends


FDI stock covered by old-generation IIAs
Not covered
New-generation
Old-generation
Developed
Developing
Least developed
71%
65%
46%
137
national
measures 
Key trends: facilitation and entry restrictions on the rise
Less favourable measures by type
Old-generation agreements cover half of global foreign direct investment
stock – with greater exposure for developing countries
Developing countries continue to prioritize investment attraction
Share of measures more favourable to investors
Developed countries
Developing countries
43%
86%
68%
32%
Treatment and
operation
Entry restrictions
More favourable measures by type
Countries with FDI screening
39%
33%
Incentives
14%
12%
2%
Promotion
Liberalization
Other
Facilitation
2014
2023
+141%
17
41
2023 agreements address new investment governance issues, yet old-generation
ones persist, raising the risk of investor–State disputes
Commitments in 2023 IIAs
Global FDI stock: IIA coverage
Parties involved in 2023 cases
2023 cases: top sectors
16
15
Protection
14
9
Facilitation
Liberalization
Cooperation
75%
30%
25%
70%
Developing
Developed
Respondent
Claimant
Construction
 
 
Oil, gas, coal, mining
Manufacturing
12
10
10
60
new ISDS 
cases
29
IIAs signed
49%
16%
35%


Chapter II
Investment policy trends
3
A. National investment policies
1. Overall trends
The number of investment policy measures adopted in 2023 
remained consistent with the five-year average, despite declining 
by 25 per cent compared with 2022. In developing countries, 
most measures aimed at promoting and facilitating investment. 
Developed countries continued to introduce restrictive measures 
to address national security concerns related to investment.
In 2023, 73 countries introduced a total 
of 137 policy measures affecting foreign 
direct investment (FDI), a 25 per cent 
decrease from 2022 but in line with the 
five-year average (figure II.1). The majority 
— 72 per cent — were favourable to 
investors (70 per cent in 2022) (box II.1). 
This confirms a return to the pre-pandemic 
distribution between policy measures 
more and less favourable to investors.
Figure II.1	
Lower numbers of new investment policy measures in 2023
Nature of measures, worldwide
(Number)
Source: UNCTAD, Investment Policy Monitor database, accessed 31 March 2024.
50
100
150
200
2022
2021
2023
2019
2018
2020
2016
2015
2014
2017
58
17
15
88
16
15
88
24
27
99
23
22
69
29
18
67
20
20
79
50
30
63
41
13
123
53
7
99
38
90
119
139
144
116
107
159
117
183
137
More favourable
Less favourable
Neutral/indeterminate


World Investment Report 2024
Investment facilitation and digital government
4
The analysis of national investment policy trends in this chapter is based on official measures affecting FDI 
adopted by United Nations Member States, as compiled in the UNCTAD Investment Policy Monitor database. 
These encompass measures explicitly targeting FDI (FDI-specific), as well as general investment measures 
with a clear impact on foreign investment (FDI-related). 
The measures are either reported directly to UNCTAD by Member States through annual surveys or identified 
by UNCTAD researchers through publicly accessible sources (such as government websites and specialized 
policy databases). The analysis excludes restrictive economic measures that affect investment.
The classification of measures as more or less favourable is based solely on their potential impact on 
investors. The types of measures included in each category are described in box table II.1.1. When a measure 
– for example, the adoption of an investment promotion strategy – contains more than one component, 
such as incentives and facilitation, these components are analysed separately. This classification does not 
reflect any value judgement by UNCTAD on the merit or suitability of the measure. 
Box table II.1.1	
Classification of measures
Source: UNCTAD.
Abbreviations: FDI = foreign direct investment, SEZ = special economic zone.
Category
Type of measure
More favourable
Liberalization
Privatization
Lifting of entry restrictions (e.g. opening of sectors to FDI) and entry conditions (e.g. minimum 
capital requirement)
Removal (total or partial) of FDI screening or approval mechanisms
Other (e.g. liberalization of land access)
Facilitation
Streamlining of investment procedures (e.g. one-stop shops)
Greater transparency of investment-related laws and procedures (e.g. information portals) 
Services by investment promotion agencies and other entities to assist investors (e.g. linkages 
programmes, investor visa facilitation and alternative dispute resolution mechanisms)
Promotion
Establishment of investment promotion agencies or other institutions with a remit as investment 
promoters
Adoption of investment promotion strategy and plans
Public–private partnership initiatives, auctions and concessions
Outward FDI promotion initiatives
Incentives
Tax and financial incentives for investment
Other incentives (e.g. citizenship by investment programmes)
SEZ-related incentives
Other
Enhanced investor treatment and protection guarantees
Easing of labour or migration regulations concerning foreign hires and key personnel 
Removal of operational restrictions on investment (e.g. local content requirements)
Less favourable
Entry
Entry restrictions (e.g. total and partial ban on FDI in specific sectors) 
Entry conditions (e.g. minimum investment threshold, joint venture requirements or State 
participation in strategic sector)
Introduction or expansion of screening mechanisms for national security
Treatment and operation
Foreign exchange restrictions 
Restrictions on foreign hires and key personnel
Removal or reduction of investment incentives
Post-establishment local content requirements or prioritization of national companies in procurement
Other measures reducing guarantees for investment treatment and protection
Restrictions on outward FDI
Box II.1	
Methodology for analysing national investment policy trends


Chapter II
Investment policy trends
5
Significant differences persist between 
developing and developed countries (figure 
II.2). Developing countries continue to 
prioritize investment attraction as part of 
their economic development strategies. 
The proportion of policies more favourable 
to investors in developing countries has 
remained stable at well above 80 per 
cent since 2014, except for a low point 
registered during the pandemic. In 2023, 
86 per cent of the measures adopted by 
developing countries were favourable to 
investors. Initiatives to promote and facilitate 
investment by simplifying or streamlining 
administrative processes and introducing 
incentive schemes were among the 
measures most frequently adopted (see 
section A.2). In contrast, in developed 
countries, policies more favourable to 
investors, which represented between 
half and two thirds of the total in the mid-
2010s, started to decline in importance 
well before the pandemic. They reached an 
all-time low of 17 per cent in 2020 and have 
since stabilized at about 40 per cent of the 
total. In 2023, measures less favourable to 
investors adopted by developed countries 
made up two thirds of the world total. 
Many of these policies related directly or 
indirectly to national security concerns 
regarding foreign ownership of critical 
infrastructure, core technologies, or other 
sensitive assets (see section A.3).
African countries were the most active in 
adopting new investment policy measures 
in 2023, followed closely by developing 
countries in Asia. Africa and developing Asia 
also produced the highest share of policy 
measures more favourable to investors. 
Among developed regions, Europe led 
in the adoption of new investment policy 
measures, despite a decrease compared 
with 2022. Most new measures were less 
favourable to investors. The number of 
new investment policy measures in North 
America and other developed regions also 
declined significantly. Three quarters of them 
were less favourable to investors (figure II.3).
Figure II.2	
Developing countries continue prioritizing investment attraction
Share of policy measures more favourable to investors in total measures
(Percentage)
Source: UNCTAD, Investment Policy Monitor database, accessed 31 March 2024.
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Developing
countries
86
World
72
Developed
countries
43


World Investment Report 2024
Investment facilitation and digital government
6
2. Policy measures more favourable to investors
In 2023, investment facilitation measures and incentives remained 
the primary components of investment attraction initiatives in 
developed and developing countries. Facilitation measures reached 
a record 39 per cent of the measures favourable to investors.
Over the last decade, the investment 
policy landscape has evolved significantly, 
with noticeable shifts not only in the 
distribution between measures more 
and less favourable to investors but 
also in their composition (figure II.4).
A marked change has been the diminishing 
prominence of liberalization measures, 
especially following the pandemic. In the 
period from 2014 to 2019, liberalization 
measures constituted approximately 40 
per cent of the total – peaking at 44 per 
cent in 2018. Yet from 2020 to 2022, they 
represented less than a quarter and in 2023 
further declined to a mere 12 per cent. 
In contrast, the weight of investment 
incentives has increased significantly since 
the pandemic. Prior to 2020, measures 
related to the introduction of incentives 
represented about a quarter of all favourable 
measures. They have since grown to over 
a third of favourable measures, indicating 
a strategic pivot towards using incentives 
as a tool to foster investment. This trend is 
occurring despite ongoing international tax 
reforms that should make fiscal incentives 
a less effective tool for the attraction of FDI 
from large multinational enterprises (MNEs).
Investment facilitation and investment 
promotion measures also display a 
notable upward trend since the pandemic. 
Together with incentives, they were all 
complementary components of country 
efforts to promote economic recovery and 
resilience. In 2023, investment facilitation 
and investment promotion initiatives reached 
record shares of 39 and 14 per cent of 
all favourable measures, respectively. 
Investment promotion measures were fuelled 
Figure II.3	
Africa and developing Asia adopted the most investment policy 
measures in 2023
Nature of measures by region, 2023
(Number)
Source: UNCTAD, Investment Policy Monitor database, accessed 31 March 2024.
More favourable
Less favourable
Africa
Developing Asia
Europe
Latin America and the Caribbean
Other developed countries
34
4
33
4
16
19
14
5
2 6


Chapter II
Investment policy trends
7
Figure II.4	
Investment policy shifts from liberalization to facilitation
Measures more favourable to investors by category 
(Percentage)
Source: UNCTAD, Investment Policy Monitor database, accessed 31 March 2024.
20
40
60
80
100
2014
2015
2017
2019
2021
2023
2016
2018
2020
2022
23
26
39
5
7
24
23
39
6
8
31
19
39
7
4
33
23
34
5
5
24
28
36
7
5
24
35
23
8
10
25
34
23
10
8
28
38
16
12
6
39
33
12
14
2
Facilitation
Incentives
Liberalization
Promotion
Other
23
26
44
2
5
Source: UNCTAD, Investment Policy Monitor database, accessed 31 March 2024.
Figure II.5	
Investment facilitation is important across regions  
Measures more favourable to investors by category and region, 2014–2023
(Percentage)
50
100
29
41
16
8
6
29
18
37
8
8
26
40
19
13
2
26
32
30
6
6
Africa
Developing Asia
Latin America and
the Caribbean
countries
Developed
Facilitation
Incentives
Liberalization
Promotion
Other
by an increase in the adoption of 
new investment promotion strategies 
and the creation of new investment 
promotion agencies (IPAs). 
The regional breakdown of policy measures 
more favourable to investors adopted in the 
last decade reveals important differences 
(figure II.5). In Africa and in Latin America 


World Investment Report 2024
Investment facilitation and digital government
8
and the Caribbean, incentives were the 
most common policy initiative, accounting 
for approximately 40 per cent of all 
measures in both regions. In contrast, Asia 
favoured liberalization, which accounted 
for 37 per cent of the measures, notably 
higher than in Africa (16 per cent) and in 
Latin America and the Caribbean (19 per 
cent). Investment facilitation measures 
consistently represented more than a 
quarter of the total across all regions. This 
underscores the widespread recognition 
of investment facilitation as a cornerstone 
of investment attraction efforts globally.
a. Facilitation 
In 2023, investment facilitation measures 
reached a peak, constituting 39 per cent 
of the policy measures more favourable 
to investors implemented by countries 
worldwide, 45 per cent of the measures 
adopted by developed countries and 38 per 
cent of those adopted by developing ones.
Investment facilitation measures fall into 
three main categories: transparency, 
streamlining and facilitation services. 
Transparency measures aim at improving 
the clarity and accessibility of laws and 
procedures related to investment. They 
made up 21 per cent (12) of the facilitation 
measures in 2023. Streamlining measures 
encompass initiatives designed to enhance 
the efficiency of procedures related to 
investments. They accounted for almost 
1	 Accessible at https://investmentpolicy.unctad.org/investment-policy-monitor.
half (27) of the facilitation measures. 
Facilitation services are provided by 
IPAs, special economic zones or other 
administrative entities. They constituted 
28 per cent (16) of the total (figure II.6). 
The introduction of single windows for 
investment figured prominently among 
the facilitation measures adopted in 2023. 
For instance, Egypt introduced a single-
approval system for investment projects, 
encompassing various licences and 
permits relevant to investment activities. 
(Unless indicated otherwise, all examples 
provided in this section, including additional 
information and links to official sources, 
can be found in the UNCTAD Investment 
Policy Monitor database).1 The General 
Authority for Investment and Free Zones 
also announced plans to launch an online 
platform for company establishment. 
Uruguay introduced an online single 
window for investment, integrating various 
services related to company establishment 
and operation. Uzbekistan established a 
physical one-stop shop to assist investors 
upon entry and facilitate visa processes. 
Transparency measures included the 
introduction of information portals for foreign 
investors. Jordan and Mexico, for example, 
unveiled platforms providing detailed 
investment procedures, opportunities 
and incentives. Additional measures 
involved initiatives to clarify investment-
related procedures. For instance, the 
Figure II.6	
Streamlining of administrative procedures is top priority  
Investment facilitation measures by category, 2023
(Number)
Source: UNCTAD, Investment Policy Monitor database, accessed 31 March 2024.
Streamlining
Other
27
Transparency
12
Facilitation services
16
2
Investment 
facilitation 
measures 
hit record 
high (39%)


Chapter II
Investment policy trends
9
Kingdom of the Netherlands and the United 
Kingdom issued guidance on the approval 
processes of their FDI screening regimes.
Facilitation services ranged from 
assistance in obtaining specific permits 
to comprehensive support for foreign 
investors. Chile implemented a multi-
agency cooperation agreement involving 
the Foreign Investment Promotion Agency, 
the National Immigration Service and 
the Economic Development Agency 
to streamline visa services for foreign 
investors and skilled professionals. Malaysia 
introduced a dedicated visa facilitation 
service for strategic investors identified by 
the Malaysian Investment Development 
Authority. Uzbekistan introduced the 
position of “investment managers” within 
the Ministry of Investments, Industry and 
Trade, to provide dedicated support to 
investors throughout the project life cycle, 
from resolving land acquisition issues 
to securing necessary permits. The rise 
in investment facilitation initiatives is 
discussed in greater detail in chapter IV.
b. Incentives
The introduction or expansion of investment 
incentives represented one third of the policy 
measures more favourable to investors in 
2023 in both developed and developing 
countries. Although the number of new 
incentives decreased in comparison with 
2022, it remained significantly higher than 
the average for the decade. Investment 
incentive measures encompass tax and 
financial incentives, including incentives 
related to special economic zones, 
alongside other types, such as infrastructure 
facilities or visa and work permits (e.g. 
citizenship-by-investment programmes). 
Approximately 50 per cent of the sector-
specific incentives introduced in 2023 
aimed at promoting investment in the 
services sector, followed by manufacturing 
and agriculture (figure II.7). This confirms a 
growing focus on promoting investment in 
services, illustrated by the increase in the 
share of new incentives for the services 
sector from 35 per cent of non-industry-
specific incentives in 2014–2018 to 46 per 
cent in 2019–2023. New incentives for 
manufacturing and agriculture remained 
stable at 31 per cent and 15 per cent, 
respectively. New incentives for extractive 
industries declined from 19 per cent in 
2014–2018 to 9 per cent in 2019–2023. 
As in 2022, the push for renewable energy 
investment stood out as the primary 
focus of new incentives enacted in 2023. 
Italy, Nigeria and South Africa adopted a 
range of fiscal and non-fiscal incentives 
aimed at encouraging investments in 
renewable energy. Canada and Egypt 
introduced an investment tax credit and 
other fiscal incentives focused specifically 
on the promotion of green hydrogen. 
New incentives in manufacturing also 
aimed to support clean technologies, 
as well as high-tech manufacturing. For 
instance, France introduced a tax credit 
for producing batteries, solar panels, wind 
turbines and heat pumps. The United 
Figure II.7	
Sector-specific incentives primarily target services 
Incentive schemes by sector, 2023
(Number)
Source: UNCTAD, Investment Policy Monitor database, accessed 31 March 2024.
Agriculture
4
Manufacturing
11
Services
16
Cross-industry
27
Renewable 
energy: key 
target of 
incentives 
in 2023


World Investment Report 2024
Investment facilitation and digital government
10
Kingdom established new green freeports 
offering several fiscal incentives for 
advanced manufacturing and the production 
of renewable energy equipment. Israel 
offered a tax credit in the high-technology 
sector. Mexico launched incentives 
for nearshoring in semiconductors, 
electromobility and medical devices.
c. Promotion
Investment promotion measures 
accounted for 14 per cent of all 
measures more favourable to investors 
in 2023. They included the formulation 
of new national investment policies 
and investment promotion strategies, 
the establishment or strengthening 
of investment promotion institutions 
and the adoption of public–private 
partnership (PPP) initiatives (figure II.8).
In recent years, several countries have 
adopted national investment policy 
documents to emphasize investment-
related priorities and introduce measures 
to improve investment attraction. Notable 
examples include Kenya in 2019, Jamaica 
in 2020, El Salvador and New Zealand 
in 2021 and Australia in 2022. In 2023, 
Nigeria and Pakistan also introduced 
national investment policies. Both outlined 
comprehensive frameworks for regulating 
and promoting investments, identifying 
target sectors for investment attraction 
and enhancing the coordination among 
various entities involved in investment 
promotion at different levels of Government. 
The national investment policies of both 
Kenya and Nigeria were prepared with 
technical assistance from UNCTAD.
Enhancing the coordination and 
effectiveness of investment promotion 
activities was also the key objective 
behind the creation or strengthening of 
investment promotion institutions in 2023. 
In Botswana, for instance, four investment-
related institutions were merged into the 
Botswana Investment and Trade Centre. 
Egypt established a Supreme Council 
for Investments under the chairmanship 
of the country’s president. Papua New 
Guinea passed reforms to strengthen 
the Investment Promotion Authority, 
including through improved inter-agency 
coordination on investment matters.
In addition, several investor targeting 
strategies were implemented in 2023. 
Jordan introduced the Investment 
Promotion Strategy for 2023–2026, 
entrusting all international promotion 
activities to specialized marketing 
agencies charged with identifying potential 
investors and conducting focused 
campaigns in select countries. China 
launched the Invest in China initiative, 
targeting foreign investment from specific 
countries. Costa Rica debuted an FDI 
strategy aimed at attracting investment 
beyond the capital’s metropolitan area.
Efforts to foster investment through 
PPPs were undertaken by Ecuador, 
Ethiopia, Kenya, Peru and the Russian 
Federation. Ecuador rolled out a new 
PPP framework, and Ethiopia introduced 
a mechanism for direct PPP negotiations 
with foreign firms. Kenya encouraged 
the development and operation of port 
infrastructure through PPPs. Peru made 
land access easier for PPP investors. The 
Russian Federation strengthened its PPP 
Figure II.8	
Adoption of new strategies leads investment promotion efforts
Measures by type, 2023
(Number)
Source: UNCTAD, Investment Policy Monitor database, accessed 31 March 2024.
Investment promotion institutions
4
Public–private partnership initiatives
5
Investment promotion strategies
11
National 
investment 
policies on 
the rise


Chapter II
Investment policy trends
11
framework to reduce investment risks and 
initiated an electronic tender process.
d. Liberalization
Liberalization initiatives accounted for 12 
per cent of all measures more favourable to 
investors in 2023. All of them were adopted 
by developing countries. The removal of FDI 
entry restrictions and conditions represented 
the majority of liberalization measures, 
followed by the removal of restrictions on 
foreign exchange, privatization initiatives 
and liberalization of land access (figure II.9).
As in the case of incentives, though most 
measures were cross-sectoral, sector-
specific liberalization initiatives concerned 
primarily services. For instance, Ethiopia 
allowed foreign investment in digital payment 
systems. India permitted foreign lawyers 
and law firms to “practice foreign law 
within the country” (i.e. to advise clients 
on the international elements of mergers 
and acquisitions or appear as arbitrators). 
Nigeria opened its electricity sector to 
FDI at the state level, granting each state 
the authority to create an independent 
electricity market within its jurisdiction.
Figure II.9	
Most liberalization measures lifted entry restrictions  
Liberalization measures by type, 2023 
(Number)
Source: UNCTAD, Investment Policy Monitor database, accessed 31 March 2024.
Privatizing
2
Easing access to land
1
Relaxing foreign exchange restrictions
3
Easing entry conditions
3
Lifting entry restrictions
8
3. Policy measures less favourable to investors
Heightened caution towards foreign investments in critical sectors 
persisted in 2023. New or expanded FDI screening mechanisms 
accounted for nearly half of the measures less favourable to 
investors (45 per cent). Four additional countries implemented FDI 
screening in 2023, and several others will follow in 2024.
A series of global crises, including the 
pandemic, have intensified geopolitical 
tensions, disrupted global supply chains 
and raised food and energy prices. This 
has led to greater caution towards foreign 
investment in sectors that are essential for 
national and economic security, prompting 
many countries, particularly developed 
ones, to tighten regulations on foreign 
investment. FDI-specific restrictions, which 
accounted for the minority of measures 
unfavourable to investors a decade ago, 
have since represented about 60 per 
cent of the total number of measures, 
with peaks of more than 80 per cent 
during the pandemic (figure II.10).


World Investment Report 2024
Investment facilitation and digital government
12
FDI entry restrictions represented the 
majority of the measures less favourable 
to investors over the last decade. 
These primarily involved the adoption 
of investment screening mechanisms in 
developed regions, especially Europe. 
Other entry-related measures adopted by 
both developed and developing countries 
included primarily restrictions on foreign 
ownership of land and limitations on foreign 
investment in strategic sectors (e.g. financial 
services, mining, media or transport). 
Tax-related measures, e.g. the removal 
or reduction of investment incentives, 
accounted for the bulk of treatment and 
operation measures affecting FDI. 
a. Investment screening for 
national security
Nearly half of the investment policy 
measures less favourable to investors 
adopted in the last decade concerned 
investment screening for national security. 
As documented in recent World Investment 
Reports and in a dedicated issue of the 
Investment Policy Monitor (UNCTAD, 
2023d), screening has been the largest 
category among all less favourable 
measures adopted by countries since 
2017, except in 2022, when tax measures 
predominated (UNCTAD, 2023f). In 2023, 
this trend persisted, with investment 
Figure II.10	
Entry restrictions remain prominent 
Policy measures less favourable to investors by category 
(Percentage)
Source: UNCTAD, Investment Policy Monitor database, accessed 31 March 2024.
2014
2016
2018
2020
2022
2023
2021
2019
2017
2015
20
40
60
80
100
23
18
59
50
12
38
42
25
21
12
48
17
13
22
49
10
10
31
55
10
35
80
2
4
14
61
20
7
12
36
6
9
49
52
8
16
24
FDI entry
FDI treatment and operation
General investment entry
General investment treatment and operation


Chapter II
Investment policy trends
13
Figure II.11	
Screening regimes continue to expand
Countries introducing or expanding security-related investment screening
(Number)
Source: UNCTAD, Investment Policy Monitor database, accessed 31 March 2024.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
2006
1995–
2005
2008
2010
2012
2014
2016
2018
2020
2022
2023
2021
2019
2017
2015
2013
2011
2009
2007
3
2
1
1
3
1
1
1
1
4
4
3
2
4
1
5
3
5
17
5
12
5
13
2
11
4
Expands screening
 
Introduces screening
Cumulative number of countries with screening
1
screening accounting for 45 per cent of all 
measures less favourable to investors.
New FDI screening regimes were 
implemented in Belgium, Estonia, 
Luxembourg and Sweden, bringing the total 
number of countries with comprehensive 
FDI screening regimes to 41 (figure II.11). 
Of these, 26 are in Europe. Collectively, 
countries that conduct FDI screening for 
national security now represent more 
than half of global FDI flows and three 
quarters of FDI stock. As in previous 
years, countries continued to address 
vulnerabilities in their existing FDI screening 
mechanisms by covering a broader range 
of transactions to improve the detection 
of potential risks related to FDI.
Only a limited number of countries report 
on their screening mechanisms. Table 
II.1 displays data compiled by UNCTAD 
from country surveys and official sources. 
UNCTAD has previously pointed out the 
lack of a standardized methodology for 
collecting data on screened projects, 
highlighting the variety in metrics and 
reporting periods employed by various 
screening authorities (UNCTAD, 2023f). 
Despite these methodological differences, 
discernible trends emerge. In the majority 
of countries for which historical data are 
available, there has been an uptick in the 
number of projects subject to review. 
The rejection rate remains low, at less 
than 1 per cent in most countries. 
Transactions that underwent screening for 
national security concerned a variety of 
sectors, including defence and security, 
energy and utilities, critical infrastructure, 
automotives, financial services, health 
care and pharmaceuticals, electronics and 
semiconductors, media, communication and 
Internet services, and metals and mining. 
The growing number of cases screened 
by authorities across several jurisdictions 
inevitably signifies a growing burden 
on administrative resources and 


World Investment Report 2024
Investment facilitation and digital government
14
Table II.1	
Screened investment projects on the rise but low rejection rates 
Source: UNCTAD, based on official sources and country inputs.
a The total number of cases screened by the end of the period may include cases carried over from previous 
periods, depending on the methodology employed by each country.
b For Germany, the number of projects modified or authorized with conditions includes prohibitions, side 
conditions, public legal contracts and administrative orders.
c In the United Kingdom, the review mechanism applies equally to domestic and foreign parties. The cumulative 
number of cases is subject to continuous adjustment as a result of verification processes, which may result in 
discrepancies with case numbers reported in previous years.
Country
Period
Screeneda
Authorized
Modified or authorized 
with conditions
Rejected
Withdrawn
Australia
4/2020–3/2021
..
28
4
..
..
7/2021–6/2022
..
75
39
..
..
7/2022–6/2023
..
100
18
..
..
Belgium
7/2023–12/2023
32
26
..
0
..
Canada
2022
35
24
0
3
8
2023
27
16
0
0
3
Czechia
2022
13
7
0
0
3
2023
28
20
0
0
1
Finland
2019
15
..
..
0
..
2020
15
..
..
0
..
2021
32
..
..
0
..
2022
34
..
..
0
1
2023
39
..
..
0
0
France
2021
328
57
67
..
..
2022
325
61
70
..
..
Germanyb
2019
106
..
12
..
..
2020
160
..
12
..
..
2021
306
..
14
..
..
2022
306
..
12
..
..
2023
257
..
10
..
..
Italy
2019
83
39
13
0
..
2020
342
135
40
2
..
2021
496
183
26
3
1
2022
608
242
18
4
3
Malta
2021
81
2
6
2
0
2022
22
0
10
1
3
2023
20
1
2
0
3
Spain
2019
6
6
0
0
0
2020
37
34
3
0
1
2021
57
51
6
0
1
2022
78
67
9
1
1
2023
108
94
10
0
4
United Kingdomc
1/2022–3/2022
209
3
0
0
..
4/2022–3/2023
776
757
9
5
11
United States
2019
231
..
28
2
12
2020
313
..
16
2
9
2021
436
..
26
0
11
2022
440
..
46
1
20


Chapter II
Investment policy trends
15
case management. In response, in 
2023, some countries established 
procedures such as pre-authorization 
and consultation (e.g. Denmark and 
Spain). Others introduced fees for FDI 
screening (e.g. Germany and Romania).
The trend towards the adoption of FDI 
screening regimes will continue in the 
coming years. The screening regimes of 
Bulgaria and Singapore entered into force 
in March 2024. The regime in Ireland is 
expected to become operational before 
the end of the year. The European Union 
has also put forward a reform proposal 
aimed at revising the current framework.2 
It emphasizes the need for all member 
States to adopt ex ante screening 
mechanisms and suggests extending 
the scope of the screening regimes to 
cover intra-European Union transactions 
controlled by foreign investors. 
Bilateral initiatives also play a role in the 
expansion of FDI screening. They focus 
predominantly on establishing formal or 
informal mechanisms for exchanging 
information relating to national security 
and investment. In December 2023, 
Mexico and the United States signed a 
memorandum of intent to create a bilateral 
working group for regular exchanges of 
information.3 The United States and the 
European Union have created a working 
group on investment screening to promote 
best practices and develop a holistic policy 
approach to addressing risks pertaining 
to specific sensitive technologies.4
b. Other entry-related measures
Other types of entry restrictions on 
investment accounted for 23 per cent of 
the measures less favourable to investors 
2	 European Commission, 2024, Proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on 
the screening of foreign investments in the Union and repealing Regulation (EU) 2019/452 of the European 
Parliament and of the Council, COM(2024 23 final, 2024/0017 (COD), https://circabc.europa.eu/ui/
group/aac710a0-4eb3-493e-a12a-e988b442a72a/library/f5091d46-475f-45d0-9813-7d2a7537bc1f/
details?download=true.
3	 United States, Department of the Treasury, 2023, Secretary of the Treasury Janet L. Yellen and Mexico’s 
Secretary of Finance and Public Credit Rogelio Ramírez de la O announce intent to establish bilateral working 
group on foreign investment review, 7 December. See https://home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/jy1965.
4	 European Commission, Working Group 8 – Investment Screening, Part of EU–US Trade and Technology 
Council, https://futurium.ec.europa.eu/en/EU-US-TTC/wg8.
in 2023, with a significant emphasis on 
enhancing State control over extractive 
industries. Key examples included 
the National Lithium Strategy in Chile, 
mandating State majority ownership 
throughout the lithium production cycle, 
and the revised Mining Code of Mali, 
granting the State a 10 per cent stake in 
new mining ventures. Mining law reforms 
in Mexico tightened concession conditions 
and removed the expropriation rights of 
concessionaires for mining exploitation. 
Panama introduced a moratorium on 
new metallic mineral concessions.
Concerns regarding foreign investors’ 
ownership of certain types of property 
also prompted various countries to enact 
new prohibitions. Canada, for instance, 
restricted the purchase of residential 
properties by foreign investors. The Russian 
Federation limited foreign ownership of 
news aggregators, and the United States 
imposed restrictions on foreign acquisition 
of agricultural and forest properties, as 
well as land or property near military 
installations and critical infrastructure. 
c. Investor treatment and 
operation
The remaining one third of policy measures 
less favourable to investors in 2023 (12 
measures) comprised various treatment 
and operation provisions adopted by both 
developing and developed countries that 
aimed to address a diverse array of specific 
policy concerns. The extractive sector 
was often affected by these measures. For 
instance, Chad nationalized the assets of 
Esso Exploration and Production Chad, 
and Mali abolished several tax incentives 
previously available to mining companies. 
Countries with 
FDI screening 
represent more 
than half of 
global FDI 
flows, three 
quarters of 
FDI stock


World Investment Report 2024
Investment facilitation and digital government
16
In line with the recent trend towards more 
stringent controls on outbound investment, 
three countries introduced measures to 
address concerns directly related to outward 
FDI (OFDI). South Africa established an 
approval requirement for transfers abroad 
of capital funds in amounts greater than R1 
million per year (approximately $50,000) 
and increased related documentation 
requirements. Spain expanded the 
mandatory reporting of OFDI to encompass 
new types of transactions. The United 
States introduced outbound investment 
controls on certain transactions relating to 
national security technologies and products.
From near the end of 2023 into the early 
months of 2024, at least 26 countries, 
primarily developed economies in Europe, 
5	 Based on data from OECD Pillar Two Country Tracker and Pillar Two Navigator, available at oecdpillars.com.
enacted laws to implement the global 
minimum tax as outlined in the Pillar II 
reform of the Organisation for Economic 
Co-operation and Development (OECD).5 
Known as the Global Anti-Base Erosion 
Model Rules, the objective is to ensure 
that MNEs contribute a minimum amount 
of tax on earnings within each operating 
country (UNCTAD, 2023f). The reform 
targets multinationals with annual revenues 
above €750 million, enabling jurisdictions 
to levy a top-up tax to achieve a minimum 
effective rate of 15 per cent on income taxed 
below this threshold. These developments 
are not captured in the Investment 
Policy Monitor database because of its 
methodological specifications (see box II.1).
4. Outward foreign direct investment policies
The global landscape of OFDI promotion, facilitation and 
regulation has undergone substantial changes since the early 
2000s. These changes reflect the evolving patterns of global 
investment and production, the sharpening focus on sustainability 
and the heightened geopolitical tensions and gradual shift from 
liberalization to regulation that have characterized FDI policies 
over the past decade.
a. Promotion and facilitation of 
outward investment
As highlighted in a recent issue of the 
Investment Policy Monitor (UNCTAD, 
2024b), OFDI promotion and facilitation 
policies have been a significant component 
of economic strategies of developed 
countries for several decades. At least 
31 of them (79 per cent of the total 
tracked) have adopted initiatives to 
promote outbound investment. Support 
for companies that are investing abroad 
typically serves two main objectives: the 
development and internationalization of 
domestic businesses, particularly small 
and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), and 
the promotion of international cooperation 
and development efforts. The number of 
developing countries that have adopted 
OFDI promotion mechanisms has expanded 
in line with their expanding role as sources of 
investment. At least 19 developing countries 
(14 per cent) have established formal 
mechanisms to promote OFDI, including 11 
countries in Asia, 6 in Africa, and 2 in Latin 
America and the Caribbean (figure II.12).
Four principal types of direct promotion 
instruments to support OFDI exist: fiscal and 


Chapter II
Investment policy trends
17
financial support, investment guarantees, 
investment facilitation services and direct 
capital participation. Facilitation services 
are the most widespread, adopted by 23 
per cent of countries globally, including 64 
per cent of developed countries and 11 
per cent of developing countries. These 
services may include providing advisory 
assistance, supporting participation in 
international events, coordinating economic 
missions abroad, connecting with partners 
in the host country, training, and preparing 
feasibility and country risk analyses.
Fiscal or financial support encompasses 
loans, grants and tax incentives for 
companies that venture into OFDI. Loans 
are usually provided by home-country 
export promotion agencies, development 
banks or similar institutions. They generally 
offer better conditions than market 
standards or support projects that might 
otherwise struggle to secure private 
financing. This type of support is common 
in developed countries (62 per cent) but 
rare in developing countries (10 per cent). 
Foreign investment insurance or guarantees 
secure some level of political risk protection 
for domestic firms investing in more 
unpredictable and volatile markets. They are 
offered by 18 per cent of countries globally 
– 67 per cent of developed countries and 
5 per cent of developing countries. 
Direct capital participation through State-
sponsored programmes is offered in 49 
per cent of developed countries and 3 
per cent of developing countries (figure 
II.13). These programmes enable domestic 
firms to invest abroad by providing patient 
capital through direct equity participation 
and private enterprise funds. These are 
made available through import–export 
banks, development banks or dedicated 
funds targeting particular sectors, countries 
or types of firms, such as SMEs.
A growing number of countries are 
leveraging OFDI as a tool to further the 
goals of the 2030 Agenda. Among the 50 
countries worldwide with OFDI promotion 
mechanisms, 18 developed countries 
(58 per cent) and 5 developing countries 
(26 per cent) have put in place at least 
one instrument specifically designed to 
encourage OFDI in developing countries. In 
addition, numerous developed countries, 
especially in Europe, have integrated OFDI 
promotion schemes into their broader 
development assistance strategies. 
They actively engage the private sector 
in development cooperation initiatives, 
so as to capitalize on its strengths and 
capabilities to advance development 
goals, while promoting growth and 
global competitiveness of domestic 
firms. Consequently, OFDI promotion 
schemes often incorporate criteria that 
emphasize the benefits to the host country, 
particularly as regards investments that 
target developing countries (figure II.14).
Figure II.12	
Outward investment promotion and facilitation schemes introduced 
mainly in developed countries
Countries with a scheme, 2023
(Number)
Source: UNCTAD.
Latin America and the Caribbean
2
Africa
6
Developing Asia
11
Developed countries
31
More countries 
using outward 
investment 
as a tool for 
Agenda 2030


World Investment Report 2024
Investment facilitation and digital government
18
Figure II.14	
Leveraging promotion of outward investment to achieve the Sustainable 
Development Goals 
Criteria for accessing support schemes, by economic grouping 
(Percentage) 
Source: UNCTAD.
Developed countries
Developing countries
Investment in developing economies
Host-country benefts
Sustainability
58
26
52
16
39
11
Figure II.13	
Facilitation is the main support tool worldwide for outward 
investment 
Tools offered and share of countries using them, 2023
(Percentage)
Source: UNCTAD.
Developed countries
Developing countries
World
Fiscal/fnancial support
62
10
21
Direct capital participation
49
3
13
Investment facilitation services
64
11
23
Investment guarantee
67
5
18


Chapter II
Investment policy trends
19
b. Regulation and screening of 
outward investment
OFDI promotion and regulation policies often 
coexist within the same country. Historically, 
restrictions on OFDI were mainly observed in 
developing countries and related to balance-
of-payments risks (UNCTAD, 2024b). In 
the early 2000s, the liberalization of OFDI 
gained momentum, as countries increasingly 
removed foreign exchange restrictions. 
In the last decade, by contrast, an 
observable shift in the regulatory approach 
to OFDI has seen restrictions increase 
by nearly one third in both developing 
and developed countries (figure II.15).
This increase can be partially explained 
by growing concerns over money-
laundering practices, tax evasion and 
other illicit financial flows disguised as FDI. 
It was accentuated by the coronavirus 
pandemic of 2019, which led to a general 
slowdown in both inward and outward 
liberalization efforts. Finally, in recent 
years, concerns have been brought 
forward related to the potential risks 
that OFDI could pose to national and 
economic security, particularly in relation 
to strategic sectors and technologies.
6	 President of the United States, 2023, Addressing United States investments in certain national security 
technologies and products in countries of concern, Presidential Documents: Executive Order 14105 of August 
9, 2023, Federal Register, 88:154, https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2023/08/11/2023-17449/
addressing-united-states-investments-in-certain-national-security-technologies-and-products-in.
In 2023, restrictions on OFDI were in 
place in nearly half (95) of the world’s 
economies, including a majority of 
developing countries and least developed 
countries. The most common involve either 
the necessity for investors to secure prior 
approval for their projects (69 per cent 
of countries with OFDI restrictions) or to 
register their planned OFDI with authorities 
(14 per cent). Total bans on OFDI are in 
place in only three countries: Ethiopia, 
Nepal and the Syrian Arab Republic. 
Screening mechanisms for OFDI based on 
national security concerns are also gaining 
traction. While some Asian countries have 
implemented them for decades (e.g. China, 
India and Japan), the focus on the security 
aspects of OFDI has recently broadened 
to include other major sources. Since 
2020, the United States has introduced 
several initiatives to monitor and regulate 
OFDI, culminating in an executive order 
aimed at scrutinizing investments in key 
national security technologies in certain 
countries (August 2023).6 In January 2024, 
the European Commission responded to 
growing national security concerns related to 
OFDI by proposing a framework to monitor 
outbound investment in critical sectors 
Figure II.15	
Outward investment restrictions on the rise
Measures by nature and economic grouping 
(Percentage)
Sources: UNCTAD, based on Investment Policy Monitor database and IMF Annual Report on Exchange 
Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions database, both accessed on 31 March 2024.
Less favourable
More favourable
Developing countries
1999–2010
2011–2022
1999–2010
2011–2022
Developed countries
22
78
49
51
21
79
54
46


World Investment Report 2024
Investment facilitation and digital government
20
such as advanced semiconductors and 
biotechnology. Member States have been 
tasked to provide initial risk assessments by 
mid-2025. Based on these assessments, 
the Commission will advise member States 
7	 European Commission, 2024, White paper on outbound investments, 24 January, https://circabc.europa.eu/
ui/group/aac710a0-4eb3-493e-a12a-e988b442a72a/library/51124c0d-58d8-4cd9-8a22-4779f6647899/
details?download=true.
on the extent to which existing tools can 
mitigate these risks and whether additional 
proportionate policy actions are warranted 
at the European Union or national level.7


Chapter II
Investment policy trends
21
B. International investment policies
1. Trends in international investment agreements
In 2023, new-generation international investment agreements 
(IIAs) included innovative provisions on investment facilitation and 
cooperation and tended to safeguard States’ right to regulate. 
However, old-generation IIAs still cover about half of global FDI 
stock, making IIA reform more urgent. The year was also marked 
by intensified efforts to reform the IIA and ISDS regimes.
a. Conclusion and termination 
of investment agreements
In 2023, countries and regional organizations 
concluded at least 29 IIAs – 12 bilateral 
investment treaties (BITs) and 17 treaties 
with investment provisions (TIPs). This 
brought the size of the IIA universe to 3,291 
(2,831 BITs and 460 TIPs), according to 
the UNCTAD IIA Navigator (figure II.16). 
Figure II.16	
Agreements from the 1990s and 2000s dominate the international 
investment agreements universe
(Annual number of agreements signed)
Source: UNCTAD, IIA Navigator database, accessed 25 March 2024.
Note: The UNCTAD IIA Navigator is updated continuously as new IIA-related information becomes available.
Abbreviations: IIA = international investment agreement.
50
100
150
200
250
1959
2023
2018
2013
2008
2003
1998
1993
1988
1983
1978
1973
1968
1963
IIAs in force
IIAs signed, not in force
IIAs terminated
Number of
IIAs in force
2 608


World Investment Report 2024
Investment facilitation and digital government
22
100
200
300
400
1994–2003
2004–2013
2014–2023
Total number
of IIAs terminated
585
In addition, at least 15 IIAs entered into force 
and 4 were terminated in 2023, bringing 
the total number of IIAs in force to at least 
2,608 by the end of the year. These IIAs 
are largely dominated by old-generation 
treaties, signed in the 1990s and 2000s.
The total number of terminations reached 
at least 585 by 2023; about 70 per cent 
of these IIAs were terminated in the last 
decade (figure II.17). Under sunset clauses, 
IIAs may continue to protect investments 
in existence at the time of termination or 
withdrawal and grant investors access 
to investor–State dispute settlement 
(ISDS) for up to 20 years afterward.
IIAs signed and/or adopted in 2023 
cover a range of investment governance 
issues that go beyond protection, such 
as investment facilitation, cooperation 
or liberalization (figure II.18). Notably, 
the majority of TIPs signed or adopted 
in 2023 included commitments on 
facilitation or cooperation. About half 
contained protection or liberalization 
provisions. In the Agreement Establishing 
the African Continental Free Trade Area 
(AfCFTA), the Protocol on Investment – 
adopted in February 2023 – provides an 
example of this nascent shift (box II.2).
Newly concluded protection-focused IIAs 
continued the trend towards safeguarding 
States’ right to regulate as well as 
reforming or omitting ISDS. It remains to 
be seen whether these refinements will be 
interpreted in line with the treaty parties’ 
intent in ISDS. A lot remains to be done to 
focus the coverage of IIAs on sustainable 
investment and foster responsible business 
conduct by investors. New IIAs also 
commonly continue to bind countries for 
long periods of time, limiting their ability to 
adapt to changing economic realities and 
new regulatory imperatives (figure II.19). 
The reform of old-generation IIAs continues 
to advance at a slow pace. Only 19 
per cent of the IIAs signed since 2020 
replace an old-generation IIA; 39 per 
cent ensure that the reformed provisions 
they contain would be effectively applied 
where parallel old-generation IIAs exist. 
Source: UNCTAD, IIA Navigator database, accessed 25 March 2024.
Abbreviations: IIAs = international investment agreements.
Figure II.17	
Terminations of investment agreements reach nearly 600
(Annual number of terminations)


Chapter II
Investment policy trends
23
The Investment Protocol to the AfCFTA, which involves 54 countries, is the first megaregional IIA covering the 
African continent in its entirety. It was adopted by the Heads of the State and Government during the Assembly 
of the African Union on 18–19 February 2023. 
The Protocol builds on existing investment treaty reform objectives and best practices recognized by the African 
Union and the regional economic communities, as well as UNCTAD. UNCTAD’s work on IIA reform is recognized in 
the preamble of the Protocol. The Protocol provides a balanced approach to international investment governance 
and contains the following elements:
•	
Proactive promotion and facilitation commitments for investment that fosters sustainable development
•	
Refined investment protection provisions that preserve the contracting parties’ right and duty to regulate in 
the public interest and are extended to sustainable investments only
•	
A dedicated chapter on investment and sustainable development, with proactive commitments on climate 
action, health and pandemics, human capital development and technology transfer
•	
Enforceable investor obligations related to environmental and labour protection, human rights, the rights of 
local communities, transparent corporate governance, tax and non-interference in local governance
•	
Firm commitments on technical assistance and capacity-building for contracting parties, as well as support 
for implementation by the Pan-African Trade and Investment Agency established under the Protocol.
Upon entry into force, the Protocol will consolidate the IIA regime in Africa. Under its terms, 183 intra-African 
BITs will be replaced and regional economic organizations in Africa undertake to harmonize regional IIAs with the 
content of the Protocol.
UNCTAD is a member of the task force that assisted the AfCFTA Secretariat in the negotiation of the Investment 
Protocol and continues to assist in the negotiation of the Investment Dispute Settlement Annex to it.
Source: UNCTAD.
Box II.2	
AfCFTA Investment Protocol (2023)
Figure II.18	
Content of investment agreements is becoming more diverse 
(Number of agreements signed in 2023 by type of commitment)
Source: UNCTAD, IIA Navigator database, accessed 25 March 2024.
Notes: Based on 22 IIAs (14 TIPs and 8 BITs) signed and/or adopted in 2023 for which text or other public 
information on content is available. Cooperation commitments refer to the establishment of institutional 
frameworks to cooperate on investment activities (investment committee) and/or undertakings to conduct joint 
activities on investment in one or more economic sectors.
Abbreviations: BIT = bilateral investment treaty, IIA = international investment agreement, TIP = treaty with 
investment provisions.
BITs
TIPs
Cooperation
5
11
Protection
8
7
Facilitation/promotion
4
10
Liberalization
1
8


World Investment Report 2024
Investment facilitation and digital government
24
IIAs in force cover 65 per cent of global 
FDI stock. TIPs, which include regional and 
megaregional agreements and relate to a 
broad range of economic issues beyond 
investment disciplines, account for the 
largest share – 53 per cent. BITs, which 
typically include investment protection 
provisions only and apply bilaterally, cover 
about 7 per cent. The remaining 5 per cent 
are covered simultaneously by a TIP and a 
BIT (figure II.20). The coverage of TIPs has 
increased by at least 10 per cent in the past 
decade, following the growing relevance 
of regional investment policymaking.
Old-generation IIAs, which provide broad 
and unrefined provisions that often expose 
host countries to greater risk of ISDS, 
cover 49 per cent of the total global FDI 
stock. For 53 countries, more than 80 per 
cent of total FDI stock is covered by an 
old-generation IIA. The exposure to ISDS 
is overall higher for developing economies 
and LDCs. Old-generation IIAs cover 65 
Figure II.19	
Recently signed investment agreements include reform features
Agreements signed between 2020 and 2023 with selected reform features 
(Percentage) 
Source: UNCTAD.
Note: Based on 36 IIAs concluded in 2020–2023 for which texts are available, not including agreements that 
lack investment protection provisions.
Abbreviations: IIA = international investment agreement, ISDS = investor–State dispute settlement.
a The IIAs counted contain reform language for five or more key substantive provisions, including at least a 
circumscribed fair and equitable treatment standard and a clarified indirect expropriation clause, or a general 
exceptions clause with other reformed clauses, in line with the UNCTAD IIA Reform Accelerator (UNCTAD, 
2020a).
Right-to-regulate safeguards
Promotion/facilitation commitments
ISDS reformed
Importation excluded
Duration/survival clause of fewer than 
10 years
Old-generation IIA(s) replaced
Investor obligations
Scope defned by reference to
sustainability
72
64
50
39
31
19
14
3
Selected features of IIAs
Right-to-regulate safeguards. Reforms language of the majority of 
key substantive IIA provisions, as defned in the UNCTAD IIA Reform 
Accelerator, including those most often invoked in ISDS.a 
Duration/survival clause of fewer than 10 years. Provides for initial 
duration of validity and survival clause of fewer than 10 years or omits 
them.
ISDS reformed. Contains procedural improvements, limits the access to 
ISDS for certain types of claims or omits ISDS altogether.
Old-generation IIA(s) replaced. Provides for the termination or 
suspension of at least one IIA upon entry into force.
Promotion/facilitation commitments. Includes commitments to 
transparency and/or the improvement of the regulatory environment, 
stakeholder engagement on investment policies or cooperation.
Investor obligations. Contains obligations applicable to investors, such 
as responsible business conduct, avoiding corruption, environmental 
management and the like.
Importation of elements from unreformed IIAs excluded. Excludes 
application of most-favoured-nation and non-derogation provisions to 
obligations in other IIAs.
Scope defned by reference to sustainability. The IIA scope of 
coverage is defned by reference to "sustainable development" and/or 
"sustainable investment".


Chapter II
Investment policy trends
25
per cent of developing countries’ FDI stock. 
This is 16 per cent higher than the global 
average and more than 20 per cent higher 
than the share for developed economies. 
The difference is even higher for LDCs, 
for which old-generation treaties cover 
71 per cent of FDI stock (figure II.21). 
IIA terminations and replacements since 
2012 have affected the IIA coverage of 
about 13 per cent of the total FDI stock.8 
Following terminations, 6 per cent of the 
stock is no longer covered; 4 per cent 
relates to developed economies and 2 
per cent to developing economies. The 
remaining 7 per cent are now covered 
by a new-generation IIA. Barely any 
8	 Analysis based on 424 IIAs (415 BITs and 9 TIPs) terminated since 2012 (including IIAs that were terminated 
by mutual consent, unilaterally terminated, expired or replaced by a new treaty).
FDI stock of LDCs has been affected 
by terminations or replacements.
Taken together, these data suggest that to 
date IIA reform has had a limited effect on 
mitigating the risk of ISDS in developing 
countries and has largely left the FDI stock 
of LDCs subject to old-generation IIAs. 
Old-generation IIAs have served as the 
basis for almost all ISDS cases to date 
(about 97 per cent), and developing 
countries have been respondents in the 
majority of them (about 62 per cent). Of 
these, at least 58 cases based on old-
generation IIAs were initiated against LDCs. 
ISDS proceedings represent a significant 
financial risk for developing countries and 
TIPs
53
None
35
BITs and TIPs
5
BITs
7
Figure II.20	
Investment agreements in force cover 65 per cent of global stock of 
foreign direct investment
Share of stock covered, by type of IIA 
(Percentage)
Sources: UNCTAD, IIA Navigator database, accessed 25 March 2024, and IMF Coordinated Direct Investment 
Survey database, accessed 19 March 2024.
Notes: FDI stocks estimated on the basis of information about 193 United Nations Member States’ shares of 
world FDI inward stock for 2022. Does not include confidential and unspecified stock data. Analysis based on 
2,429 IIAs in force (2,220 BITs and 209 TIPs) with substantive investment commitments. For TIPs that include a 
relevant regional economic integration organization, only the FDI stock of members for which the IIA is in force 
was counted. Excludes the Energy Charter Treaty (1994) in view of its sector-specific scope.
Abbreviations: BIT = bilateral investment treaty, FDI = foreign direct investment, IIA = international investment 
agreement, TIP = treaty with investment provisions.


World Investment Report 2024
Investment facilitation and digital government
26
LDCs, in particular. The average amount 
sought by investors in ISDS cases is $1.1 
billion and the average amount awarded is 
$385 million. In at least eight ISDS cases 
developing countries were required to pay 
compensation of more than $1 billion. At the 
end of 2023, the amount that LDCs were 
required to pay totalled $595 million, with 
one case alone accounting for $270 million.
b. Other developments relating 
to investment rule-making 
The withdrawals of France, Germany and 
Poland from the Energy Charter Treaty 
(ECT) (1994) became effective in 2023. At 
least three more countries have deposited 
notices to exit the ECT over concerns 
related to climate change, and the European 
Parliament voted in favour of the withdrawal 
of the European Union in April 2024.
The trend towards negotiating flexible 
international instruments aimed at 
channelling investment towards the 
green economy also continued. 
Partners concluded negotiations on 
the Clean Economy Agreement in the 
context of the Indo-Pacific Economic 
Framework for Prosperity. 
Figure II.21	
Old-generation investment agreements cover the majority of foreign 
direct investment stock in developing and least developed countries
Stock covered, by economic grouping and generation of agreement
(Percentage)
Sources: UNCTAD, IIA Navigator database, accessed 25 March 2024, and IMF Coordinated Direct Investment 
Survey database, accessed 19 March 2024.
Notes: FDI stocks estimated on the basis of information about 193 United Nations Member States’ shares of 
world FDI inward stock for 2022. Does not include confidential and unspecified stock data. Analysis based on 
2,429 IIAs in force (2,220 BITs and 209 TIPs) with substantive investment commitments. For TIPs that include a 
relevant regional economic integration organization, only the FDI stock of members for which the IIA is in force 
was counted. Excludes the Energy Charter Treaty (1994) in view of its sector-specific scope. Where a new-
generation IIA coexists with an old-generation IIA covering the same FDI stock without suspending its effect, 
the relevant FDI stock is considered covered by an old-generation IIA.
Abbreviations: BIT = bilateral investment treaty, FDI = foreign direct investment, IIA = international investment 
agreement, TIP = treaty with investment provisions.
49
16
35
45
18
37
65
8
27
71
2
27
World
Developed
Developing
(except least developed)
Least developed
Old-generation
New-generation
Not covered


Chapter II
Investment policy trends
27
The year witnessed the first outputs of the 
work of the United Nations Commission on 
International Trade Law (UNCITRAL) Working 
Group III on ISDS reform. In July 2023 the 
UNCITRAL Commission adopted the Model 
Provisions and the Guidelines on Mediation 
for International Investment Disputes, and 
the Code of Conduct for Arbitrators in 
International Investment Dispute Resolution. 
In April 2024, Working Group III finalized 
the draft statute for the establishment of an 
advisory centre on investment disputes.
The text of the Investment Facilitation for 
Development Agreement was made public 
on 25 February 2024 by the ministers of 
123 participating members of the World 
Trade Organization. The status of 
the text in relation to the Organization’s 
architecture remains to be determined. 
The UNCTAD World Investment Forum 
2023 took place in Abu Dhabi on 16–20 
October 2023 ahead of the twenty-eighth 
Conference of the Parties (COP28). At the 
Forum investment policymakers and experts 
discussed urgent reforms of the IIA regime 
in light of the climate crisis, resulting in the 
launch of the UNCTAD Multistakeholder 
Platform for IIA Reform (box II.3).
Work on diverse aspects of international 
investment governance continued in a 
number of international forums (table II.2). 
Notably, Brazil – which holds the Group 
of 20 Presidency in 2024 – identified 
sustainable development in IIAs as one 
of the key priorities for the Group of 20 
Trade and Investment Working Group. 
The events in the IIA track at the UNCTAD World Investment Forum 2023 brought together key actors in 
IIA reform:
High-level IIA conference 2023 (18 October 2023). Investment policymakers and experts from 
governments, international organizations, think tanks, academia and the private sector noted the challenges 
that the current IIA regime may pose to climate action, explored options for aligning IIAs with climate 
mitigation and adaptation goals, and called for the urgent reform of the stock of old-generation treaties. 
Based on requests by participants to identify ways to fast-track investment treaty reform for sustainable 
development and climate action, UNCTAD launched a Multi-Stakeholder Platform for IIA Reform.
International policy developments in investment facilitation (19 October 2023). The session united 
key actors in investment facilitation from Governments, development partners, private sector representatives 
and regional/international organizations, to analyse global trends and challenges in investment facilitation 
policies for sustainable development. Speakers welcomed UNCTAD’s policy options for facilitating investment 
in sustainable development, part of the IIA Issues Note Investment Facilitation in IIAs: Trends and Policy 
Options (UNCTAD, 2023a).
Regional sessions (16–18 October 2023). Three sessions co-organized with key regional partner 
organizations complemented the UNCTAD World Investment Forum IIA track and highlighted the role that 
such organizations can play in shaping coherent international investment policies among their members:
•	
D-8 Organization for Economic Cooperation – UNCTAD Guiding Principles for Investment
•	
AfCFTA Investment Protocol: towards a new generation of investment policies in Africa
•	
Islamic Development Bank–UNCTAD Investment Policy Principles
Source: UNCTAD.
Notes: For more information on the UNCTAD World Investment Forum, see https://
worldinvestmentforum.unctad.org/wif-events-programme?event=80. For information on the 
UNCTAD Multi-Stakeholder Platform for IIA Reform, see https://investmentpolicy.unctad.org/news/
hub/1732/20231020-launch-of-multi-stakeholder-platform-for-investment-treaty-reforms.
Box II.3	
UNCTAD World Investment Forum 2023 – IIA track highlights


World Investment Report 2024
Investment facilitation and digital government
28
Table II.2	
Work relating to investment rule-making in international forums, 
2023–2024
Source: UNCTAD, based on various sources.
Abbreviations: ICC = International Chamber of Commerce, IIA = international investment agreement, ISDS 
= investor–State dispute settlement, OECD = Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, 
OHCHR = Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, OIC = Organisation of Islamic 
Cooperation, UNCITRAL = United Nations Commission on International Trade Law, UNIDROIT = International 
Institute for the Unification of Private Law, WTO = World Trade Organization.
Organization/initiative
IIA-related coverage
Most recent outputs/events
Americas Partnership for Economic 
Prosperity
Financing/investment for sustainable 
infrastructure
East Room Declaration (November 2023)
Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation
Sustainability considerations for investment 
policy
San Francisco principles on integrating 
inclusivity and sustainability into trade and 
investment policy (November 2023)
Draft legally binding instrument on the 
right to development
Right to regulate
Draft instrument presented to Human Rights 
Council (September 2023)
Interaction with the scope of IIAs
Group of 20 Trade and Investment 
Working Group
Sustainable development in IIAs
Second meeting (April 2024)
Investment facilitation in IIAs
UNCTAD-OECD Report mapping of 
sustainable development and investment 
facilitation provisions in IIAs by Group of 20 
members and invited countries (April 2024)
Investment Facilitation for 
Development, WTO
Investment facilitation
Joint Ministerial Declaration on the 
Investment Facilitation for Development 
Agreement by participating countries 
(February 2024)
OECD Work Programme on the Future 
of Investment Treaties
IIAs and climate change
OECD Investment Treaty Conference (March 
2024)
IIA reform
OHCHR Special Rapporteur on the issue 
of human rights obligations relating to 
the enjoyment of a safe, clean, healthy 
and sustainable environment
ISDS
Report on risks of ISDS for the right to a 
healthy environment (July 2023)
Safe, clean, healthy and sustainable 
environment
OIC Intergovernmental Experts Group 
on ISDS
ISDS, permanent mechanism
Second expert meeting (September 2023)
OIC investment agreement
UNCITRAL Working Group III
ISDS reform
Model provisions and guidelines on 
mediation, and codes of conduct for 
arbitrators and judges adopted by the 
UNCITRAL Commission (July 2023)
Draft statute of advisory center for ISDS 
finalized (April 2024) 
UNCTAD
IIA reform for sustainable development
First meeting of Multi-stakeholder Platform 
for IIA Reform (February 2024)
Policy analysis, technical assistance, 
consensus building 
Capacity-building and technical assistance 
on IIA reform provided for more than 90 
countries 
UNIDROIT and ICC Working Group
International investment contracts 
(codification)
Second working group meeting (March 2024)


Chapter II
Investment policy trends
29
2. Trends in investor–State dispute settlement
The total ISDS case count reached 1,332, with 60 new arbitrations 
initiated in 2023. About 70 per cent of them were brought 
against developing countries, including three LDCs. Investors in 
construction, manufacturing and extractives accounted for over 
half of the claims.
a. New cases initiated in 2023
In 2023, 60 known treaty-based ISDS cases 
were initiated – 48 cases at the International 
Centre for Settlement of Investment 
Disputes (ICSID) and 12 cases before other 
forums (figure II.22). As some arbitrations 
can be kept confidential, the actual number 
of arbitrations filed in 2023 (and previous 
years) is likely to be higher. In the past 10 
years, the total number of ISDS cases has 
more than doubled. There were fewer than 
Figure II.22	
Investor–State dispute settlement cases surpassed 1,300 at the end of 
2023 
(Annual number of known treaty-based cases)
Source: UNCTAD, ISDS Navigator database, accessed 25 March 2024.
Notes: Information has been compiled from public sources, including specialized reporting services. UNCTAD 
statistics do not cover investor–State cases that are based exclusively on investment contracts (State 
contracts) or national investment laws, or cases in which a party has signalled its intention to submit a claim to 
ISDS but has not commenced the arbitration. Annual and cumulative case numbers are continually adjusted as 
a result of verification processes and may not match exactly case numbers reported in previous years.
Abbreviations: ICSID = International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes, ISDS = investor–State 
dispute settlement.
20
40
60
80
100
1987
1993
1997
1995
2001
1999
2005
2003
2007
2015
2013
2011
2009
2017
2021
2019
2023
ICSID
Non-ICSID
Cumulative number
of known ISDS cases
1 332


World Investment Report 2024
Investment facilitation and digital government
30
600 known ISDS cases at the end of 2013, 
against more than 1,300 at the end of 2023.
To date, 132 countries and one economic 
grouping are known to have been 
respondents to one or more ISDS claims. 
The new cases in 2023 were initiated 
against 37 countries and one economic 
grouping (the European Union). About 70 
per cent of them were brought against 
developing countries, including LDCs 
(Myanmar, Senegal and the United Republic 
of Tanzania). Mexico was the most frequent 
respondent, with 10 new known cases. 
Honduras faced five cases, followed by 
Argentina and the Bolivarian Republic of 
Venezuela with three cases each. The largest 
share of claims was directed at countries 
in Latin America and the Caribbean, with 
about half of the 60 cases. In regional terms, 
between 1987 and 2023, respondent States 
in Europe and in Latin America and the 
9	 Fossil fuel-related cases include those related to mining of coal and lignite; extraction of crude petroleum 
and natural gas; power generation from coal, oil and gas; transportation and storage of fossil fuels; and 
manufacture of coke and refined petroleum products.
Caribbean each accounted for about 30 per 
cent of the total 1,332 known ISDS cases. 
Developed-country claimants brought most 
– about 75 per cent – of the 60 known 
cases in 2023. The highest numbers of 
cases were brought by claimants from the 
United States (13), the United Kingdom (8) 
and Switzerland (5). Between 1987 and 
2023, claimants invoking the IIAs of five 
countries – the United States, the Kingdom 
of the Netherlands, the United Kingdom, 
Germany and Spain – initiated about 45 
per cent of the 1,332 known ISDS cases.
The ISDS cases filed in 2023 involved 
disputes related to several economic 
sectors (figure II.23). Construction, 
manufacturing and extractive industries 
accounted for over half of them, with 10 
or more cases each. By the end of 2023, 
investors had filed a total of 235 fossil 
fuel-related cases,9 making such activities 
Construction
Manufacturing
Mining, oil, gas and coal extraction
Transportation and storage
Financial and insurance services
Supply of electricity, gas and related
Real estate
WASH and waste management
Information and communication
Agriculture, forestry and fshing
Tourism and sports
12
10
10
7
6
6
5
3
2
2
2
Figure II.23	
Construction, manufacturing, and extraction activities account for over 
half of investor–State cases filed in 2023
(Number of known cases by sector)
Source: UNCTAD, ISDS Navigator database, accessed 25 March 2024.
Note: Some cases concerned multiple sectors. 
Abbreviations: WASH = water, sanitation and hygiene.


Chapter II
Investment policy trends
31
among those most frequently brought 
to the ISDS system. Construction and 
manufacturing activities, which commonly 
involve lengthy and asset-intensive projects, 
are typically prone to litigation risk.
About 70 per cent of investor–State 
arbitrations in 2023 were brought under 
BITs and TIPs signed in the 1990s or 
earlier. In combination, the North American 
Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) (1992) 
and the Agreement between Canada, 
the United States and Mexico (USMCA) 
(2018) were the IIAs most frequently 
invoked in 2023. They gave rise to 11 
cases based on so-called “legacy claims” 
under the NAFTA. Five cases were based 
on the ECT (1994), followed by the Central 
America–Dominican Republic Free Trade 
Agreement (FTA) (2004) with three cases 
and the Association of Southeast Asian 
Nations–Australia–New Zealand FTA 
(2009) with two cases. Between 1987 
and 2023, about 20 per cent of the 1,332 
known ISDS cases invoked either the ECT 
(162 cases) or the NAFTA (92 cases).
b. Outcomes of investor–State 
dispute settlement
In 2023, ISDS tribunals rendered at least 49 
known substantive decisions in investor–
State disputes, 28 of which were in the 
public domain at the time of writing. Ten of 
the public decisions principally addressed 
jurisdictional and preliminary objections. 
In four of them, tribunals dismissed such 
objections (at least in part) and continued 
the arbitration proceedings; in six of them, 
tribunals upheld the objections and ceased 
the proceedings for lack of jurisdiction or 
admissibility. Another 18 public decisions 
were rendered on the merits, with 9 holding 
the State liable for IIA breaches and 9 
dismissing all investor claims. In addition, 
six publicly available decisions in annulment 
proceedings at ICSID were rendered. In all 
of them, the ad hoc committees of ICSID 
rejected the applications for annulment.
By the end of 2023, at least 958 ISDS 
proceedings had been concluded, 
leading to different results (figure II.24).
Figure II.24	
Outcomes of investor–State dispute settlement cases can differ greatly
Share of concluded cases, 1987–2023
(Percentage)
Source: UNCTAD, ISDS Navigator database, accessed 25 March 2024.
a Decided in favour of neither party (liability found but no damages awarded).
Decided in favour of 
State
38
Breach but no
damagesa
3
Discontinued
13
Settled
18
Decided in favour of
investor
28


World Investment Report 2024
Investment facilitation and digital government
32
Newly concluded IIAs increasingly 
incorporate proactive commitments aimed 
at improving the investment climate in the 
contracting parties. They increasingly steer 
towards investment facilitation commitments 
(see chapter IV.C). There is growing interest 
also in establishing continuous cooperation 
mechanisms for investment activities, 
sometimes geared towards specific 
development objectives. The majority of 
investment protection elements in newly 
concluded IIAs also continued to include 
refinements, clarifications and flexibility 
mechanisms that aim to preserve countries’ 
right to regulate in the public interest. 
IIA reform continues to advance at a slow 
pace, accentuating the dichotomy in the IIA 
regime between newer and older treaties. 
Old-generation IIAs continue to dominate 
the regime as much in terms of number of 
IIAs in force as in coverage of FDI stock. 
They also continue to form the basis of 
most ISDS cases. Developing countries 
– and LDCs in particular – are the most 
disadvantaged by the slow pace of reform, 
as their exposure to the risks of ISDS is 
significantly higher than that of developed 
economies. In addition, the dichotomy is 
producing a progressively more complex 
IIA regime with overlapping and sometimes 
contradictory commitments, making it 
difficult for countries to navigate, especially 
developing ones and least developed ones. 
UNCTAD’s Multi-Stakeholder Platform 
for IIA Reform, established in 2023 as an 
outcome of UNCTAD’s World Investment 
Forum, aims to fast-track IIA reform and 
underscores the importance of providing 
an inclusive forum that promotes the 
alignment of investment governance with 
sustainable development priorities. Since 
2012, UNCTAD has played a leading role in 
facilitating IIA reform action by developing 
core policy guidance tools. UNCTAD will 
continue to work with all stakeholders to 
build the capacity of country negotiators 
and policymakers to ensure that the IIA 
regime works for – rather than impedes 
– sustainable development objectives.
* * *


Chapter III
Sustainable 
finance trends


Regulations and standards are proliferating; greenwashing remains a challenge
Stock exchanges help drive 
sustainability disclosure
The sustainable ﬁnance market grew but signs of a slowdown persist
More institutional investors
reported on sustainability
performance in 2023
Sustainable bond market
Sustainable fund market
Sustainable ﬁnance regulation
Sustainability disclosure
Global issuance, 2023: $872 billion
Cumulative issuance since 2018: $4 trillion
2022
2023
63
94
Green
Social
Sustainability
Sustainability-
linked
587
154
109
22
Market value, 2023: $3 trillion
+7%
Net inﬂows
($ billions)
-89%
2018
2019
2020
557
2021
161
2022
63
2023
58 public pension funds and
sovereign wealth funds report…
50% growth in sustainable
ﬁnance measures, 2023
Developing economies: 
60% of new policies
59% provide written guidance
31% enforce mandatory rules
…but only 17 target fossil
fuel divestment and renewables
investment
Top
100
58
42
17 countries adopted
new ISSB standards
Greenwashing: only 20%
of “green fund” portfolios are
exposed to climate-positive assets
provide training
66%
3%
12%


Chapter III
Sustainable finance trends
79
A. Sustainability-themed capital 
market products
The sustainable finance market continues to grow. In 2023, the 
value of sustainable investment products, encompassing bonds 
and funds,1 reached more than $7 trillion, a 20 per cent increase 
from 2022. Although the picture is nuanced, the overall positive 
trend in the sustainable finance market points to continued investor 
confidence and the resilience of sustainable investment strategies. 
Sustainable bonds were the main driver of growth in sustainable 
capital market products. Issuance climbed to $872 billion, a 3 per 
cent rise from 2022, bringing the cumulative value of the market 
since 2018 to more than $4 trillion. Despite continued growth in 
number and asset value, though, sustainable funds experienced 
strong headwinds in 2023. Net inflows dropped from $161 billion 
in 2022 to $63 billion in 2023. Greenwashing remains the most 
significant challenge to the sustainable fund market.
1. Sustainable bond markets
1	 This chapter covers publicly traded sustainable finance products only, namely bonds and funds. It excludes 
derivatives whose value may be unrealized, as well as voluntary carbon markets, whose value  - for now  - 
remains insignificant 
Global issuance of green, social, 
sustainability and sustainability-linked 
bonds (box III.1) has grown fourfold since 
2018. As a share of global bond markets, 
the sustainable segment represented 5 
per cent in 2023, unchanged from 2022. 
This consistent share as well as record 
levels of outstanding bonds and increased 
annual issuance of sustainable bonds signal 
the rising importance of such bonds as 
a mechanism for financing sustainable 
development. However, the near-record 
levels of issuance of green bonds and 
sustainability-linked bonds were offset by 
falls in issuance of social and sustainability 
bonds – partly related to the phasing out of 
social and sustainability bonds related to the 
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic 
(generally referred to as COVID-response 
bonds) – which contributed to a slowing in 
the five-year compound annual growth rate 
of the sustainable bond segment (figure III.1).


World Investment Report 2024
Investment facilitation and digital government
80
Box III.1	
What is the difference between green, social, sustainability and 
sustainability-linked bonds?
All four types of sustainable bonds are fixed-income securities designed to target sustainable outcomes while offering a 
financial return to investors. Green, social and sustainability bonds are generally tied to the financing of a specific project or 
use of proceeds, whereas sustainability-linked bonds instead integrate in their design a level of sustainability performance 
(such as greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions).
Green bonds raise funds specifically for projects with environmental benefits, such as renewable energy or pollution 
prevention, with issuers providing transparency on how the proceeds are used. These bonds are typically linked to assets 
and backed by the issuer’s balance sheet. Historically, the focus has been on direct financing of physical assets and 
projects and indirect financing thereof (e.g. loans to suitable assets or projects).
Social bonds raise funds for projects with positive social outcomes, such as education, health care, affordable housing 
and employment generation, especially for underserved or marginalized communities. Issuers of social bonds also commit 
to transparency regarding the use of proceeds and the impact of the projects funded, ensuring that investors can see 
the social benefits derived from their investments.
Sustainability bonds combine elements of both green and social bonds to finance projects with both environmental and 
social benefits. The proceeds from these bonds are used to fund a diverse range of initiatives, such as renewable energy 
projects, water conservation, sustainable agriculture, affordable housing and health-care facilities. Sustainability bonds are 
also designed for investors looking to support comprehensive projects that contribute to the Sustainable Development 
Goals. Like green and social bonds, issuers of sustainability bonds provide transparency and reporting on the allocation 
of proceeds and the impact of the projects financed, ensuring accountability and alignment with sustainability objectives.
Sustainability-linked bonds tie the cost of financing to key performance indicators of sustainability. These bonds 
differ from green, social and sustainability bonds in their structure and objectives. Whereas traditional green, social 
and sustainability bonds focus on financing or refinancing projects that have specific environmental or social benefits, 
sustainability-linked bonds are uniquely characterized by their performance-based approach. The financial or structural 
characteristics of the bond (such as the interest rate) are directly linked to the issuer’s achievement of predefined 
sustainability targets. Transparency and credibility are maintained through regular reporting on progress towards the 
targets and through third-party verification to ensure objectives are met, making these bonds a powerful tool for promoting 
sustainability in finance.
Sources: UNCTAD and Climate Bonds Initiative.
Figure III.1	
The sustainable bond market recovered in 2023, aided by green 
bond growth
Global sustainable bond issuance by year and by category
(Billions of dollars and percentage year-on-year growth)
Source: UNCTAD, based on information from Climate Bonds Initiative.
227
358
716
1 015
843
872
587
154
109
22
+27%
+58%
+100%
+42%
-17%
+3%
+15%
-7%
-31%
+83%
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
Green
Social
Sustainability Sustainability-
linked
Total sustainable bond market
25%
CAGR
2018−2023
$4 trillion
cumulative 
issuance since 
2018


Chapter III
Sustainable finance trends
81
Issuers based in Europe account for 46 
per cent of the global market, with 2023 
issuance up slightly from 2022 (figure III.2). 
The Asia-Pacific region accounted for a 
third of total issuance, a rise of nearly 40 per 
cent from 2022. Issuers in North America 
accounted for 11 per cent of the global 
market in 2023. Supranational issuance, 
which is an important source of sustainable 
bonds, fell to $24 billion in 2023, from $106 
billion in 2022, a drop of 77 per cent. 
Reflecting this regional distribution, the 
euro is the most common currency used 
for sustainable debt issuance, accounting 
for over 40 per cent of total cumulative 
issuance to date (in equivalent United 
States dollars). This is followed by the 
dollar (30 per cent), renminbi (9 per cent) 
and pound sterling (4 per cent), with the 
remaining 17 per cent in other currencies. 
Developing countries that issue bonds in 
major reserve currencies while generating 
revenues in local currencies encounter 
currency mismatch risks. Investors, 
especially large institutional ones, often 
have better access to a variety of financial 
instruments such as futures, options or 
swaps, allowing them to hedge against 
these currency risks. However, this 
hedging can lead to demand for higher 
yields to compensate for the additional 
risks, ultimately increasing the costs of 
financing. The involvement of international 
development finance institutions such as 
the World Bank, the International Finance 
Corporation and regional development 
banks can be crucial in mitigating 
these risks and reducing the financing 
costs linked to currency mismatches in 
bond issuances (UNCTAD, 2023f). In 
addition, deepening local capital markets 
and issuing debt instruments in local 
currencies can also be effective, ensuring 
that sustainable bonds make a greater 
contribution to sustainable outcomes. 
In terms of cumulative issuance (outstanding 
debt), supranational issuance remains 
larger than any single country and thus 
an important generator of finance for 
sustainable projects. As a group, developing 
countries remain underrepresented in global 
sustainable bond markets, even compared 
with traditional bond markets, although 
China and Chile rank among the top 15 
issuers for cumulative sustainable bond 
issuance, with $431 billion and $53 billion, 
respectively, at the end of the third quarter 
of 2023. Their sustainable bond issuance 
has been helped by strong policy support 
Figure III.2	
European issuers of sustainable bonds lead the market
Global sustainable bond issuance by region, 2023
(Billions of dollars and percentage change from 2022)
Source: UNCTAD, based on information from Climate Bonds Initiative and Environmental Finance.
a Percentage change not available because data source and coverage for 2022 differed.
Asia-Pacifc
North America
Latin America and the Caribbean
Supranational
Africaa
288
Europe
405
97
54
24
4
+0.75%
+39%
-28%
+74%
-77%


World Investment Report 2024
Investment facilitation and digital government
82
for the growth of local and international 
markets (Climate Bonds Initiative, 2023).
Financial and non-financial corporate entities 
were the largest issuers of sustainable 
bonds in 2023, followed by government-
backed entities (figure III.3). Among the 
latter, public pension and sovereign wealth 
funds (PPFs and SWFs) have become more 
active issuers of sustainable debt as well 
as more active buyers. Sovereign issuers, 
the next largest issuer type, account for 
one tenth of total cumulative issuance of 
sustainable bonds but about two thirds of 
the overall debt market, suggesting that 
there is significant potential to expand 
the share of sovereign debt in sustainable 
bond markets (Climate Bonds Initiative).
a. Green bonds
The value of green bonds issued grew 15 
per cent to $587 billion in 2023, from $509 
billion in 2022, representing two thirds of 
sustainable bond issuance. Looking at 
use of proceeds categories, this strong 
growth – reversing 2022 trends – was 
mainly driven by increases in the energy, 
transport, information and communication 
technology, waste and industry sectors 
(figure III.4). The increase was also 
supported by a recovery in sustainable 
bonds issued by financial corporates to 
$163 billion, eclipsing the record highs of 
2021, and by non-financial corporates to 
$172 billion, which was just short of the 
2021 high point of $174 billion. Notably, 
sovereign issuance jumped 45 per cent to 
$120 billion in 2023, up from $83 billion in 
2022 and surging past the previous all-time 
high in 2021 of $92 billion (figure III.5). 
In a year of declining values for some 
sustainable equity investments, the rising 
demand for green bonds in 2023 could 
be the result of investors looking for lower-
risk routes to gain exposure to sustainable 
sectors and/or emerging markets, in 
addition to a general rebalancing towards 
fixed income in an environment of higher 
interest rates. Research by the Climate 
Bonds Initiative has shown that investors 
are willing to absorb a “greenium” (lower 
yield and/or higher price) that is usually 
associated with green bonds, indicating 
the strength of demand for green versus 
traditional bonds (Climate Bonds Initiative, 
2021). On the supply side, the rise in 
sovereign issuance may be helping 
countries to diversify their investor base 
and provide credibility to green policies. 
Figure III.3	
Corporate issuers dominated sustainable bond issuance in 2023
Global sustainable bond issuance by issuer type
(Billions of dollars)
Source: UNCTAD, based on information from Climate Bonds Initiative.
Green
Sustainability-linked
Social
Sustainability
Non-fnancial corporate
172
22
13
2
Financial corporate
163
25
1
17
Government-backed entity
73
91
11
Sovereign
120
25
7 6
Development bank
48
15
10
Local government
18
12
18


Chapter III
Sustainable finance trends
83
b. Social, sustainability and 
sustainability-linked bonds
The values of both social and sustainability 
bond issuance both fell in 2023. Social 
bonds issuance declined by 7 per cent, 
from $165 billion to $153 billion, while that 
of sustainability bonds fell by 30 per cent, 
from $157 billion to $109 billion. Despite 
the growing awareness of climate and 
environmental sustainability issues and the 
opening of more investment opportunities 
in social and sustainable projects, both 
types of bonds continued falling to pre-
pandemic levels of issuance (figure III.6). 
The fall is likely directly related to recovery 
Figure III.4	
Energy, transport and buildings accounted for 75 per cent of the green 
bond market in 2023 
Global green bond issuance by sector
(Percentage)
Source: UNCTAD, based on information from Climate Bonds Initiative.
Energy
Transport
Green buildings
Land use and marine resources
Water
Waste
Climate adaptation and resilience
Information and communication 
technology
Industry
35
22
18
6
6
5
4
2
2
Figure III.5	
Sovereign issuance of green bonds saw the largest gains in 2023 
Green bond market size by type of issuer
(Billions of dollars and percentage change from 2022)
Source: UNCTAD, based on information from Climate Bonds Initiative.
+35%
+13%
+45%
-26%
+2%
–
Non-ﬁnancial corporate
172
Financial corporate
163
Sovereign
120
Government-backed entity
73
Development bank
48
Local government
12


World Investment Report 2024
Investment facilitation and digital government
84
from the pandemic, during which the 
value of COVID-response bonds surged 
– momentum that has now subsided. 
Nevertheless, together these two categories 
still represent 38 per cent of cumulative 
sustainable bond issuance since 2018.
In contrast, the annual issuance of 
sustainability-linked bonds increased 83 
per cent, from $12 billion in 2022 to $22 
billion in 2023. This continues a constant 
annual increase since the introduction of 
the first such bond by Enel (Italy) in 2019, 
bringing cumulative issuance of such bonds 
to $47 billion. Unlike green, social and 
sustainability bonds, sustainability-linked 
bonds are not tied to use of proceeds. This 
potentially gives issuers more flexibility but 
may also call into question the sustainability 
impact of this debt instrument, reflected in 
the lower alignment of this category with 
sustainability screening criteria (for further 
discussion, see WIR 2020 (UNCTAD, 2020).
Latin America and the Caribbean is the 
only region where the value of outstanding 
social, sustainability and sustainability-
linked bonds is higher than that of green 
bonds; they account for more than 90 
per cent of total cumulative issuance, 
according to the Climate Bonds Initiative. 
Despite social bond issuance there 
being on a par with that in Europe and in 
Asia, the region could be missing out on 
considerable financing opportunities in the 
green bond segment, especially in sectors 
such as energy, transport and industry. 
In 2023, social bonds were more favoured 
by government-backed entities and financial 
corporate entities. Sustainability bonds 
were more popular with local government, 
non-financial corporates and sovereign 
issuers. Sustainability-linked bonds were 
overwhelmingly favoured by non-financial 
corporates and sovereign lenders.
Figure III.6	
Social and sustainability bond issuance continued to decline in 2023 
(Billions of dollars)
Source: UNCTAD, based on information from Climate Bonds Initiative.
15
39
15
68
238
169
212
199
165
157
154
109
Social
Sustainability
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
$1.5 trillion
cumulative 
issuance since 
2018
-7%
combined CAGR
2020–2023


Chapter III
Sustainable finance trends
85
2. Sustainable funds
a. Market trends
The sustainable fund market continued to 
expand in 2023, albeit at a slower pace. 
The number of sustainability-themed funds 
worldwide reached 7,485, up 7 per cent 
from 2022. These funds remain highly 
concentrated in Europe and the United 
States, representing 73 per cent and 9 per 
cent of the global market, respectively. The 
share of the market in the rest of the world 
increased slightly, from 16 per cent to 19 per 
cent, with growth witnessed in Australia and 
Canada and in developing Asia (figure III.7).
The total assets of sustainable funds 
reached almost $3 trillion in 2023, mainly 
driven by rising share prices in equity 
markets, in particular in Europe and the 
United States. Europe remains by far 
the largest market, with assets of nearly 
$2.5 trillion, or 85 per cent of the global 
market. The value of sustainable funds in 
the United States increased from $286 
billion in 2022 to $324 billion in 2023, 
representing about 11 per cent of the global 
market. The market share in the rest of 
the world remains at about 5 per cent. 
Although the increasing number and value of 
sustainable funds indicate continued growth, 
sustainable funds faced a challenging 
environment in 2023. High interest rates, 
lagging performance, lukewarm demand and 
rising concerns about greenwashing issues 
all contributed to growing uncertainties in 
the market. As a result, the number of new 
launches has continued to drop, from a 
record high of 240 in the fourth quarter of 
2021 to 121 in the fourth quarter of 2023. 
In total, 565 launches were recorded in 
2023, down from 682 in 2022. The decline 
was more than offset by the restructuring of 
conventional funds into sustainable ones, 
in particular in Europe, leading to continued 
expansion of the universe of sustainable 
funds. Sustainability-themed funds remain 
an important tool to tilt capital markets 
Figure III.7	
The market value of sustainable funds recovered in 2023, reaching a 
record high 
(Billions of dollars and number) 
Source: UNCTAD, based on Morningstar data.
277
262
302
389
428
673
1 460
2 231
2 078
2 492
49
51
63
82
89
140
236
74
357
286
324
40
56
68
91
106
83
112
1 714
7 485
0 
1 000
2 000
3 000
4 000
5 000
6 000
7 000
8 000
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
Europe
United States
Rest of the world
Number of sustainable funds


World Investment Report 2024
Investment facilitation and digital government
86
towards more sustainable investment and 
thus direct capital to sectors and areas that 
can contribute to sustainable development. 
Net investment flows to sustainable funds 
also continued to drop, from $161 billion 
in 2022 to $63 billion in 2023, marking 
a significant decrease from the record 
of $557 billion set in 2021 (figure III.8). 
Throughout 2023, European sustainable 
funds received net investment inflows of 
$76 billion, nearly halved from the $149 
billion of 2022. In addition to a challenging 
macroeconomic environment and persistent 
geopolitical risks, some investors have 
remained cautious about environmental, 
social and governance (ESG) investing 
because of the overall underperformance 
in 2022 and lukewarm returns from popular 
sustainable investment assets, such as 
renewables, in 2023. However, compared 
with annual outflows of $50 billion from 
European conventional funds, the European 
sustainable fund market has remained 
relatively resilient, demonstrating continued 
interest by investors in this asset category.
The investment momentum in sustainable 
funds in the United States reversed 
completely in 2023. Following a surge in 
inflows in 2020 and 2021 ($290 billion 
and $472 billion, respectively), new 
inflows plummeted to only $3 billion in 
2022. Moreover, 2023 marked the first 
annual outflows, which totalled $13 
billion. In addition to dismal returns, 
persisting greenwashing concerns and a 
backlash against sustainable investment 
strategies in the United States market 
(see section C.2) also contributed 
to a chilling effect on demand.
In terms of financial performance, 
sustainable equity funds underperformed 
relative to conventional funds for the second 
consecutive year (Henry and Furdak, 
2024). Article 9 funds, the “dark green” 
products known for their commitment 
to specific sustainable investment 
objectives and substantive approach to 
sustainability integration under the European 
Union Sustainable Finance Disclosure 
Regulation (SFDR), underperformed their 
benchmark by more than 6 per cent in 
2023. Article 8 funds, the “light green” 
products that take environmental or social 
sustainability into consideration in asset 
allocation, also underperformed, but by 
a narrower margin of less than 1 per 
cent. Only Article 6 funds, which do not 
incorporate sustainability considerations 
into their investment strategies beyond 
basic ESG risk assessments, nearly 
matched their benchmarks.
Figure III.8	
Net flows to sustainable funds continued their slide in 2023 
(Billions of dollars) 
Source: UNCTAD, based on Morningstar data.
a The figure for 2022 has been updated since its publication in WIR 2023.
28
24
33
72
60
159
352
557
161
63
2014
2015
2017
2016
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022a
2023


Chapter III
Sustainable finance trends
87
This disparity in performance may be 
attributed to short-term market dynamics 
that work against some popular sectors 
in sustainable investments. Renewable 
energy, for example, has been particularly 
affected by elevated interest rates, since 
the sector is particularly characterized by 
higher upfront costs and lower operational 
expenses over time. Such short-term 
fluctuations should not overshadow 
the long-term benefits of sustainable 
investing, underscoring the importance 
of taking a long-term perspective.
b. The greenwashing challenge
As sustainable investment products gain 
popularity, concerns about greenwashing 
are also growing. Greenwashing poses 
the most significant challenge to the 
sustainable fund market, primarily because 
of the lack of specific product standards 
for sustainable funds, including in leading 
markets. UNCTAD analysis of global green 
funds published in WIR 2023 revealed 
that their average net exposure to climate-
positive assets (low-carbon assets minus 
total fossil fuels) is slightly more than 20 
per cent, casting doubt on their proclaimed 
green credentials. According to Morningstar 
data, just over 20 per cent of Article 9 funds 
reported minimum sustainable investments 
aligned with the European Union taxonomy 
between 0 and 10 per cent, and only 8 per 
cent target taxonomy-aligned investments 
of at least 10 per cent. Meanwhile, only 
4 per cent are completely free from oil 
and gas investments, and 15 per cent 
allocate more than 5 per cent of their 
assets to oil and gas as of December 2023 
(Bioy et al., 2024). These figures suggest 
that, even among products regarded 
as “dark green”, a substantial portion 
might not live up to their sustainability 
claims. It is not surprising that concerns 
about greenwashing have dampened 
investor demand, partly explaining the 
loss of momentum in investment within 
the European market and leading to 
outflows in the United States market. 
The persistence of greenwashing has 
demonstrated that more systemic efforts 
are needed to tackle the issue. In response 
to concerns about the implementation 
of the SFDR, in December 2023 the 
European Union Commission launched a 
consultation with the industry and other 
stakeholders on a general review of the 
regulation, focusing on bringing more 
clarity and credibility to the sustainable 
fund market so as to tackle greenwashing 
concerns. This consultation addresses 
critical issues such as the interaction with 
the European Union taxonomy and other 
sustainable finance legislation, potential 
changes to disclosure requirements and 
the establishment of a categorization 
system for financial products. In parallel, the 
European Supervisory Authorities published 
a final report amending the draft Regulatory 
Technical Standards for the Delegated 
Regulation supplementing the SFDR. The 
report proposes additional social indicators 
for disclosing the principal adverse impacts 
of investment decisions on the environment 
and society, new product disclosure 
requirements regarding GHG emissions 
reduction and improvements to disclosures 
on the “do no significant harm” principle. 
These measures are designed to bring more 
clarity to the SFDR and its implementation 
standards and enhance its consistency 
with the European Union Taxonomy 
Regulation with the aim of improving its 
robustness and effectiveness in addressing 
greenwashing. (For further discussion 
of policy responses to greenwashing 
in other countries, see section C.)
The complexity of defining and combating 
greenwashing underscores the critical need 
for clear, verifiable sustainability disclosure 
rules and effective enforcement to ensure 
market integrity. In addition, it is essential 
to establish well-defined rules and product 
standards that clearly outline the criteria 
required for a product to be labelled as 
sustainable. Moreover, reliance on self-
assessment should be replaced by external 
auditing and third-party ratings to ensure 
market transparency and credibility.
Exposure 
to climate-
positive assets 
only 20 per 
cent, casting 
doubt on green 
credentials


World Investment Report 2024
Investment facilitation and digital government
88
B. Sovereign and public institutional 
investors
Institutional investors made progress on sustainability performance 
and 
compliance 
with 
international 
sustainability 
reporting 
standards in 2023. Since UNCTAD began monitoring in 2019, the 
number of these funds that report has grown from one in four to 
almost three in five. Nevertheless, this means that a significant 
number of these funds still do not disclose any information on their 
sustainability performance. SWFs and PPFs, with their long-term 
investment horizons, continued to integrate sustainability into their 
investment strategies and improve their climate risk management. 
Yet, a majority of funds still have not committed to net zero in 
their investment strategies. Both SWFs and PPFs must comply 
with a range of reporting standards and obligations and have tried 
to keep pace with the rapidly evolving international landscape for 
sustainability reporting, especially on climate action. 
With assets of more than $30 trillion at 
the end of 2023 – a significant portion 
originating from developing economies – 
SWFs and PPFs have received growing 
attention as potential sources of investment, 
especially in sectors relevant to the 
Sustainable Development Goals and in 
developing countries. As the world’s largest 
institutional asset owners, some SWFs and 
PPFs have substantial market influence 
through their allocation decisions and 
strategic influence over the investments 
they hold through active ownership. PPFs 
and SWFs also differ from other investors 
in terms of their liabilities, which are 
generally long term, and their mandates, 
which are often aligned with public policy 
objectives, such as achieving net zero. 
However, these funds are not always 
required to disclose and report on their 
governance or sustainability performance. 
Robust regulatory and policy frameworks 
are needed to ensure that institutional 
investment can contribute to the sustainable 
development agenda, especially in 
developing countries. For many funds, 
fiduciary obligations still limit their 
exposure to sustainable sectors and 
to developing countries, which have a 
higher risk premium. Addressing this 
challenge may require education and 
training for funds about markets and 
opportunities in developing countries. 
UNCTAD analysis of the top 100 institutional 
asset owners identified 70 PPFs and 
30 SWFs, representing more than $24 
trillion in assets under management in 
2023, or 80 per cent of global PPF and 
SWF assets. More than two thirds of the 
top 100 are from developed economies; 
SWFs are predominantly based in 
developing countries (figure III.9).
In 2023, some 58 of them reported on 
their sustainability performance, either in a 
dedicated sustainability report or in annual 
financial reporting. Among these funds, 
PPFs are, in general, relatively better at 
disclosing sustainability-related information 


Chapter III
Sustainable finance trends
89
than SWFs (60 per cent of PPFs disclose, 
against just over 50 per cent of SWFs). 
Disclosure is strongly linked to the regulatory 
environment in a fund’s jurisdiction. Europe 
stands out, where 90 per cent of the funds 
report on sustainability performance, a figure 
related to the more comprehensive reporting 
requirements of the European Union. 
Among the funds that report, Canadian 
pension funds make up the majority of 
those in North America, again reflecting 
the relatively advanced regulatory 
environment in that country. Conversely, 
2	 Economist Intelligence Unit (2023), Anti-ESG sentiment in the US weakens ESG markets, 29 June, https://
www.eiu.com/n/anti-esg-sentiment-in-the-us-weakens-esg-markets.
3	 UNCTAD Sustainable Finance Regulation Platform: http://gsfo.org. 
some funds in the United States recently 
experienced pushback against their 
sustainable investment strategies and 
sustainability disclosure at the State level 
as well as from public campaigning.2 
Among the top 100, developing-country 
funds tend to report on sustainability 
performance less than developed-country 
funds. A majority of funds in the emerging 
Asia-Pacific markets do report, but even 
in countries that have relatively advanced 
policy environments, such as China 
and Singapore (see section C),3 several 
Figure III.9	
The top 100 sovereign wealth funds and public pension funds manage 
$24 trillion in assets 
Funds by type and by region and economic grouping
(Number)
Source: UNCTAD, based on Global SWF (2023).
Abbreviations: PPF = public pension fund, SWF = sovereign wealth fund.
$24
trillion
Middle East
11
Emerging
Asia-Pacifc
9
Developed Asia-Pacifc
4
North America
2
Europe
3
Africa
1
Middle East
2
Emerging Asia-Pacifc
7
Developed Asia-Pacifc
12
North America
33
Europe
15
Africa
1
Developed-
economy
funds
69
Developing-
economy
funds
31
PPFs
70
SWFs
30


World Investment Report 2024
Investment facilitation and digital government
90
funds in the top 100 do not report. This 
reflects some implementation challenges 
and weaker disclosure obligations in 
these jurisdictions. In the Middle East, a 
region with many SWFs, fewer than one 
in three SWFs – and no PPF – reports 
sustainability-related information, indicating 
that policy measures to strengthen 
sustainability reporting would be helpful.
Despite advances, the dichotomy in 
disclosure persists. Forty-two funds 
still do not report on their sustainability 
performance. This group includes almost 
half of the SWFs in the top 100, with a 
noticeable concentration in the Middle East 
and emerging Asia. In the case of PPFs, the 
tendency not to report is skewed towards 
North America. This is partly the result of the 
weight of these regions in the top 100 but 
also likely related to regulatory requirements 
that are weaker than in Europe. 
At the same time, the funds that do report 
exhibit some of the most advanced policies 
on sustainability integration. They are making 
sustained efforts to address sustainability 
risks, both for the material threat to their 
business models and out of an ethical 
stance towards future generations. This 
group of asset owners comprises many 
first movers, several of which have been 
addressing sustainability issues for many 
years already and now employ, for example, 
complex climate modelling analysis and 
valuation models and rigorous screening 
of investments. The following analysis is 
based on the public disclosures of the 
58 reporting funds in the top 100. 
1. Sustainability integration strategies and practices
Most reporting funds articulate a clear 
vision for sustainability integration and have 
implemented policies and guidelines to 
manage sustainability risk, such as specific 
strategies on climate change mitigation. 
Many funds have also created dedicated 
sustainable investment teams. Yet, despite 
the existence of such climate strategies, 
only one in three of these funds reported a 
target for fossil fuel divestment in 2023, a 
share unchanged from the preceding year.
a. Investment strategies
Sustainability risk has been driving PPF and 
SWF investment strategies and decision-
making for several years. In 2023, 9 out 
of every 10 funds reported the general 
integration of sustainability considerations 
in their investment strategies (figure III.10). 
Four out of every five funds reported the 
integration of social and governance 
dimensions in their investment strategies by 
taking into account issues such as labour 
rights, executive pay, tax contributions 
and board diversity. A similar number of 
funds also reported impact strategies, 
especially on the environmental side; 
these can involve sectoral targeting, 
such as renewables, and capital market 
instruments, such as green or sustainability 
bonds. Less than half mentioned the 
integration of the Sustainable Development 
Goals in their investment decisions. 
Another way funds integrate a sustainability 
perspective in their investment strategies 
is through active ownership. In 2023, 
almost 80 per cent report engagement with 
their investees (figure III.11). This enables 
funds to influence the behaviour of their 
portfolio holdings through discussion or 
voting for policy changes. While more than 
two thirds of funds reported providing 
guidance on ESG criteria and Goals criteria 
to their asset managers and investees, 
less than a quarter offered their asset 
managers training on these topics.
58 of top 100 
PPFs and SWFs 
reported on 
sustainability 
performance 
in 2023


Chapter III
Sustainable finance trends
91
Figure III.10	
Sustainability shapes investment strategies used by funds in 2023 
(Percentage of reporting funds) 
Source: UNCTAD, based on latest fund reporting (2023); some latest reports from 2021 and 2022.
Note: Funds can report more than one strategy.
Abbreviation: ESG = environmental, social and governance.
a Includes issues related to child labour, diversity and others.
b Includes issues related to to executive pay, board diversity, tax and others.
c Includes ESG-oriented sectors (e.g. renewable energy, green housing) or capital market instruments
(e.g. green bonds, ESG funds) or markets (emerging and developing economies) in ESG investment.
General integration of sustainability
considerations
Integration of social dimensiona
Integration of governance dimensionb
Impact investmentc
Negative screening or exclusion
Positive or best-in-class screening
Integration of Sustainable
Development Goals considerations
91
84
80
79
61
59
45
Figure III.11	
Institutional investors are active owners of their assets 
(Percentage of reporting funds)
Source: UNCTAD, based on latest fund reporting (2023); some latest reports from 2021 and 2022.
Abbreviation: ESG = environmental, social and governance;
Active engagement activities
Guidance on ESG (and Sustainable
Development Goals) provided to
asset managers or investees
Voting policy that takes ESG factors
into account
Training provided for asset managers or
investees
79
68
63
23


World Investment Report 2024
Investment facilitation and digital government
92
b. Climate-related actions 
Reporting funds demonstrate significant 
engagement on climate change mitigation, 
with 9 out of 10 funds having developed 
specific strategies addressing climate 
issues. This is partly the result of regulations 
and fund commitments in this area and 
partly because of the nature of climate-
related reporting metrics available to 
funds. Nonetheless, while this commitment 
is significant, the actions taken vary in 
depth and potential effectiveness and 
point to areas for further development.
Funds are more likely to set targets for 
investment in renewable energy than to 
define a target for divestment from fossil 
fuels, with just under a third of funds 
doing both (figure III.12). Among those 
that do have targets for both, funds 
in Europe, particularly those in Nordic 
countries, take the lead with a dual strategy 
that includes significant investments in 
renewable energy and assertive fossil fuel 
divestments. This approach aligns with the 
comprehensive climate policies in Europe 
and reflects strategic diversification. This 
is also true for hydrocarbon funds, such 
as Norges Bank Investment Management 
(Norway), which are transitioning towards 
more sustainable energy solutions. 
Despite robust investments in renewable 
energies, PPFs in North America 
take varied approaches to fossil fuel 
divestment, influenced by diverse state-
level policies and public opinion. PPFs, 
such as the Healthcare of Ontario Pension 
Plan (Canada) and the New York State 
Common Retirement Fund (United States), 
lean heavily towards renewable energy 
investments, but these funds are less 
proactive in divesting from fossil fuels. This 
difference reflects the balancing act between 
sustainable commitments and funds’ 
fiduciary duty to ensure stable returns. 
Middle Eastern and African funds, such 
as Mubadala (United Arab Emirates), 
which receives funding from sources 
in the hydrocarbons industry, and the 
Public Investment Corporation (South 
Africa), which is linked to an energy sector 
still dependent on coal, temper their 
approach. The result is a careful balance 
between exploring renewable energy 
investments and maintaining stakes in 
fossil fuels. This nuanced approach reflects 
the complex interplay between these 
Figure III.12	
Only 30 per cent of funds have targets for renewables investment and 
fossil fuel divestment
Funds by type of target
(Number)
Source: UNCTAD, based on latest fund reporting (2023); some latest reports from 2021 and 2022.
Target for investment 
in renewable energy
22
Target for divestment 
from fossil fuels
2
Targets for both
17
No targets for either
17


Chapter III
Sustainable finance trends
93
regions’ economic priorities, including 
employment in fossil fuel industries, and 
their sustainable development objectives.
Among funds that have committed to 
achieving net zero or carbon neutrality, 
most have set the target year of 
2050. Some have set more ambitious 
targets, while others, particularly those 
associated with hydrocarbon sectors, 
have set later targets, such as 2060. 
Three quarters of reporting funds have 
adopted sophisticated, systematic climate 
risk assessment strategies. This signifies 
a commitment by a majority of reporting 
funds to integrate climate risk into their 
risk management frameworks, aiming 
to mitigate vulnerabilities and exposure 
to transitional and physical risks, and to 
explore new opportunities (table III.1). North 
American funds, such as the California 
State Teachers’ Retirement System, are 
pioneers in climate scenario analysis, 
exploring how various global warming 
scenarios could influence its portfolio. SWFs 
in oil-rich regions often integrate broader 
risk management approaches, possibly 
because of their exposure to the fluctuating 
dynamics of the energy sector amid global 
decarbonization efforts. Sectoral analysis 
is gaining traction among European funds, 
which scrutinize specific industries for 
climate-related vulnerabilities, allowing for 
more targeted risk mitigation efforts. About 
20 per cent of funds also conduct climate 
stress testing of their investment portfolio.
Table III.1	
Most funds systematically assess sustainability and climate risk
Source: UNCTAD, based on latest fund reporting (2023); some latest reports from 2021 and 2022.
Note: Number of reporting funds = 41.
Category
Number of funds
Integrated risk management
25
Climate scenario analysis
20
Sectorial analysis
7
Stress testing
7
Portfolio testing
6
2. Sustainability disclosure
a. Reporting frameworks and 
standards used by funds
In 2023, PPFs and SWFs maintained 
their commitment to the standardization 
of sustainability reporting. The Task 
Force on Climate-related Financial 
Disclosures (TCFD) and the Principles 
for Responsible Investment are the two 
main frameworks that funds use for their 
sustainability reporting (figure III.13). 
Following closely are the new International 
Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) 
Sustainability Disclosure Standards set by 
the International Sustainability Standards 
Board (ISSB), the Global Reporting 
Initiative (GRI) and the Sustainability 
Accounting Standards Board (SASB). 
The growing adoption of the new ISSB 
standard, which incorporates the elements 
of the TCFD standard, represents a 
significant development in SWF and 
PPF sustainability reporting, showing the 


World Investment Report 2024
Investment facilitation and digital government
94
potential rise of the standard as a global 
baseline for sustainability disclosure. 
Nonetheless, the variety of frameworks 
and standards in use shows that further 
convergence will be beneficial for 
enhancing comparability and consistency 
in disclosure among SWFs and PPFs.
b. The main reporting metrics 
used for sustainability 
disclosure
While almost 95 per cent of reporting 
funds have put in place policies on 
sustainability, fewer funds – 64 per 
cent – clearly disclose the metrics or 
methodologies they use to measure 
sustainability performance and impact.
Reporting funds mainly use 16 indicators to 
measure their sustainability performance, 
categorized into five reporting areas (figure 
III.14). Climate and GHG emissions are the 
main area of disclosure and measurement: 
among the 37 funds reporting on 
indicators, more than 60 per cent have 
set specific ones for GHG accounting. 
The indicators are categorized into three 
types: absolute emissions, emissions 
intensity and total carbon footprint. 
These calculations are typically applied 
to portfolios: funds generally monitor 
scope 1 and scope 2 GHG emissions (in 
tons of carbon dioxide equivalent), with 
a small minority of funds going further 
and reporting on scope 3 emissions.
For those funds that use emissions 
intensity metrics, the largest number use 
the carbon footprint indicator, describing 
the total carbon emissions for a portfolio. 
Nearly half use the TFCD-recommended 
weighted average carbon intensity, which 
indicates the portfolio’s exposure to carbon-
intensive companies, expressed in tons 
of carbon dioxide equivalent per million 
dollars of revenue. It assesses a portfolio’s 
carbon efficiency by considering each 
investment asset’s revenue-based emissions 
intensity and its weight in the portfolio. 
Some funds consider operational emission 
reduction actions of invested companies, 
including energy consumption, renewable 
energy usage and operational carbon 
footprint calculation. However, few funds 
incorporate science-based climate targets 
into their metrics system. Regarding 
environmental protection and resource 
consumption, specific indicators include 
Figure III.13
Most funds use a global sustainability reporting standard or framework 
(Number of reporting funds)
Source: UNCTAD, based on latest fund reporting (2023); some latest reports from 2022.
a CDP was formerly known as the Carbon Disclosure Project.
Task Force on Climate-Related Financial 
Disclosures
Principles for Responsible Investment
International Sustainability Standards 
Board
Global Reporting Initiative
Sustainability Accounting Standards 
Board
Corporate Sustainability Reporting 
Directive
CDPa
European Union Taxonomy
33
22
16
13
12
5
5
4


Chapter III
Sustainable finance trends
95
expenditure on environmental protection 
by portfolio companies, water withdrawal 
rates and whether portfolio companies 
have a responsible waste management 
system. Regarding corporate governance, 
funds predominantly use ESG and 
sustainability-related metrics; company 
diversity and issues such as employee 
training are also reported. In general, social 
areas are underreported compared with 
environmental and climate areas. Social 
issues are typically considered within the 
broader context of sustainability, with 
only one fund specifically addressing the 
social impact of portfolio companies.
To ensure the quality of sustainability 
reporting, third-party verification or auditing 
is important, in the same way that financial 
reporting is audited. Yet only one in four 
reporting funds use third-party verification. 
Despite its importance for ensuring credibility 
and trust (and combating greenwashing), 
auditing is currently voluntary. Nevertheless, 
the International Auditing and Assurance 
Standards Board (IAASB) is developing 
the International Standard on Sustainability 
Assurance (ISSA) 5000, General 
Requirements for Sustainability Assurance 
Engagements, which will be issued before 
the end of 2024. It is intended to serve as a 
general standard suitable for any assurance 
purpose. According to the IAASB, it will 
apply to sustainability information reported 
across any sustainability topic and prepared 
under multiple frameworks, including 
the recently released IFRS Sustainability 
Disclosure Standards S1 and S2.
Figure III.14	
SWFs and PPFs reported sustainability metrics in five areas in 2023
Source: UNCTAD, based on latest fund reporting.
Abbreviations: ESG = environmental, social and governance, GHG = greenhouse gas, PPF = public pension 
fund, SWF = sovereign wealth fund, tCO2e = tons of carbon dioxide equivalent.
Reporting indicator
Number of
funds reporting
Examples
• Carbon footprint of investments
• Scope 1 and 2 GHG emissions of investments
• Carbon intensity (no specifc calculation methods)
• Scope 3 GHG emissions of investments
• Weighted average carbon intensity
• Absolute emissions of investments (no scope)
• Total portfolio emissions (tCO2e)
• Portfolio carbon intensity (tCO2e/$ million of portfolio value)
• Portfolio weighted average carbon intensity (tCO2e/$ million of revenue)
• Electricity production from renewable energy sources
• Fossil fuel revenue
• Climate-neutral and circular internal business operations
• Number of portfolio companies with science-based net-zero  
   2050 target
• Waste management, environmental performance of properties
• Water withdrawal
• Sustainability considerations in investments
• Investments in Sustainable Development Goals and climate solutions
• Exposure to fossil fuels
• Climate risk and climate stress test
• Emissions reduction of operations
• Science-based climate target
• Work-related injuries, net new hires and employee engagement
• Gender, age, ethnic and cultural background, and work capacity
• ESG/sustainability related
• Others
• Diversity related
13
7
5
4
4
3
5
4
3
8
6
3
7
7
3
36
GHG accounting
17
Climate risk and emissions reduction
17
Corporate governance-related targets
12
Environment-related targets
5
Sustainable investment targets
• Environmental protection and resource consumption
5


World Investment Report 2024
Investment facilitation and digital government
96
C. Policies, regulations and 
standards
In 2023, the IFRS Foundation launched the Sustainability 
Disclosure Standards, which have attracted significant interest 
globally. The emergence of international standards, including the 
IFRS and European standards, has created spillover effects that 
affect developing economies and their small and medium-sized 
enterprises (SMEs). Progress has been made in enhancing the 
interoperability of international standards. Stock exchanges also 
continue to play a vital role in the adoption and implementation 
of sustainability reporting. Governments from both developed 
and developing economies have accelerated sustainable finance 
policymaking, focusing on leveraging capital markets for climate 
transition. In 2023, 26 of the 35 economies tracked by the UNCTAD 
Global Sustainable Finance Observatory introduced more than 90 
measures dedicated to sustainable finance, marking a significant 
increase from the 63 measures adopted in 2022. Countries are 
integrating 
sustainable 
finance 
into 
national 
development 
strategies 
more and more, prioritizing policy impact and effectiveness.
1. International sustainability reporting standards
a. New standards 
June 2023 saw the launch of the first 
two of the IFRS Sustainability Disclosure 
Standards by the ISSB, after a global 
consultation process. The International 
Organization for Securities Commissions 
(IOSCO) issued a statement endorsing the 
standards and called on its 130 member 
jurisdictions, which regulate more than 95 
per cent of the world’s financial markets, 
“to consider ways in which they might 
adopt, apply or otherwise be informed by 
the ISSB standards within the context of 
their jurisdictional arrangements, in a way 
that promotes consistent and comparable 
climate-related and other sustainability-
related disclosures for investors.” This 
statement has been received as a strong 
signal from market regulators to encourage 
the adoption of the ISSB standards.
The ISSB, created in 2021 by the IFRS 
Foundation, develops standards that 
form a global baseline for disclosure of 
sustainability-related risks and opportunities, 
to meet the needs of investors and other 
capital market participants. It was formed 
in response to strong demand from capital 
market participants and international 
policymakers, including the members of 
the Group of Seven, the Group of 20 and 
the Financial Stability Board, to harmonize 
and simplify the landscape of investor-
oriented sustainability disclosure standards.


Chapter III
Sustainable finance trends
97
The first standard, IFRS S1 General 
Requirements for Disclosure of 
Sustainability-related Financial Information, 
sets out a requirement for an entity 
to disclose information about all risks 
and opportunities related to material 
sustainability that could reasonably be 
expected to affect the entity’s prospects. 
It provides conceptual foundations to aid 
the disclosure of this information, as well as 
core content requirements applicable to all 
sustainability-related risks and opportunities. 
IFRS S2 Climate-related Disclosures 
provides more detailed requirements for the 
disclosure of climate-related information.
At its formation, the ISSB merged with four 
formerly independent bodies: the TCFD, the 
Climate Disclosure Standards Board (CDSB), 
the SASB and the International Integrated 
Reporting Council (IIRC). As a result, the 
ISSB standards draw heavily from the 
voluntary investor-focused standards and 
frameworks produced by those four bodies. 
Companies using ISSB standards should 
make disclosures about their governance 
and risk management of sustainability and 
climate-related risks and opportunities, 
as well as the strategy, metrics and 
targets used to manage those risks and 
opportunities. In line with the concept of 
providing a globally consistent baseline, 
national policymakers may add building 
blocks to the ISSB’s standards in order to 
meet local reporting objectives, provided 
that local provisions do not obscure 
information required by the global baseline.
Following the launch of the ISSB standards 
and their endorsement by IOSCO, the ISSB 
set three new priorities. First, for future 
areas of disclosure standardization, the 
ISSB is exploring biodiversity, ecosystems 
and ecosystem services, as well as human 
capital. It has also published educational 
material on nature and social aspects of 
climate-related risks and opportunities. 
Second, in support of adoption of the 
standards by market participants, the ISSB 
has established a partnership framework 
for capacity-building, working with public 
and private organizations, global and local, 
to ensure accelerated readiness among 
jurisdictions to adopt the standards. A 
dedicated IFRS Sustainability Knowledge 
Hub was also launched to guide report 
preparers. Third, in support of adoption 
of the standards by jurisdictions, the 
ISSB has been engaging with regulators 
worldwide and has published a preview 
of a jurisdictional guide for the adoption 
or other use of the standards. 
b. Status of adoption
An increasing number of jurisdictions have 
already adopted the ISSB standards, with 
many others working on adoption (table 
III.2). While some intend to implement the 
standards fully as the globally consistent 
baseline, others plan to introduce 
amendments to them, which may result 
in inconsistencies in the information 
reported by complying entities.
In response to the rise of international 
and regional standards and their 
spillover effects through global supply 
and investment chains, many countries, 
including developing ones, are taking 
action to modernize their company 
reporting systems by aligning them more 
closely with international best practices.
However, several challenges could pose 
severe barriers to policymaking in this 
area in developing economies (UNCTAD, 
2024c). They include (a) the fragmentation 
of international standards, (b) the lack of 
robust national sustainability reporting 
infrastructure, (c) insufficient knowledge 
and human capacity, and (d) limited access 
to sustainability data. Addressing these 
issues would require enhanced international 
coordination on sustainable finance 
regulations, especially in standard-setting, 
while considering the specific needs and 
challenges faced by developing economies. 
Technical support will also be essential. 
Towards this end, UNCTAD, through its 
Intergovernmental Working Group of 
Experts on International Standards of 
Accounting and Reporting, is supporting 
countries in reinforcing their regulations and 
17 
jurisdictions 
using ISSB 
standards, with 
others working 
towards 
adoption


World Investment Report 2024
Investment facilitation and digital government
98
institutions, and building human capacity 
to implement international standards, such 
as those of the ISSB. Since 2021, UNCTAD 
has been launching regional partnerships 
to promote high-quality sustainability 
reporting in developing countries. The 
Partnerships in Africa (29 countries and 
58 institutions)  and in Latin America (30 
institutions in 15 countries) have become 
operational over the past two years. At the 
2023 World Investment Forum, UNCTAD 
announced additional regional partnerships 
for Asia, Eurasia, and the Gulf States and 
neighbouring countries. These partnerships 
are vehicles for facilitating the exchange 
of good practices in the implementation 
of sustainability reporting standards.
c. Policy spillover effects
The effects of these international standards 
can extend beyond the jurisdictions where 
they are formally adopted, through global 
supply chains. Large companies and 
financial institutions increasingly require 
their suppliers or investee companies 
to report on sustainability. For example, 
beyond disclosing scope 3 GHG emissions 
Table III.2	
Jurisdictions move toward adopting ISSB standards
Source: UNCTAD.
Jurisdiction
Status as of April 2024
Implementation date
Australia
Consulting on standards until 1 March (currently adopting 
only IFRS S2)
Staggered implementation from January 2025
Bangladesh
Introduced mandatory requirements for banks and finance 
companies
January 2024
Brazil
Adopting in full (IFRS S1 and S2)
January 2026
Canada
Consulting on draft standards from March to June 2024
January 2025 for listed companies, January 2027 for 
unlisted companies with assets of more than $1 billion
Costa Rica
Adopted in full (IFRS S1 and S2) in 2024
Phased mandatory adoption for public companies (January 
2025) and companies classed as large taxpayers (January 
2026)
Japan
Issued standards for consultation
March 2025
Kenya
Developing a road map
-
Malaysia
Consulted on standards
Phased mandatory adoption for listed and unlisted 
companies December 2025–December 2027
Morocco
Reviewing disclosure and target-setting requirements
Early 2025 (currently only for banks)
Nigeria
Consulted on adoption road map
Phased mandatory adoption for listed companies and 
SMEs between January 2027 and January 2030
Pakistan
Consulting on adopting IFRS S1 and S2
Phased mandatory reporting between January 2025 and 
January 2027
Philippines
Revising sustainability reporting guidelines for listed 
companies to incorporate IFRS S1 and S2
January 2025 for listed companies, January 2027 for 
unlisted companies with assets of more than $1 billion
Republic of Korea
Finalizing standards for June 2024
January 2026 or later
Singapore
Introduced mandatory climate-related disclosures 
(currently adopting only IFRS S1 for climate reporting)
January 2025 for listed companies, January 2027 for 
unlisted companies with assets of more than $1 billion
Türkiye
Adopted in full (IFRS S1 and S2)
January 2024
United Kingdom
Consulting on standards until July 2024
-
Hong Kong, China
Developing adoption road map
-


Chapter III
Sustainable finance trends
99
along supply chains, the ISSB S2 standard 
requires financial institutions to report 
“financed emissions” – the emissions 
associated with their investments, including 
those in SMEs. The SFDR of the European 
Union includes similar requirements. As 
sustainable finance gains traction, all 
companies, including SMEs, are increasingly 
expected to provide sustainability 
reports to meet investor demands.
In some cases, companies may need to 
comply with regulations in markets where 
they have significant operations, even if 
they are not listed there. For example, 
under the European Union Corporate 
Sustainability Reporting Directive (CSRD), 
non-European Union companies will have 
to report if they generate more than €150 
million in the European Union market. 
It is estimated that about 3,000 United 
States companies and more than 10,000 
businesses worldwide will be affected by 
the requirements (Huck, 2023). Similarly, 
the climate disclosure rules released 
recently by the United States Securities 
and Exchange Commission (SEC) include 
requirements for not only local, but also 
foreign incorporated entities (SEC, 2024). 
Sustainability reporting requirements can 
further arise from legislative developments 
beyond the immediate standard-setting 
community. For instance, the European 
Union Carbon Border Adjustment 
Mechanism is not specifically a sustainability 
disclosure regulation, yet its implications 
for climate-related disclosures will extend 
well beyond Europe. Starting in October 
2023, importers of certain goods into 
the European Union are required to 
report quarterly on the direct and indirect 
emissions embedded in each product. 
The requirements related to these standards 
and related regulations will have a cascading 
effect, affecting exporters and their suppliers, 
including SMEs from other regions, and 
posing notable challenges for developing 
economies. This challenge urgently requires 
international coordination, including 
enhanced interoperability and consistency 
among international and regional standards.
d. Interoperability 
With the shift from voluntary disclosure 
initiatives towards mandatory reporting 
requirements, there has been a renewed 
impetus to examine the consistency and 
interoperability of the sustainability reporting 
landscape. As new requirements are 
introduced, businesses operating across 
jurisdictions may face inconsistent disclosure 
obligations, leading to greater workloads 
and potential inconsistencies in the 
information reported from one jurisdiction 
to another. Similarly, investors operating 
internationally may face an additional 
challenge when comparing the disclosures 
of companies they are assessing.
Overall, the newly developed requirements 
can be classified by their focus on single 
materiality or double materiality. Single 
materiality (sometimes referred to as 
“investor materiality” or “financial materiality”) 
is primarily intended to inform a general 
investor audience and thus focuses on 
the impact of sustainability on an entity’s 
prospects and financial performance. 
Examples of such requirements include 
the ISSB standards and the climate rule of 
the United States Securities and Exchange 
Commission. Other requirements, such 
as the European Sustainability Reporting 
Standards and the proposed requirements 
in China, take a double materiality (also 
known as “impact materiality”) approach, 
covering both the impact of sustainability 
on the entity and the impact of the entity 
on sustainability. The GRI standards 
focus specifically on double materiality. 
To minimize potential inconsistencies and 
issues with interoperability, standard-
setters have been working to align their 
standards more closely. Notable examples 
are the efforts by the European Financial 
Reporting Advisory Group, which develops 
the European Sustainability Reporting 
Standards, in achieving a “high level of 
alignment” with the GRI standards and the 
ISSB IFRS S2 standard on climate change. 
The IFRS Foundation and GRI have also 
published a summary of interoperability 
Inconsistent 
disclosure 
obligations 
across 
jurisdictions 
creates 
more work 
for reporting 
entities


World Investment Report 2024
Investment facilitation and digital government
100
considerations for GHG emissions, 
to support more efficient reporting for 
companies that use both the ISSB 
standards and the GRI standards. This 
resource was developed under the two 
organizations’ collaboration agreement, to 
coordinate their sustainability-related work 
programs and standard-setting activities.
As jurisdictions continue their 
implementation of sustainability disclosure 
regimes, international investors and others 
continue to highlight the importance of 
consistent requirements. Where existing 
requirements are in place or well under 
way, some have proposed that international 
standards should be given equivalence to 
local requirements, especially in the case of 
foreign entities, to avoid potential conflicts 
within the requirements and allow for more 
streamlined global sustainability reporting. 
Such equivalence has been achieved in 
financial reporting, where for example 
foreign private issuers listed on a United 
States exchange are permitted to prepare 
their financial statements according to IFRS 
accounting standards as an alternative 
to the Generally Accepted Accounting 
Principles standards more commonly 
used by United States companies.
e. Stock exchanges promoting 
adoption and implementation
As the interface between market regulators, 
issuers (both bond and equity), investors 
and standard-setters, stock exchanges 
are playing an important practical role in 
promoting the implementation and adoption 
of sustainability reporting standards and new 
sustainable finance products (figure III.15). 
In 2023, the number of exchanges with 
ESG-themed bond segments increased, 
continuing a sharp rise in these segments 
since 2017 and for the first time exceeding 
the number of markets covered by an ESG 
equity index. For many years, sustainable 
finance focused primarily on equity markets, 
but this has changed in recent years 
as sustainability-themed products also 
emerged in the bond market, derivatives 
markets and elsewhere. The past year also 
saw a continued upward trend in mandatory 
listing requirements related to sustainability 
reporting, with 38 markets having such 
rules, up from close to zero just a decade 
ago. The standardization and regulation 
of sustainability reporting is also creating 
greater demand for market education on 
this topic, as a core mandate of exchanges 
is to educate market participants on 
compliance issues and transparency and 
reporting. The past year saw a continued 
sharp upward trend in the number of 
exchanges providing such training.
As of the close of 2023, about 59 per 
cent (71) of all exchanges offered written 
guidance to issuers on sustainability 
reporting, a more than tenfold increase from 
a decade earlier. This written guidance, often 
voluntary, plays a critical role in preparing 
market participants for mandatory rules that 
typically follow. The trend lines over the past 
decade show a strong relationship between 
exchange guidance issuance and mandatory 
listing rules. In light of these ongoing trends, 
the objective of Sustainable Development 
Goal 12.6 concerning sustainability reporting 
is on track to be attained by 2030. The 
market is gravitating towards a more 
concentrated set of standards. Exchanges 
are actively endorsing global ESG reporting 
frameworks. The GRI standards remain 
the most frequently cited, followed by the 
four component standards of the ISSB 
(those of CDSB, IIRC, SASB and TCFD). 
Markets 
that require 
sustainability 
reporting: 38 
and growing. 
SDG 12.6 
on track


Chapter III
Sustainable finance trends
101
Figure III.15	
Stock exchanges continue to play an important role in promoting 
sustainability standards and products 
(Number of exchanges with standard or product)
Source: UNCTAD, Sustainable Stock Exchanges database.  
Abbreviation: ESG = environmental, social and governance. 
2004 2005
2007
2003
2006
2008 2009 2010 2011
2013
2012
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Sustainability reports
 
 
Written guidance on ESG reporting
 
Training on ESG topics
 
Markets covered by an ESG index
 
Mandatory ESG listing requirements
 
ESG bond segments


World Investment Report 2024
Investment facilitation and digital government
102
2. Policymaking at national and regional levels 
a. Overview
The rapid expansion in the sustainable 
finance market has brought about the 
parallel growth of national sustainable 
finance measures. National and regional 
governments are increasingly creating 
policies and regulatory frameworks to 
leverage capital markets to achieve their 
net-zero goals. The UNCTAD Global 
Sustainable Finance Observatory monitors 
sustainable finance regulations and policy 
measures in 35 economies (countries and 
economic groupings). They include the 
members of the Group of 20, the largest 
developing economies outside the Group 
of 20 and selected financial centres. 
Together these economies represent 
more than 90 per cent of global GDP 
and the world’s largest capital markets.
In 2023, these economies introduced a 
total of 94 sustainable finance policies and 
regulations. This brings the cumulative 
number of sustainable finance measures 
since 2014 to 516, with nearly 60 per 
cent of them introduced in the past five 
years, partly in response to the rapid 
expansion of the sustainable finance 
market and product availability (figure 
III.16). Meanwhile, at least 69 sustainable 
finance measures are in development.
Figure III.16	
Record level of new sustainable finance policy measures and regulations 
adopted in selected economies in 2023  
(Number of measures adopted by year)
Source: Global Sustainable Finance Observatory (GSFO.org), based on UNCTAD, PRI and World Bank data.
Notes: Encompasses seven key policy areas for sustainable finance: national strategy, national framework 
and guidelines, taxonomy, product standards, sustainability disclosure, sector-specific regulations and carbon 
pricing. Other economies are Switzerland; 13 developing economies (Bangladesh, Chile, Colombia, Egypt, 
Kenya, Malaysia, Nigeria, the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand, the United Arab Emirates and Viet Nam, as 
well as Hong Kong, China); and ASEAN. Relevant measures of the European Union included in Group of 20 
economies.
a Number updated to include incentive-related measures.
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
14
2
12
7
10
7
18
8
20
5
24
6
14
15
75
9
50
13
64
30
Group of 20 economies
Other economies


Chapter III
Sustainable finance trends
103
The most popular policy area is sustainability 
disclosure, accounting for 37 per cent of all 
measures (figure III.17). This highlights the 
priorities of improving market clarity and 
credibility and addressing greenwashing 
concerns. Sector-specific measures, 
which covered sustainable banking, 
insurance, asset management and others, 
constituted 23 per cent of total measures, 
and national strategies and frameworks 
another 17 per cent. Although specific 
measures targeting products such as 
sustainable bonds and funds, carbon 
pricing and taxonomy represent a smaller 
portion of the policy pool, policymaking 
in these areas has been notably dynamic 
in recent years, with a significant number 
of measures currently in development.
Thematically, most of the policy measures 
introduced in the last five years have focused 
on climate change and the green transition; 
however, social sustainability and inclusive 
development have started to attract more 
attention. Examples include the development 
in the European Union of a social taxonomy, 
the inclusion of economic activities 
targeting social sustainable development 
in the South Africa taxonomy and policy 
measures adopted by Bangladesh 
and China and by the Association of 
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) to 
support the development of SMEs.
Figure III.17	
Sustainability disclosure measures remain the most common policy 
category 
Sustainable finance policy measures by category, 2014–2023 
(Percentage)
Source: Global Sustainable Finance Observatory (GSFO.org).
Sustainability
disclosure 
37
Sector-speciﬁc
measures 
23
Taxonomy
3
Carbon pricing
9
Product-speciﬁc
measures
11
National strategy or
framework
17


World Investment Report 2024
Investment facilitation and digital government
104
b. Regional developments
In 2023, the 35 economies or country 
groupings tracked by the Global Sustainable 
Finance Observatory adopted substantive 
measures across six key policy areas: 
national strategy or framework, taxonomy, 
sustainability disclosure, sector-specific 
measures, product-specific measures 
and carbon pricing. Policymaking was 
most active in national strategies and 
frameworks, sustainability disclosure, 
and sector- or product-specific measures 
focusing on green bonds, sustainable 
banking and investment (table III.3).
The European Union established a 
comprehensive sustainable finance 
regulatory framework with the CSRD, 
which entered into force in January 2023. 
Together with the Taxonomy Regulation 
and the SFDR, these regulations lay 
the foundation of an integrated policy 
framework governing sustainable finance in 
the European Union. To further strengthen 
the framework, the European Union is 
conducting a comprehensive review of 
the SFDR, the taxonomy and related 
technical standards, aiming to improve 
their usability and effectiveness and to 
ensure consistency among different pillars 
of the framework. It also announced a new 
package of measures to further strengthen 
its sustainable finance regime, which 
includes expanding the taxonomy to cover 
additional activities contributing to climate 
as well as non-climate environmental 
objectives, such as water and marine 
resources protection, circular economy 
transition, pollution prevention and control, 
and biodiversity and ecosystem restoration. 
The measures also bring more transparency 
and integrity to the market by introducing 
rules on the ESG rating and provide 
guidance to support transition finance.
In the United States, at the federal level, 
measures were adopted to promote 
climate disclosure and sustainable finance; 
however, at the State level, the backlash 
against sustainable investment strategies 
continues: 17 States have passed legislation 
prohibiting fund managers from considering 
ESG factors in their investment decisions 
or prohibiting States from contracting 
with asset managers that exclude certain 
industries, such as fossil fuels, from 
their portfolios (Malone et al., 2023).
A sharpening focus on policy effectiveness 
has also led to policy consolidation in other 
developed economies. Australia, Japan, 
Switzerland and the United Kingdom are 
reviewing legislation related to sustainable 
Policy area
Economy
National strategy or framework
Argentina, Brazil, China, France, India, Japan, Mexico, Switzerland, Türkiye, United 
Arab Emirates, ASEAN
Taxonomy
Mexico
Sustainability disclosure
Brazil, China, France, Germany, India, Republic of Korea, United Kingdom, United 
States, European Union 
Sector-specific measures
Argentina, Australia, Brazil, China, India, Indonesia, Italy, Mexico, Switzerland, 
European Union
Product-specific measures
Argentina, Australia, Brazil, China, Republic of Korea, European Union
Carbon pricing
Australia, Canada, European Union
Table III.3	
Measures in six policy areas adopted by monitored economies, 2023
Source: UNCTAD GSFO Sustainable Finance Regulations Platform.
Note: Sector-specific measures cover sustainable banking, insurance, investment and credit ratings; product-
specific measures cover sustainable funds and bonds. Measures in development are not included.


Chapter III
Sustainable finance trends
105
finance, with a focus on sustainability 
disclosure and the development of 
sustainable finance taxonomies.
Developing economies are becoming 
increasingly active in sustainable finance 
policymaking. They accounted for 60 per 
cent of new policy measures in 2023 – a 
record high. This surge demonstrates their 
systemic efforts to leverage sustainable 
finance for sustainable development. They 
are actively developing national strategies 
and frameworks for sustainable finance. 
In 2023, seven of them (Argentina, Brazil, 
China, India, Mexico, Türkiye and the United 
Arab Emirates), together with ASEAN 
member States, rolled out national strategies 
or frameworks on sustainable finance. Most 
of these national strategies were informed 
by the overall national development agenda, 
aligning with national objectives under the 
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development 
and the Paris Agreement. Such strategies 
help establish policy objectives, priorities 
and key areas for actions to provide 
guidance and stimulate national efforts to 
support the growth of sustainable finance.
This trend underscores a growing 
commitment among countries to adopt 
a systematic approach to policymaking 
related to sustainable finance. 
Another important development concerns 
the increase in sector- or product-specific 
measures, focusing on sustainable banking, 
sustainable insurance and green bonds. For 
example, in 2023, Brazil and Chile adopted 
national frameworks for sustainable bonds; 
the Philippines released guidelines on the 
issuance of “blue” or ESG bonds; and 
Bangladesh, China, India, Singapore and 
Thailand released policies to support the 
banking industry in integrating sustainable 
development considerations into operations, 
covering sustainable deposits, sustainable 
loans and green credits (see table III.3).
Except for the largest States, developing 
countries in general continue to face 
challenges in leveraging sustainable 
finance for development owing to a lack 
of human resources and knowledge, 
weak market infrastructure, and the 
fragmentation and inconsistency in 
international standards (UNCTAD, 2024c). 
The persistently low level of sustainable 
investment in many developing economies 
poses another challenge to their adoption 
of sustainable finance policies.
Larger 
developing 
economies 
are active in 
sustainable 
finance 
policymaking, 
but smaller 
economies 
face multiple 
challenges
Some of the findings in this chapter are 
positive and give hope for a future financial 
system that is sensitive to sustainability 
criteria and measures of performance that 
go beyond financial return. Other findings 
are less positive, including the continued 
prevalence of greenwashing, a backlash 
against sustainable investment in some 
jurisdictions and foot-dragging by some 
important categories of investors that are 
reluctant to report on sustainability risks. 
Overall, the analysis in this chapter shows 
that the sustainable finance market 
continues to expand and offers further 
potential for financing sustainable growth, 
including in developing countries. It shows 
that a majority of the top 100 PPFs and 
SWFs, with patient capital, understand the 
threat of sustainability risks to their business 
model. Finally, it reveals the positive trend 
in sustainable finance policymaking, as 
governments have made more efforts to 
leverage the potential of sustainable finance, 
including through better harmonization 
of international standards to achieve 
comparable, high-quality reporting criteria. 
Going forward, policymakers, regulators 
and other stakeholders will have 
to address three challenges: 
First is spillover effects resulting from 
national and regional standard-setting and 
regulation, which have implications for 
companies around the world. These effects 
primarily occur through global supply and 
* * *


World Investment Report 2024
Investment facilitation and digital government
106
investment chains, where large companies 
and financial institutions increasingly require 
their suppliers or investee companies 
to report on their sustainability. 
Second is integrating sustainable finance 
frameworks into national sustainable 
development strategies. Most such 
strategies have been informed by the overall 
national development agenda, aligning 
with national objectives under the 2030 
Agenda for Sustainable Development and 
the Paris Agreement. Such strategies help 
establish policy objectives, priorities and 
key areas for actions to provide guidance 
and stimulate national efforts in supporting 
the growth of sustainable finance.
Third is ensuring that sustainable finance 
policymaking becomes more impact 
oriented, focusing on policy effectiveness. 
Prioritizing the impact and effectiveness 
of sustainable finance measures is 
essential, given the concerns about a rising 
backlash against sustainable investment. 
Addressing the issue will require improving 
the credibility of sustainable finance and 
combatting the persistent challenge 
of greenwashing, in particular through 
enhanced disclosure aligned with leading 
international standards, and the clear 
definition of sustainability concerning 
economic activities and sustainable financial 
products. Meanwhile, delivering visible 
impact would also be important, particularly 
for developing economies that have not 
yet benefited from increased sustainable 
investment flows to the real economy.
The signals sent through capital markets 
can influence, direct and ultimately shape 
a future economy that is environmentally 
sustainable, socially equitable and fairly 
governed. Addressing policy challenges 
and implementation issues, including 
policy harmonization and spillover effects, 
will be essential for realizing any benefits 
from sustainable finance for the 2030 
Agenda for Sustainable Development. 


Chapter IV
Investment 
facilitation 
and digital 
government


More investment agreements
encourage digitalization
Investment facilitation policy
measures are increasingly digital
2015–2016
2021–2023
36%
60%
+67%
2012–2015
2016–2019
64
3
89
22
2020–2023
121
34
Non-digital
Digital
2016
Developed
2024
43
48
2016
Developing
2024
82
124
Number
Quality (1–10)
4.6
6.5
4.8
5.8
2016
Developed
2024
12
28
2016
Developing
2024
13
67
Number
Quality (1–10)
6.4
8.2
5.3
6.8
Investment facilitation portals are growing in number and quality
Information portals
Single windows
Digitalization has broad beneﬁts
Top three business services
provided online
Countries with better
digital government solutions… 
Higher FDI
inﬂows 
Higher business
creation rates 
Higher
institutional
quality 
+8%
Filing taxes
Registering
businesses
Obtaining
licences


Chapter IV
Investment facilitation and digital government
109
A. Introduction
Business and investment facilitation have become central to efforts 
to develop the private sector and attract foreign direct investment 
(FDI) in developing countries. Facilitation aims to make it easier for 
domestic firms and international investors to establish and operate 
their businesses. Core elements include providing information, 
making rules and regulations transparent, and streamlining 
administrative procedures. Because these elements are based on 
both information and procedures, digitalization is central to their 
effective implementation. They have thus led to a wave of digital 
government initiatives, including information portals and online 
single windows.
Investment facilitation encompasses policies, 
measures and practices aimed at minimizing 
or eliminating obstacles faced by investors 
in a country (UNCTAD, 2016). Key elements 
include enhancing transparency and access 
to information for investors, streamlining 
administrative procedures, ensuring the 
predictability of the policy environment and 
promoting the accountability and efficiency 
of government officials. Facilitation can also 
include initiatives focused on preventing or 
resolving investment disputes. Distinct from 
investment promotion, which is focused 
on marketing a location as an investment 
destination, investment facilitation 
involves a government-wide approach, 
engaging multiple agencies and levels. 
Business and investment facilitation are 
closely intertwined. Business facilitation 
aims to create a favourable environment 
for all firms – large and small, foreign and 
domestic – to start, operate and grow 
their operations. Investment facilitation 
adds mechanisms and initiatives aimed 
at easing processes specific to foreign 
investors, such as foreign investment 
approvals or the admission of foreign 
personnel. Facilitation efforts can extend 
into other policy areas. Trade facilitation, 
for example, complements business 
and investment facilitation by reducing 
complexities in cross-border commerce. 
Business and investment facilitation can play 
a pivotal role not just in attracting investment 
but also in supporting attainment of the 
Sustainable Development Goals. By creating 
a more transparent and accessible business 
environment, they can encourage small 
firms to move from the informal to the formal 
sector, a vital step in enhancing domestic 
revenue mobilization. By removing barriers to 
investment and providing equal opportunities 
for all, business and investment facilitation 
can also play a role in promoting more 
inclusive economic growth, enhancing 
the access of women, young people and 
rural populations to economic activity.
The UNCTAD Division on Investment 
and Enterprise has been instrumental 
in supporting progress on investment 
facilitation. Since 1999, its Investment Policy 
Reviews have provided comprehensive 
advice to nearly 60 countries and regions 
on a wide array of investment facilitation 
policies. The Division offers advisory 
services on investment facilitation to 
investment promotion agencies (IPAs) and 
special economic zones (SEZs). Its digital 


World Investment Report 2024
Investment facilitation and digital government
110
government platforms, including information 
portals and single windows for business, 
investment and trade facilitation, have 
been deployed in more than 60 countries. 
UNCTAD guides on digital investment 
provide investors with essential information 
to evaluate investment opportunities in 
specific countries and regions (box IV.1). 
UNCTAD has been a catalyst for 
international debate on investment 
facilitation. In 2016, the Global Action 
Menu on Investment Facilitation outlined 
the main elements of investment facilitation 
(box IV.2). Since its publication, an 
international agreement on investment 
facilitation for development has been 
negotiated, facilitation has become a 
mainstay in regional and bilateral trade 
and investment agreements, and national 
implementation efforts have proliferated.
By 2023, more than a quarter of investment 
policy measures worldwide centred 
on facilitation mechanisms (chapter 
II). Together with the Action Menu, 
UNCTAD launched the Global Enterprise 
Registration (GER) index, an objective 
rating of countries’ provision of digital 
information and services for businesses 
and investors. It was used as a baseline 
for the state of play on these instruments 
during the early stages of discussions on 
the IFD agreement, which was finalized by 
Box IV.1	
UNCTAD: Tools and technical assistance for digital business and 
investment facilitation
UNCTAD offers a series of tools and participatory methodologies for documenting and simplifying procedures and 
for implementing online platforms. Applied sequentially, they form an integrated programme for the modernization 
of public administration.
Document and publish procedures: the eRegulations information portal
The eRegulations system offers an affordable, turnkey solution for governments aiming to simplify administrative 
procedures and to make them transparent. Designed from the user’s perspective, it breaks down each procedure 
step by step, providing essential information for each. This includes contact details (entity, office, responsible 
person), expected outcomes, required documents, costs, duration, legal justifications and options for lodging 
complaints. Importantly, creating and maintaining the eRegulations portal requires no programming skills, making 
it accessible for government staff who lack technical backgrounds. The system’s versatility allows its use for any 
administrative process, including company registration, tax payments, licensing activities, construction permits and 
import–export operations. Currently, eRegulations portals are operational in more than 50 countries.
Simplify procedures: 10 principles to simplify administrative procedures
Once administrative procedures are clearly defined, they become easier to simplify. This can be achieved by 
comparing existing practices with legal requirements and reducing interactions and document demands to only 
what is necessary and sufficient. The “10 principles to simplify administrative procedures” from UNCTAD guide 
Governments in reducing procedural steps and requirements, often by more than 50 per cent, without necessitating 
changes to existing laws.
Digitalize procedures: the eRegistrations system
eRegistrations is a no-code development platform that allows the creation of online services without programming 
skills. It can be easily adapted and configured to any administrative process and may apply to procedures such as 
company registration, construction permits, export licences or transfers of property titles. eRegistrations is suited 
both to operations involving only one administration (such as the business registry) and to simultaneous operations 
at multiple administrations (such as registering a company at the tax office, with the municipal council, with social 
security, at the labour department and at the business registry). It can thus operate as an online single window. It 
can be installed at any level of government.
Monitoring progress: regional digital investment facilitation monitors
UNCTAD has developed online tools to support the monitoring of progress on digital business and investment 
facilitation within the context of regional economic integration organizations. The tools are based on the GER.co 
methodology, which assesses the coverage, quality and user-friendliness of information portals and online single 
windows for establishing a business. Examples include the digital investment facilitation monitor of the Association 
of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) (https://asean.investmentfacilitation.org) and, most recently, the Southern 
African Customs Union monitor (https://sacu.investmentfacilitation.org).
Source: UNCTAD. See also https://digitalgovernment.world/ and https://businessfacilitation.org.


Chapter IV
Investment facilitation and digital government
111
some 120 members of the World Trade 
Organization (WTO) in February 2024.
At the regional level, UNCTAD assisted 
the members of ASEAN in reviewing the 
implementation of the ASEAN Investment 
Facilitation Framework (AIFF) in 2022 
(box IV.3). It was also part of the task 
force assisting African countries during 
the negotiations of the Protocol on 
Investment to the African Continental 
Free Trade Area (AfCFTA), which includes 
a chapter on investment facilitation. 
At the bilateral level, UNCTAD has been 
advocating for the introduction of proactive 
investment promotion and facilitation 
provisions for sustainable investment 
in international investment agreements 
(IIAs), based on the Investment Policy 
Framework for Sustainable Development 
(UNCTAD, 2015). UNCTAD recently 
developed a set of policy options to enable 
governments to transform their IIAs into 
tools to channel investment towards 
sustainable development (UNCTAD, 
2023a). It is working with the Group 
of 20 Trade and Investment Working 
Group under the Brazilian Presidency 
on mapping investment facilitation and 
sustainable development provisions in 
the IIAs of members of the Group.
Notwithstanding the diverse positions in 
debates on investment facilitation at the 
international level, the need for robust 
investment facilitation practices at the 
national level is universally acknowledged. 
Policymakers have firmly shifted their 
focus to the most effective implementation 
strategies and tools. Because investment 
facilitation is about enhancing transparency 
and providing information to investors and 
about making administrative procedures for 
businesses easier to complete, digitalization 
is at the heart of most facilitation initiatives. 
The use of digital government tools for 
investment facilitation has several important 
benefits. Because of the economies of 
scale and scope in the establishment of 
digital platforms, they tend to improve not 
only foreign investment procedures but also 
general business establishment procedures 
(e.g. business registration tax, social 
security and operating licences), thereby 
reducing administrative hurdles not only 
for foreign investors but also for domestic 
Box IV.2	
The UNCTAD Global Action Menu for Investment Facilitation
UNCTAD published its Global Action Menu for Investment Facilitation in 2016. It was debated among investment 
stakeholders at the World Investment Forum 2016 and subsequently endorsed by the Trade and Development 
Board, the governing body of UNCTAD. 
The Menu lists 10 action lines, each with a series of options for policymakers:
1.	 Promote accessibility and transparency in investment policies, and regulations and procedures relevant to 
investors. 
2.	 Enhance predictability and consistency in the application of investment policies. 
3.	 Improve the efficiency of investment administrative procedures. 
4.	 Build constructive stakeholder relationships in investment policy practice.
5.	 Designate a lead agency, focal point or investment facilitator. 
6.	 Establish monitoring and review mechanisms for investment facilitation. 
7.	 Enhance international cooperation on investment facilitation. 
8.	 Strengthen investment facilitation efforts in developing-country partners. 
9.	 Enhance proactive investment project development in developing-country partners through capacity-building.
10.	Complement investment facilitation by enhancing international cooperation for investment promotion for 
development through provisions in international investment agreements.
Source: UNCTAD (2016).


World Investment Report 2024
Investment facilitation and digital government
112
firms, including micro, small and medium-
sized enterprises (MSMEs). Moreover, the 
implementation of digital government can 
positively affect the business climate in ways 
that go beyond the immediate scope of 
business and investment facilitation and the 
reduction of red tape. It has the potential 
to tackle the root causes of low investment 
attractiveness in many developing 
countries by mitigating weaknesses in 
governance and institutions more broadly.
For that reason, the focus of this chapter 
is on investment facilitation and digital 
government. The aim is to take stock of 
progress in the implementation of digital 
business and investment facilitation 
worldwide; to look at the challenges, 
opportunities and policy priorities for 
its effective implementation; and to 
examine how it connects with wider digital 
government strategies to promote good 
governance and institutional robustness; 
to create a more transparent, efficient 
and investor-friendly environment; and 
to accelerate economic development.
Section B provides an overview of progress 
in digital investment facilitation worldwide, 
with a focus on information portals and 
online single windows, including through 
an update on the UNCTAD GER survey on 
the spread and quality of digital services for 
business in all Member States of the United 
Nations. Section C examines the growing 
importance of investment facilitation and 
its digital component in national investment 
policies and IIAs. Section D evaluates the 
impact of digital business and investment 
facilitation on investment attraction, business 
creation, and institutional governance and 
transparency. Section E looks at lessons 
learned about the implementation of 
digital business and investment facilitation, 
identifying challenges and opportunities, 
and exploring wider implications for the 
development of digital government. Section 
F summarizes policy implications and 
recommendations spanning investment 
policy and digital government development.
Box IV.3	
ASEAN: regional cooperation on digital investment facilitation
In 2021, the ASEAN countries adopted the ASEAN Investment Facilitation Framework (AIFF), a significant step in 
regional investment cooperation. This framework aims to enhance investment attraction across member States 
by increasing transparency, streamlining administrative procedures, promoting policy alignment and building the 
capacity of investment-related agencies.
The ASEAN region has long been proactive in adopting strategies and policy measures to support investment. These 
efforts have intensified in recent years, accelerating during the pandemic, with an increase from 6 new investment 
facilitation measures in 2019 to 28 in 2020. These included the introduction of online facilities, e-application systems 
and streamlined administrative processes, reflecting a strong regional commitment to digitalizing and simplifying 
investment procedures.
Notable initiatives include the Philippines and Malaysia implementing fast-track “green” lanes and simplified 
processes to ease investment. Member countries have also developed investment portals and digital platforms for 
e-payment and acceptance of electronic documents and certificates, further enhancing the investment landscape.
Overall, investment facilitation efforts in ASEAN are characterized by a dynamic policy environment and innovative 
approaches to attract and streamline investment, emphasizing digitalization and institutional strengthening. The 
AIFF acts as a strategic blueprint to guide efficient and integrated investment facilitation across the region, including 
through the creation of a digital investment facilitation monitor. Progress on AIFF implementation was assessed in 
the ASEAN Investment Report 2022 (produced with the support of UNCTAD).
Source: UNCTAD; ASEAN Secretariat and UNCTAD (2022). See also https://asean.investmentfacilitation.org.


Chapter IV
Investment facilitation and digital government
113
B. Progress on digital investment 
facilitation worldwide
Administrative procedures for businesses and investors are often 
the first government services to be digitalized. Information portals 
and online single windows covering mandatory procedures for 
the establishment of a business have spread rapidly and are now 
available in most countries. Their quality and level of sophistication 
varies. Some portals in the least developed countries (LDCs) rival 
those in developed countries, showing that digital business and 
investment facilitation can provide leapfrogging opportunities. 
However, gaps remain, as evidenced by missing coverage, portal 
closures, problems in the maintenance of information and “single 
window dressing”. 
1	 UNCTAD contributed to the development of the self-assessment tool, with inputs on sections dealing with 
transparency and streamlining of administrative procedures, as well as single windows and technical cooperation.
It is challenging to assess the state 
of progress in the implementation of 
investment facilitation – in general, not just 
digital – around the world in a systematic 
manner. Early World Bank research and 
the World Bank Doing Business indicators 
were among the more comprehensive 
efforts before investment facilitation was 
clearly defined. Investment Policy Reviews 
by both UNCTAD and the Organisation for 
Economic Co-operation and Development 
include many elements of investment 
facilitation assessments. The lack of 
updated systematic information across 
countries was one of the reasons for the 
development of a self-assessment tool 
to support the implementation of the 
IFD agreement.1 The WTO Secretariat 
has developed a standardized self-
assessment guide to help countries 
with such assessments (WTO, 2023).
The number of investment facilitation 
measures implemented worldwide is on the 
rise (chapter II), and with the use of digital 
technologies and platforms, these measures 
are evolving. This section mostly discusses 
progress in the development of information 
portals for businesses and investors, which 
are platforms that explain the administrative 
steps required to establish and operate a 
business, and online single windows, which 
are transactional portals that allow users to 
complete multiple procedures administered 
by multiple government agencies online.
1. The wider digital government context
While systematic research on the application 
of business and investment facilitation 
practices is scarce, information is available 
to assess the state of progress on digital 
services for business as part of broader 
development of digital government. The 
United Nations Department of Economic 
and Social Affairs (UN DESA) conducts a 
biennial eGovernment Survey that provides 
an assessment of the digital government 


World Investment Report 2024
Investment facilitation and digital government
114
landscape across 193 Member States. The 
survey uses the eGovernment Development 
Index (EGDI) to rank countries, shedding 
light on online services and specific 
eGovernment components that benefit 
businesses. In its latest edition, the report 
examines these online services: business 
registration, business licence application, 
business tax filing and payment, land title 
registration application, environmental 
permit application, and access to and 
modification of a business’s own data. 
The 2022 survey findings unequivocally 
underscore the pivotal role of business 
facilitation as one of the foremost priorities 
in digital government (figure IV.1). Of 
the 20 administrative procedures that 
are most commonly available as online 
government services, half relate to business 
establishment and operation (others include 
services to citizens such as provision of birth 
certificates or residency documentation, and 
government administrative functions such 
as public sector vacancy announcements 
or public procurement). The two most 
common procedures – ranked first and 
second by some distance – are business 
registration and business licensing. 
Business and investment facilitation are 
clearly important entry points for the 
development of digital government.
The survey highlights a global trend in the 
use of online services, especially related 
to the registration of new businesses. 
According to the survey, the number of 
countries offering this online service, either 
as an information portal or within a single 
window – a transactional portal where 
(part of) the service can be conducted 
online – has grown from 162 in 2020 to 
176 in 2022. Similarly, there has been 
notable growth in other online services, 
such as applications for business licences 
(from 151 to 167) and options for payment 
of value added tax (from 130 to 141). 
The EGDI survey primarily assesses the 
presence of some form of eGovernment 
service (more than its substance or 
comprehensiveness) and does not focus 
solely on business and investment facilitation 
services. EGDI ratings are highly correlated 
with levels of development. Europe and 
North America lead in eGovernment 
development, with an average EGDI value 
exceeding 0.80 out of 1, followed by Asia 
(0.65), Latin America (0.64), Oceania 
Figure IV.1	
Business services are usually the starting point for digital government
Digital government services available to businesses, 2022 
(Number of countries with service)
Source: UNCTAD. Elaborated from the questionnaire of the 2022 Online Services Index (most recent 
survey year), a component of the United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs eGovernment 
Development Index.
Note: Includes information portals and online single windows.
Business registration
Business licenses
Utilities payment (electricity)
Building permits
Land title registration
Utilities payment (water)
Environmental permits
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
176
167
152
149
145
141
138
136
134
Business tax ﬁling
Value added tax ﬁling


Chapter IV
Investment facilitation and digital government
115
(0.51) and Africa (0.41). Despite significant 
progress in Africa, the EGDI average for 
the continent remains low, highlighting 
the persistence of a digital divide. 
The new Business Ready (B-READY) 
index of the World Bank Group, intended 
to replace its well-known Ease of Doing 
Business rankings, also places significant 
weight on the provision of digital government 
services, including single windows and 
information portals. The UN DESA and 
World Bank initiatives reflect a global trend: 
countries are increasingly leveraging digital 
technologies to streamline information 
provision and administrative procedures to 
enhance their efforts to facilitate investment.
2. The spread and quality of business portals
UNCTAD survey data (based on the GER 
methodology; box IV.4) confirm many of the 
findings of the EGDI. In contrast to the EGDI, 
the GER survey focuses specifically on 
business and investment facilitation portals. 
It distinguishes between types (information 
portals and single windows), and it assesses 
their content and quality. These differences 
explain several discrepancies between the 
two surveys. Nevertheless, the data show 
a clear trend in the development of digital 
tools to streamline business registration 
processes and other procedures (figure 
IV.2). The growth trajectory is evident, 
with the utilization of information portals 
for business and investment processes in 
Box IV.4	
The UNCTAD Global Enterprise Registration survey
To comprehensively evaluate the landscape of digital business and investment facilitation, UNCTAD introduced the 
Global Enterprise Registration (GER.co) online rating system and associated index in 2016. In its inaugural version, 
the platform was developed in collaboration with the Kauffman Foundation’s Global Entrepreneurship Network and 
the United States Department of State. 
GER.co assesses information portals, gauging their transparency regarding mandatory procedures for the 
establishment of a business. These typically include business registration, tax and social security enrolment and 
operating licence procurement, and – in the case of foreign investors – investment approval. GER.co also evaluates 
online single windows, measuring their effectiveness in enabling businesses and investors to complete mandatory 
procedures online. 
The assessment uses a 10-point scale, calculated on the basis of objective criteria, thus ensuring a standardized 
and transparent evaluation process. The highest-rated information portals provide comprehensive information 
about each step of an administrative procedure, what documents are required, how much the procedure costs, 
how long the process takes, which laws apply and how to appeal a negative decision. The highest-rated online 
single windows enable firms to complete a single form, submit a unified set of documents and make a single 
payment covering multiple procedures administered by multiple agencies. In return, investors receive digitally 
verifiable certificates. 
GER.co provides an interactive interface, allowing stakeholders in each country to submit revised ratings. This 
feature ensures that the platform remains current and reflects the evolving digital landscape in different countries.
For this World Investment Report, UNCTAD reviewed the GER ratings of United Nations Member States in 
2016, 2021 and 2024. The information portals or single windows evaluated may have changed across the three 
assessments as older sites were replaced or new government agencies created. Given the overlapping mandates 
of government agencies in investment promotion and business registration, multiple sites may be available for 
evaluation in a single country. In each such case, for this analysis UNCTAD retained the information portal or single 
window with the best score. In countries with federal systems or where business registration is administered 
by a subnational entity, UNCTAD evaluated the situation in the main commercial city. Since GER.co focuses on 
business registration, evaluations were made separately of the extent to which the sites benefit foreign investors 
and registrations for special economic zones.
Source: UNCTAD. See also https://www.genglobal.org/ger.


World Investment Report 2024
Investment facilitation and digital government
116
developing countries increasing from 82 
economies in 2016, when the UNCTAD 
Global Action Menu for Investment 
Facilitation was launched, to 124 today. 
The number of developing economies 
with online single windows has risen 
from a modest 13 to 67 (figure IV.3). 
The observed increase in the number 
of portals is the result of growing policy 
attention to investment facilitation since 
2016 as well as a push following the 
COVID-19 pandemic, which accelerated 
the implementation of digital business 
facilitation measures in many countries. 
Several developing countries responded 
by streamlining business establishment 
procedures, adopting online application 
systems, reinforcing one-stop centres, 
expediting operating licence approvals 
and providing additional support to 
investors. Digital tools also became 
important for administering support 
services for small businesses.
The quality of both information portals and 
single windows has also generally increased, 
in terms of their comprehensiveness 
and coverage of mandatory procedures, 
accessibility and user-friendliness. A slight 
decline in the average rating of information 
portals in LDCs can be explained by the 
addition to the sample of new countries 
with relatively basic portals. For developing 
countries as a group, the average rating 
has gone up significantly despite the 
increase in the number of portals. 
Although information portals in developed 
countries improved over the observation 
period, their ratings still barely exceed 
those in developing countries. This may be 
because developed-country governments 
are generally considered to have greater 
regulatory transparency and more 
sophisticated public services, reducing their 
incentive to develop comprehensive online 
portals. There may also be a displacement 
effect: where comprehensive online single 
Figure IV.2	
Information portals are now present in most countries and their quality is 
improving
Information portals for business registration
Source: UNCTAD, GER.co survey.
Notes: Includes only Member States of the United Nations. GER.co rates quality on the basis of 10 objective 
criteria (box IV.4). The last assessment for GER.co was undertaken between February and April 2024.
20
0
40
60
80
100
2
0
4
6
8
10
2016
2021
2024
43
41
48
20
0
40
60
80
100
2
0
4
6
8
10
2016
2021
2024
56
73
85
20
0
40
60
80
100
2
0
4
6
8
10
2016
2021
2024
26
35
39
b. Developing countries excluding
least developed (n = 97)
c. Least developed countries (n = 45)
Number (left axes)
 
Quality (right axes)
a. Developed countries (n = 51)


Chapter IV
Investment facilitation and digital government
117
Figure IV.3	
There is still room for growth in online single windows
Online single windows for business registration
Source: UNCTAD, GER.co survey.
Notes: Includes only Member States of the United Nations. GER.co rates quality on the basis of 10 objective 
criteria (box IV.4). The last assessment for GER.co was undertaken between February and April 2024.
20
0
40
60
80
100
2
0
4
6
8
10
2016
2021
2024
12
17
28
20
0
40
60
80
100
2
0
4
6
8
10
2016
2021
2024
12
31
51
20
0
40
60
80
100
2
0
4
6
8
10
2016
2021
2024
1
14
16
Number (left axes)
 
Quality (right axes)
b. Developing countries excluding
least developed (n = 97)
a. Developed countries (n = 51)
c. Least developed countries (n = 45)
windows are introduced but separate 
information portals remain operational, 
the value of such portals is reduced.
For online single windows, which can be 
more technologically complex and require 
greater integration and coordination 
between government agencies, the ratings 
for developed countries remain higher 
than those for developing countries. Yet 
ratings among developing countries vary 
significantly, with some clear outliers. 
Several developing countries, among 
them some LDCs, feature among the 
countries with the world’s best information 
portals and single windows, illustrating 
that there is a leapfrogging opportunity. 
This effect is especially strong for online 
single windows, as countries with 
relatively few legacy systems may have 
an advantage in building online services.
Crucially, many of the developing countries 
that lead in the adoption of these digital 
tools have received technical assistance, 
including from UNCTAD. This underscores 
the importance of international cooperation 
in facilitating the digital transformation 
of business and investment processes, 
ensuring that developing countries 
can harness the full potential of these 
tools to drive economic growth and 
attract investment. Appropriately, the 
IFD agreement includes provisions 
that promote international cooperation 
and technical assistance to developing 
countries (box IV.5). Such cooperation 
can also take place at regional levels, 
supporting regional integration efforts.
Whereas almost all LDCs now have 
information portals that detail mandatory 
business registration and investor 
procedures, only one third have introduced 
online single windows, as compared with 
more than half of the other developing 
countries. LDCs face considerable 
challenges in consolidating relevant 
administrative procedures into a unified 
platform. Key difficulties include costs, gaps 
in skills and know-how, greater divergence 
in the way regulations are translated into 
administrative procedures across agencies 
and subnational bodies, and frictions in 


World Investment Report 2024
Investment facilitation and digital government
118
coordination among the agencies involved 
in facilitating businesses and investment. 
These difficulties are also evident from 
other findings of the survey. In 2024, seven 
economies discontinued online single 
windows that had been rated in the previous 
assessments.2 Ten discontinued information 
portals, and nine of these were developing 
economies. The cessation of these single 
windows and information portals could be 
the result of resource constraints, changes 
in ownership and responsibility for sites 
between ministries or agencies, changes in 
regulations prompting the need for updates 
or issues with information maintenance. 
A significant number of portals refer to 
dated legislation or procedures or offer 
relatively old forms. Both information 
portals and online single windows need 
clear ownership and resources for 
continuous updates and improvements.
Another phenomenon found during the 
survey is that of “single window dressing”, 
where significant communication efforts 
appear to have been made to market a 
portal to investors or the public, but upon
2	 Discontinued online single windows were found in Eswatini, Ghana, Serbia, Somalia, South Sudan, Uganda 
and Zambia. Discontinued information portals were found in Azerbaijan, the Republic of Congo, Costa Rica, 
Eritrea, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Mali, Micronesia, the Russian Federation, Tajikistan and Zimbabwe.
close inspection key procedures either are 
not accessible, refer to physical processes 
that cannot be conducted online or present 
other technical barriers that diminish the 
value of the portal. Such limitations are often 
revealed only when testing the process 
through the creation of a dummy company. 
As observed earlier, business registration 
is usually the first step in and the basis 
for wider digitalization programmes. 
The GER survey results indicate that tax 
services, social security enrolment and 
operating licence acquisition are the most 
common additional services included in 
online single windows for business and 
investment facilitation. Together, these 
services constitute the core mandatory 
procedures for business establishment. 
Other, complementary services often 
provided online on the same platform 
include the reservation of company 
names (part of business registration 
procedures), processes to obtain digital 
identities or signatures, registrations for 
statistical purposes and connections with 
chambers of commerce (figure IV.4).
Box IV.5	
Investment Facilitation for Development agreement: Digitalization aspects
The Investment Facilitation for Development (IFD) agreement encourages the use of digitalization expressly through 
commitments related to the creation of single information portals for transparency; the acceptance of electronic 
applications, documents and payments for streamlining; and the establishment of local supplier databases to 
facilitate investment. In addition to such digital government tools, digitalization can also ensure the effective 
implementation of other IFD commitments. These include avoiding multiple applications, establishing focal points 
for informational purposes and providing investors with the opportunity to comment on proposed measures.
Investment facilitation commitments can be resource intensive. Under the IFD agreement, developing and least 
developed countries may designate provisions for which implementation is conditional upon the receipt of technical 
assistance and capacity-building. Donor-country signatories commit to facilitate the provision of technical assistance 
for the implementation of the IFD agreement. Both donor and recipient countries can direct such support towards 
digitalization.
Source: UNCTAD, based on the text of the IFD agreement.


Chapter IV
Investment facilitation and digital government
119
3. Foreign investor-specific online procedures
3	 Available on the Investment Policy Hub, at https://investmentpolicy.unctad.org/investment-laws.
The distinction between business facilitation 
and investment facilitation through digital 
government platforms depends on the 
degree to which countries require foreign 
investors to complete additional or distinct 
administrative procedures to establish 
their operations. Several scenarios 
can be distinguished (table IV.1).
In most countries, foreign investors follow 
the same procedures as domestic investors 
to establish a business. This is the case 
for three quarters of the 141 countries 
with an investment law recorded in the 
UNCTAD Investment Laws Navigator.3 
The same information portals and single 
windows created for domestic firms 
therefore also serve foreign investors. 
This can be especially beneficial for SME 
foreign investors and entrepreneurs from 
neighbouring countries (box IV.6).Some 
countries (16 per cent of those with an 
investment law) require foreign companies 
to seek government approval to invest. 
This authorization, typically referred to as 
an investment licence or permit, is usually 
delivered after an evaluation process that 
considers the investor’s business plan in 
light of host-country criteria that can range 
from economic development objectives to 
national security considerations. This is the 
case for several small island developing 
States (SIDS) (e.g. Cook Islands, Kiribati, 
Maldives, Niue, Papua New Guinea and 
Solomon Islands), as well as countries in 
the Middle East (e.g. Iran, Oman, Qatar, 
Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates) 
and in Africa (e.g. Ethiopia, Namibia and 
Somalia). In these cases, digital government 
solutions need to provide additional 
services for foreign investors, either through 
dedicated portals or through separate 
procedures on the same platform.In other 
cases, government approval is required for 
investment in specific sectors only. Where 
the list of sectors is limited to activities 
considered sensitive from a national 
security perspective, as in most developed 
countries, such approval processes are 
referred to as FDI screening (UNCTAD, 
2023c). In some countries (e.g. China, 
India, Nepal and Thailand), the approval 
requirement can extend to a broad range 
of sectors and aim to protect domestic 
industries or address other public interest 
concerns. In this scenario, foreign investors 
Figure IV.4	
Online single windows offer various services in addition to business 
registration
Additional services provided by online single windows, 2024
(Percentage)
Source: UNCTAD, GER.co survey.
Notes: Includes only Member States of the United Nations. The last assessment for GER.co was undertaken 
between February and April 2024.
Tax registration
Social security
Business licenses
Digital signature
Chamber of commerce registration
Statistics ofﬁce registration
66
42
30
14
4
3


World Investment Report 2024
Investment facilitation and digital government
120
Table IV.1	
Digital government solutions for foreign investment facilitation are 
shaped by legislative scenarios
Foreign investor-specific requirements and implications for digital investment facilitation
Source: UNCTAD.
Scenario
Description
Common business facilitation 
practices
Example countries
No distinction
Foreign and domestic investors follow 
the same business establishment 
procedures
General-purpose business 
facilitation portals
Most countries
Foreign investment 
license/permit
All foreign investors are required to 
follow an approval procedure
General-purpose business 
facilitation portals with dedicated 
digital procedures
Papua New Guinea
Solomon Islands
Separate foreign investment 
facilitation portals, digital 
procedures
Ethiopia
Saudi Arabia
Somalia
Separate foreign investment 
facilitation portals, non-digital 
procedures
Lesotho
Maldives
Sector-specific FDI 
approval
Most foreign investors follow 
domestic procedures but approval is 
required in specific sectors based on 
national security (screening) or other 
public interest concerns
Separate foreign investment 
facilitation portals, digital 
procedures
France
Germany
India
Nepal
Separate foreign investment 
facilitation portals, non-digital 
procedures
Belgium
Canada
Thailand
United States
Foreign investor registry
Foreign investors are included in 
a dedicated registry, often as a 
prerequisite to obtain the advantages 
of the investment law (e.g. incentives)
Separate foreign investment 
facilitation portals, digital 
procedures
Bhutan
Dominican Republic
Separate foreign investment 
facilitation portals, non-digital 
procedures
Chile
Colombia
Peru
can use business facilitation portals, 
but with some restrictions or additional 
requirements in sectors of concern.
A small share of countries (11 per cent 
of countries with an investment law) 
require foreign investors to register their 
companies in a dedicated registry, either as 
an alternative or in addition to registering 
them as domestic businesses. Registration 
is typically done at the IPA or investment 
authority or at the central bank. The 
purpose of the registration is often to collect 
statistics on FDI (e.g. in the Plurinational 
State of Bolivia, Cabo Verde, Colombia, 
the Dominican Republic and Georgia), or 
to enable investors to access the benefits 
of the investment law, including incentives 
(e.g. in Chile, Nicaragua, Peru and the 
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela). The 
dedicated registry can either be separate 


Chapter IV
Investment facilitation and digital government
121
from a general business registration portal 
or be connected to or integrated in it.
Some countries (17 per cent) impose 
investment registration requirements on 
both foreign and domestic investors. 
The purpose is often to benefit from 
the provisions of the investment law – 
which usually applies to both foreign and 
domestic investment – including eligibility 
for incentives (e.g. in Cambodia, Chad, 
Kenya, Malawi, the Philippines and Uganda). 
Access to the treatment and protection 
guarantees of the law can be a crucial 
consideration for investors in their decision 
to establish and operate in a country, 
making this registration equivalent to an 
investment permit. In Angola, for instance, 
to benefit from the provisions of the Private 
Investment Law, both domestic and foreign 
businesses that invest more than $1 million 
must obtain an investment licence. The 
provisions include the ability to access 
land concessions, secure fiscal incentives, 
transfer funds abroad and obtain other 
necessary permits. Complex procedures 
specific to foreign investors usually prompt 
the establishment of dedicated information 
portals or online single windows, distinct 
from those for domestic investors.
These different scenarios are reflected 
in the accessibility to foreign investors of 
online single windows (figure IV.5). For such 
investors, portals in developing countries, 
and especially in LDCs, have comparatively 
more dedicated services or additional forms 
or procedures. Most investment laws are 
adopted in developing countries, whereas 
developed countries tend to rely instead 
on general commercial law for business 
establishment procedures. Nonetheless, 
accessibility to foreign investors is not 
actually better in developed countries. 
Many developed-country single windows 
prevent foreign investors from carrying out 
procedures online through requirements 
such as electronic identities or certified email 
addresses that can be obtained only through 
government offices that require residency 
or physical presence in the country. These 
requirements often stem from anti-money-
laundering legislation or general efforts to 
curb illicit financial activities. Such legitimate 
regulatory obstacles to the complete 
digitalization of business establishment 
processes are an important reason for the 
continued relevance of information portals 
in addition to online single windows.
Box IV.6	
Burundi: Fueling business creation and regional integration through digital 
investment facilitation
In November 2022, the Burundi Development Agency introduced a digital platform designed to simplify the process 
of starting a business in the country (EasyBusiness.bi). Developed using the eRegistrations platform of UNCTAD 
and supported by the World Bank through the Local Development Project for Employment, the platform offers a 
comprehensive online service for business registration across the country, eliminating the need for entrepreneurs 
to travel to the capital.
The platform has reduced the registration requirements by 70 per cent, which has had a profound effect on the 
number of businesses being established. Since its launch, registrations have increased by 59 per cent, including 
a notable rise in participation from foreign individuals in limited liability companies. More than half of these foreign 
partners are from neighbouring countries, and more than 70 per cent from the region. The introduction of the 
platform has not only facilitated local business creation but also attracted international interest, fostering economic 
growth and development in Burundi.
Source: UNCTAD. See also https://easybusiness.bi.


World Investment Report 2024
Investment facilitation and digital government
122
4. Portal ownership and the role of IPAs
Both information portals and online single 
windows for business and investment 
facilitation can be managed by different 
government entities, depending on their 
scope. In countries surveyed by the 
GER, over 40 per cent of both types are 
administered by line ministries, often for 
economic affairs or for trade and investment 
(figure IV.6). Investment authorities and 
IPAs also frequently manage information 
portals, including for general-purpose 
business facilitation (not just foreign investor 
procedures). Transactional online single 
windows are more commonly managed by 
business registries and developed as part of 
the process of automating such registries.
The lower involvement of IPAs in the 
management of online single windows 
is understandable, as they are not 
direct owners of the resulting registries. 
Nonetheless, many IPAs do play a role in the 
development of online services for investors 
in their country. Only about one quarter of 
respondents in the annual UNCTAD IPA 
survey reported having no involvement of 
any kind in the development of an online 
single window for business and investment 
facilitation (figure IV.7). The rest reported 
various levels of engagement, ranging from 
advocacy to advisory roles to participation 
in government-wide task forces. 
The result of this active engagement is that 
IPAs have a generally positive perception 
of the share of mandatory administrative 
processes that can be completed online, a 
perception that contrasts to some degree 
Figure IV.5	
Single windows in developing countries are often more accessible to 
foreign investors than those in developed countries
Accessibility to foreigners of online single windows, 2024
(Percentage)
Source: UNCTAD, GER.co survey. 
Notes: Rules-based barriers pose requirements that are not immediately accessible or available to foreigners 
(e.g. certified e-identities or work permits). Technical barriers are challenges in accessing the platform at the 
time of research (e.g. website inaccessible).
25
14
18
43
39
14
22
20
6
25
19
50
6
Developed countries
Developing countries
(excluding least developed)
Least developed countries
Fully accessible
 
Dedicated services that redirect to other sites 
Different forms or procedures 
Rules-based barriers
Technical barriers 


Chapter IV
Investment facilitation and digital government
123
Figure IV.6	
Portals are generally managed by government ministries, IPAs and 
business registries
Ownership of information portals and digital single windows, 2024
(Percentage)
Source: UNCTAD, GER.co survey.
Abbreviation: IPA = investment promotion agency.
Ministry
Trade and investment
Economic affairs
Finance
Justice
Industry
Other line ministry
Business registry
Digital government body
Investment promotion agency
Chamber of commerce
Other
43
15
7
6
5
2
7
25
14
10
3
4
Ministry
Economic affairs
Trade and investment
Finance
Industry
Justice
Other line ministry
Investment promotion agency
Digital government body
Business registry
Chamber of commerce
Other
44
12
12
7
4
3
6
32
14
3
2
5
b. Single windows
a. Information portals
Figure IV.7	
Only about one quarter of IPAs have no involvement in developing online 
single windows
Role of IPAs in development of online single windows, 2024
(Percentage of survey respondents)
Source: UNCTAD, 2024–2026 World Investment Prospects Survey. 
Notes: The survey, conducted in April 2024, collected 96 responses from national and subnational IPAs. 
Percentages may not sum to 100 due to rounding.
Abbreviation: IPA = investment promotion agency.
26
19
18
18
14
12
No direct
involvement
Advocacy
role
Leading
development
of online
single window
Part of task
force
developing
digital service
Advisory
role
Leading
development
of selected
digital service
with the results of the GER survey. Some 70 
per cent of IPAs report that most mandatory 
procedures for business establishment – 
including registration, tax and social security 
enrolment, and operating licence acquisition 
– can be conducted online in their country, 
whereas the GER survey of transactional 
portals shows lower shares for social 


World Investment Report 2024
Investment facilitation and digital government
124
security enrolment and operating licence 
acquisition. Either IPAs have lower visibility of 
requirements that may be sector specific or 
not immediately urgent in the establishment 
phase, or these services are provided 
mostly through separate online systems 
not connected to an online single window.
There is scope for further engagement 
by IPAs in the development of digital 
government (see, for example, the proactive 
role that the Kenyan IPA Keninvest is 
taking in this regard (box IV.7)). The digital 
transformation of IPAs is ongoing (UNCTAD, 
2023b). They often provide other types of 
digital investment promotion and facilitation 
tools, in combination with or separate 
from information portals that deal purely 
with administrative procedures. Tools 
that connect well with typical investment 
facilitation practices include investor 
feedback and grievance communication, 
online databases to support searches for 
local suppliers, and incentives calculators.
Box IV.7	
Kenya: Connecting digital tools for investment promotion and facilitation
Despite significant advances in digital government services in Kenya, notably through the eCitizen platform, new 
businesses and investors still encounter multiple, disjointed registration processes and authorizations, including 
for licences and permits needed to operate in regulated sectors and counties.
Although some applications can be completed online, the lack of integration among systems adds significant 
barriers for investors and entrepreneurs. There is a pressing need for enhanced facilitation to elevate investment 
levels sufficiently to address interconnected economic, health, security and climate challenges.
The Kenya Investment Authority (Keninvest) offers one-stop, in-person services such as assistance with foreign 
taxpayer registration, electrical grid connection and work permits. However, its services do not extend to 
crucial permits and licences at the county, sectoral or environmental levels. In addition, it lacks the capability to 
comprehensively register investment projects online, collect data or provide effective investor aftercare services, 
which are essential for monitoring and supporting successful investment outcomes.
The Kenya Investment Single Window project, being developed by UNCTAD, aims to tackle these issues. It will 
introduce an online system to streamline the investment process in the country and enhance the Government’s 
capacity to attract and monitor investments effectively.
The system will connect with existing government databases such as the eCitizen portal, the Kenya Revenue 
Authority’s iTax system and county government portals. This integration will enhance the functionality of existing 
platforms, making it easier for businesses to navigate the regulatory environment.
Source: UNCTAD. See also https://eregulations.invest.go.ke.


Chapter IV
Investment facilitation and digital government
125
C. Facilitation in national and 
international investment policies
Investment facilitation plays an increasingly prominent role in 
both national and international investment policies. Facilitation 
measures are now the largest category of national investment 
policy measures, and especially important in developing countries. 
More recent national policy measures refer explicitly to digital 
government tools. Most modern IIAs and instruments also include 
facilitation provisions and act as catalysts for the use of digital 
government solutions.
1. National policies
4	 For more details regarding the definition of investment-related policy measures and their classification into less 
and more favourable to investors, see chapter II, box II.2.
5	 The facilitation measures included in this analysis relate to FDI and primarily encompass policy measures 
enacted through national legislation. They comprise 333 measures implemented across 99 countries, 
including 23 developed and 76 developing countries, over the past 12 years.
Investment facilitation measures have 
become a key component of the global 
investment policy landscape, constituting 
between a quarter and a third of the 
investment policy measures more favourable 
to investors that countries adopted over 
the last decade, and nearly two fifths of 
such measures in 2023 (chapter II).4 The 
total number of investment facilitation 
measures introduced each year has more 
than doubled since the early 2000s, growing 
by 150 per cent in developing countries 
and 82 per cent in developed countries 
from 2012–2015 to 2020–2023 (figure 
IV.8).5Streamlining initiatives emerged as the 
predominant type of investment facilitation 
measure over the past decade (53 per 
cent), followed by facilitation services (31 
per cent) and transparency initiatives (16 
per cent). This trend was similar across 
developing and developed regions.
During the second half of the 2010s, 
digital tools emerged in investment policy 
measures. Digital investment facilitation 
services, absent from the measures adopted 
between 2012 and 2015, constituted 
15 per cent of all investment facilitation 
service initiatives in 2020–2023. Between 
the two periods, the share of digital 
streamlining measures grew from less 
than 10 to 25 per cent and the share of 
digital transparency measures grew from 
0 to almost 30 per cent (figure IV.9). 
Transparency measures related to 
investment included primarily the 
consolidation of investment-related 
provisions (for instance, in Fiji and 
Uzbekistan), the issuance of guidelines 
on investment legislation (notably in China 
and India) and the establishment of online 
investment portals (as seen in Oman and 


World Investment Report 2024
Investment facilitation and digital government
126
Uruguay). In addition, the recent expansion 
of investment screening regimes (chapter 
II) – by itself not among the measures 
that are favourable to investors – has 
prompted several developed countries 
(including Australia, France, the Kingdom 
of the Netherlands and the United 
Kingdom), to clarify their investment review 
frameworks by publishing guidelines. 
Streamlining initiatives span a wide 
array of measures designed to simplify 
and modernize investment policies and 
administrative procedures. Non-digital 
measures include the simplification of 
business registration (e.g. in Mauritius, 
Romania and Viet Nam), licensing 
procedures (e.g. in Jordan, Mozambique, 
Peru and the Philippines) and screening 
mechanisms (e.g. in Canada and New 
Zealand). They also include the creation 
of physical one-stop shops (e.g. in 
Algeria, Mongolia and South Africa).
Digital initiatives represented a quarter of 
streamlining efforts. The largest category 
was the establishment of digital one-
stop shops (10 per cent) or online single 
windows. Other digital streamlining initiatives 
encompass the digitalization of various 
investment-related processes (e.g. the 
introduction of online applications, forms, 
certificates and payment facilities). As 
in the case of transparency measures, 
several new digital initiatives aim to 
simplify investment screening processes 
by introducing portals designed for this 
purpose (e.g. in France and Germany).
Facilitation services provide tailored support 
from IPAs, SEZs or other entities designed 
to aid investors in establishing or expanding 
their operations within a country. During 
the last decade, measures in this category 
were evenly split between services related 
to SEZs and those offered by IPAs or 
governmental agencies. The latter included 
services such as alternative dispute 
resolution mechanisms, visa facilitation, 
linkage programmes and aftercare services. 
Digital tools are increasingly utilized in 
delivering investment facilitation services. 
This trend strengthened after the COVID-19 
pandemic, which saw an expansion in the 
offering of digital investment facilitation and 
aftercare services by IPAs, with a sharper 
focus on promoting linkages between 
foreign companies and the local economy 
(UNCTAD, 2020b). Oman, for instance, 
recently launched an online platform to 
connect local companies with global 
investors. In Cambodia, the online supplier 
database aims not only to link foreign and 
Figure IV.8	
Facilitation measures are increasingly prevalent in national investment 
policies
Facilitation measures by economic grouping and period of adoption
(Number)
Source: UNCTAD, Investment Policy Monitor database, accessed 15 April 2024.
Developing countries
Developed countries
50
17
95
16
124
31
2012–2015
2016–2019
2020–2023


Chapter IV
Investment facilitation and digital government
127
domestic firms, but also to generate a 
“sustainable investment cycle” by rewarding 
and motivating sustainable operations. 
Traditional approaches to resolving investor 
grievances are increasingly incorporating 
digital solutions. The Investment 
Ombudsman model of the Republic of Korea 
serves as a prime example (box IV.8). 
Facilitation provisions are increasingly 
common not only in investment policy 
measures and initiatives, as discussed 
earlier, but also in investment laws. Of 
141 such laws currently in force, as 
recorded by UNCTAD in the Investment 
Laws Navigator, 64 (45 per cent) include 
clauses on investment facilitation. These 
clauses have become more common 
in laws enacted after the early 2000s 
(figure IV.10). There are some regional 
differences; 63 per cent of investment laws 
in Africa incorporate investment facilitation 
provisions, but only 20 per cent do so 
in Latin America and the Caribbean.
As in the case of policy measures, 
investment facilitation provisions in 
investment laws relate to streamlining, 
services and transparency (figure IV.11). 
Transparency provisions are present in 
19 investment laws currently in force. 
They typically commit the State to 
publishing all laws, rules and regulations 
concerning investment. Only two such 
laws emphasize the digital accessibility 
of such information, and one mandates 
its publication on the official Government 
website. Another law requires the 
online publication of supplementary 
information relevant for investors, such 
as socioeconomic data on the country.
Streamlining provisions largely involve 
the establishment of one-stop shops for 
investors (in 33 of 36 investment laws with 
streamlining provisions). Most of these 
one-stop shops serve all investors, but 
some are tailored specifically to foreign or 
strategic investors. Only five laws establish 
Figure IV.9	
Digital government tools are increasingly common in investment 
facilitation measures
Measures by type and period of adoption
(Number)
Source: UNCTAD, Investment Policy Monitor database, accessed 15 April 2024.
7
15
4
21
8
33
3
44
17
58
19
24
30
1
42
7
2012–2015
2016–2019
2020–2023
2012–2015
2016–2019
2020–2023
2012–2015
2016–2019
2020–2023
Non-digital
Digital
b. Streamlining
a. Transparency
c. Facilitation services


World Investment Report 2024
Investment facilitation and digital government
128
Figure IV.10	
Recent investment laws frequently include facilitation provisions
Laws by period of adoption
(Number) 
Source: UNCTAD, Investment Laws Navigator database, accessed 14 April 2024.
Before 1988
1988–1999
2000–2011
2012–2023
6
11
29
22
13
31
29
With faciliation provisions
Without facilitation provisions
Box IV.8
Republic of Korea: Digital solutions improve investment grievance 
settlement
The Republic of Korea pioneered the institutionalization of an ombudsman mechanism for resolving foreign 
investment-related grievances. The Office of the Foreign Investment Ombudsman (OFIO), introduced in 
1999, acts as a grievance resolution centre and advocacy body for foreign investors. Its digital portal offers 
a real-time grievance management system, enabling foreign companies to report issues and monitor case 
progress online. The portal also allows virtual meetings with experts, who then coordinate solutions with 
relevant ministries or organizations.
The digitalization of OFIO services has accelerated the exchange of information with public entities, which 
is critical for resolving foreign investors’ grievances. From 2018 to 2022, OFIO settled 1,746 grievances, 
contributing to an increase in decisions to reinvest and a better business environment. This support resulted 
in $1.73 billion in reinvestment in 2022 alone. These results have led several countries, including Brazil, 
Kazakhstan and the Russian Federation, to adopt similar investment ombudsman mechanisms. 
Source: UNCTAD, based on information from the Office of the Foreign Investment Ombudsman and the Korea Trade-
Investment Promotion Agency.


Chapter IV
Investment facilitation and digital government
129
digital one-stop shops. Additional provisions 
to streamline investor processes include 
simplifying administrative procedures, 
promoting digitalization and establishing 
maximum timelines for government 
processes related to investment.
Facilitation services provisions in investment 
laws encompass alternative dispute 
resolution (22 laws), including mediation, 
conciliation and dedicated mechanisms for 
resolving investment-related grievances, 
such as investment ombudsmen. They also 
include investor support services by IPAs 
or other agencies (12 laws). These services 
comprise counselling, administrative 
assistance for permits and licensing, visa 
facilitation for investors and skilled workers, 
and assistance in access to land and utilities.
2. International investment agreements
New-generation IIAs increasingly 
embrace proactive investment facilitation 
features. Yet, much more is needed 
to direct facilitation commitments in 
IIAs towards sustainable investment 
and to ensure that treaty provisions 
translate into practical interventions.
Recent IIAs increasingly contain 
provisions aimed at improving the 
regulatory environment in host countries, 
encouraging stakeholder engagement, 
setting up regular cooperation mechanisms 
between the contracting parties and 
facilitating investment for sustainable 
development (figure IV.12). Prominent 
examples of these provisions appear in 
treaties and instruments concluded at the 
plurilateral, regional and bilateral levels.
The plurilateral Investment Facilitation for 
Development (IFD) agreement strongly 
emphasizes transparency and streamlining 
of administrative procedures and 
contains elements to support sustainable 
development, responsible business conduct 
and international cooperation. At the regional 
level, the Protocol on Investment (2023) 
to the AfCFTA, as well as the Association 
of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) 
Investment Facilitation Framework (2021) 
and the Intra-MERCOSUR Cooperation 
and Facilitation Investment Protocol 
(2017), contain proactive commitments 
to sustainable investment, digitalization 
and cooperation. At the bilateral level 
various models promote investment 
facilitation, including the Cooperation 
and Facilitation Investment Agreements 
concluded by Brazil, the Angola–European 
Union Sustainable Investment Facilitation 
Agreement (SIFA) (2023) or the framework 
agreements such as the Australia–Singapore 
Green Economy Agreement (2022).
Digitalization, expressly encouraged 
in several recent IIAs, can serve as 
a tool for effectively implementing 
IIA facilitation commitments. It is the 
natural implementation mechanism for 
transparency commitments, the most 
common facilitation feature in recent IIAs. 
Figure IV.11	
Streamlining and facilitation services are more common than 
transparency provisions in investment laws
Laws with specific investment facilitation measures, 2023
(Number)
Source: UNCTAD, Investment Laws Navigator database, accessed 14 April 2024.
Streamlining
Facilitation services
Transparency
19
36
31


World Investment Report 2024
Investment facilitation and digital government
130
Figure IV.12	
Recent IIAs include a wide range of facilitation commitments
Share of IIAs signed during 2015–2023, by investment facilitation feature
(Percentage)
Source: UNCTAD.
Note: Based on 235 IIAs, 148 BITs and 87 TIPs concluded in the period 2015–2023 for which texts are 
available.
Abbreviations: BIT = bilateral investment treaty, IIA = international investment agreement, TIP = treaty with 
investment provision.
Regulatory environment
 
Stakeholder engagement
 
Cooperation mechanisms
 
Sustainable investment
Transparency of investment-related 
measures
Entry and stay of personnel
Objective application of investment-
related measures
Regulatory practices and coherence
Streamlining of administrative 
procedures
Right to comment on proposed 
regulatory measures
Focal points for investors
Institutional framework for cooperation
Technical assistance and capacity-
building
Proactive provisions facilitating 
sustainable investment
54
37
22
14
7
30
17
46
14
24
Selected features of IIAs
Transparency of investment-related measures. Commitment to 
publish investment-related measures and/or measures that affect the 
application of the IIA, including online.
Right to comment on proposed regulatory measures. Commitment 
to provide investors the opportunity to comment on proposed measures.
Entry and stay of personnel. Commitment to streamline and/or render 
more transparent procedures for granting entry and stay of investors, 
including sympathetic consideration commitments.
Focal points for investors. Commitment to establish institutions 
available to investors with information, aftercare, dispute avoidance 
and/or broader functions.
Objective application of investment-related measures. Commitment 
to objective and predictable application, independence of administering 
authorities and/or maintenance of appeal and review mechanisms.
Institutional framework for cooperation. Establishment of a 
cooperation mechanism under the IIA, including for contracting parties’ 
institutions responsible for investment.
Streamlining of administrative procedures. Commitment to 
eliminate redundant bureaucratic steps and clarify the administrative 
process, including through digitalization and eGovernment tools.
Regulatory practices and coherence. Encouragement of good 
rule-making practices (e.g. regulatory impact assessment, periodic 
review) and/or inter-agency coordination.
Technical assistance and capacity-building. Reference to technical 
assistance and/or capacity-building activities in the IIA.
Proactive provisions facilitating sustainable investment. 
Commitment to proactive measures aimed at promoting and facilitating 
investment linked to the Sustainable Development Goals
(e.g. environment, health, climate action). 


Chapter IV
Investment facilitation and digital government
131
It can also operationalize IIA commitments 
to streamline investment administrative 
procedures and improve stakeholder 
engagement. Recent treaties increasingly 
encourage digitalization or include 
commitments regarding online information 
provision or single windows (figure IV.13).
Over half of all IIAs signed since 2015 
contain a commitment to publish 
investment-related measures. Such 
transparency provisions are among the 
earliest investment facilitation commitments 
to appear in IIAs, and the share of IIAs 
that contain them has grown steadily. IIAs 
commonly extend this commitment to 
proposed measures and at times include 
a detailed indicative list of measures to 
publish. These can cover regulations 
directed specifically at investors, such as 
incentive schemes, as well as measures 
or laws that are likely to affect investments 
indirectly, such as regulations concerning 
corporate governance, insolvency, property 
or taxation. Examples of such detailed 
provisions can be found in the Angola–
European Union SIFA, the IFD agreement, 
the Türkiye–United Arab Emirates 
Comprehensive Economic Partnership 
Agreement (CEPA) (2023) and the ASEAN 
Investment Facilitation Framework, among 
others. These treaties illustrate the catalytic 
role that international agreements can play 
in the adoption of facilitation measures 
and digital government tools – an effect 
already observed with the WTO Trade 
Facilitation Agreement (box IV.9).
Digital government tools are the most 
effective way to operationalize transparency 
commitments. About half of IIAs with 
transparency provisions signed in the 
Figure IV.13	
IIAs increasingly encourage digitalization
Facilitation provisions in IIAs that refer to digital tools
(Percentage)
Source: UNCTAD.
Note: Based on 131 IIAs, 70 BITs and 61 TIPs concluded in 2015–2023 that contain at least one facilitation 
provision. Data based in part on International Economic Law Clinic (2024).
Abbreviations: BIT = bilateral investment treaty, IIA = international investment agreement, TIP = treaty with 
investment provision.
2015–2016
2017–2018
2019–2020
2021–2023
36
40
47
60


World Investment Report 2024
Investment facilitation and digital government
132
past five years contain a commitment to 
online publication, and several expressly 
encourage the contracting parties to create 
a digital information portal. For example, 
under the Angola–European Union SIFA, 
each contracting party commits to make 
a wide range of information available to 
investors by electronic means and, where 
practicable, through a single portal.
A key national policy component that 
recent IIAs have begun to incorporate 
is the simplification and streamlining 
of investment-related administrative 
procedures. These provisions usually aim 
to eliminate redundant bureaucratic steps 
and to clarify the administrative process for 
investment-related application procedures. 
They often require a reasonable time frame 
and cost for licence applications, encourage 
countries to consolidate the application 
process under a single agency and establish 
certain procedural commitments for the 
application process. Recent examples 
include the Angola–European Union 
SIFA, the China–Ecuador FTA (2023), the 
IFD agreement, the Türkiye–United Arab 
Emirates CEPA and the ASEAN IFF.
More recently, treaty partners have 
also begun to commit to streamlining 
procedures in the energy sector to support 
energy transition efforts or to facilitate 
investment in the energy transition (see 
the AfCFTA Investment Protocol and 
the European Union–New Zealand FTA) 
(UNCTAD, 2023d). Another provision 
that can benefit from digitalization is 
the streamlining of procedures for 
the entry and stay of investors and 
key personnel (see, for example, the 
Regional Comprehensive Economic 
Partnership Agreement (2020) and the 
Israel–Republic of Korea FTA (2021)).
Box IV.9
Information portals for trade
Transparency in import, export and transit procedures is essential for businesses to ensure predictability in 
cross-border trade. Despite progress in trade facilitation, many companies – particularly micro, small, and 
medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs) – still find it challenging to complete trade formalities and documentation. 
The challenge often arises from a lack of transparency, cumbersome and redundant procedures, and 
uncoordinated legal frameworks, causing businesses to spend excessive time and resources to comply 
with trade and customs procedures.
The WTO Trade Facilitation Agreement includes transparency provisions that require members to make 
certain information available online, such as detailed descriptions of import, export and transit procedures; 
required forms and documents; and contact information for enquiry points. Although the Agreement does 
not specify that this information be centralized, it is most effective when presented on a user-centric website 
that offers comprehensive, step-by-step guides to trade-related procedures.
Building on extensive experience in developing digital solutions for business and investment procedures, 
UNCTAD has created a model Trade Information Portal. This online tool aims to enhance transparency and 
assist traders by simplifying the completion of international trade procedures. Launched first in Kenya in 
2017, the portal has proven effective. Traders have seen reductions in time and costs to access information 
about clearance procedures. By 2022, the National Trade Facilitation Committee of Kenya had simplified 
numerous procedures through the portal, eliminating steps and required documents and moving several 
processes online.
The UNCTAD Trade Information Portal model, which is based on the eRegulations technology, emphasizes 
presenting information from the user’s perspective and providing step-by-step guidance for all import, export 
and transit procedures. To date, this approach has been implemented in 28 countries, significantly aiding 
traders by simplifying and demystifying the required legal and procedural steps.
Source: UNCTAD. See also https://digitalgovernment.world/trade-information-portals.


Chapter IV
Investment facilitation and digital government
133
Digital government solutions can help 
eliminate redundant bureaucratic steps 
and streamline the administrative process. 
The AIFF (2021) offers a regional example 
in which parties endeavour to establish 
and maintain single online digital platforms 
for investor applications. Similarly, at the 
bilateral level, the Türkiye–United Arab 
Emirates CEPA contains a commitment 
to work towards the “the highest possible 
level of digitalization of procedures related 
to investments”. Parties also refer to 
measures that have proven to be effective, 
such as one-stop shops, single portal 
submissions or commitments to accept 
the submission of electronic applications, 
documents and payments (see the AfCFTA 
Protocol on Investment and the Angola–
European Union SIFA, among others).
Used strategically, digitalization can not 
only improve the overall investment climate 
but also contribute to operationalizing IIA 
provisions aimed at facilitating sustainable 
investment. For example, to render 
tangible recent IIA commitments to 
facilitate investment in renewable energy, 
parties may prioritize the digitalization of 
licencing processes related to construction 
of energy installations or laying of 
cables, disbursement of renewable 
energy incentives or connections to 
electricity grids (UNCTAD, 2023c).
About 30 per cent of IIAs signed since 2015 
include a commitment to offer investors and 
relevant other stakeholders the opportunity 
to comment on proposed investment-related 
measures (see for example the Australia–
United Kingdom FTA (2021)). Some 17 
per cent also require the creation of focal 
points for investors, with informational 
or grievance functions. Examples 
include the Cooperation and Facilitation 
Investment Agreements of Brazil, the 
intra-MERCOSUR Protocol on Investment 
Facilitation and the Regional Comprehensive 
Economic Partnership Agreement 
(2020). Some recent IIAs also encourage 
the establishment of local supplier 
databases (see the Angola–European 
Union SIFA and the IFD agreement, 
which are by default digital) (box IV.2).
The use of digital tools can improve the 
efficiency of all these commitments, as 
well as their accessibility, including for 
underrepresented economic actors and civil 
society. The work of focal points can be 
optimized by, for example, a first-response 
automated chat assistant for simple 
information requests and a mechanism 
to direct grievances to relevant officers, 
which allows an overall higher number 
of inquiries to be processed. Similarly, 
maintaining an online portal for investor 
and civil society comments on proposed 
investment-related measures can allow a 
broader range of stakeholders to access 
it and improve the efficiency of collecting, 
processing and disaggregating comments.


World Investment Report 2024
Investment facilitation and digital government
134
D. The impact of investment 
facilitation and digital government
Digital investment facilitation has positive effects on governance 
and institutions, business creation and investment attraction. It 
can support the promotion of sustainable investment, although 
facilitation measures are difficult to target. Much of the sustainable 
development impact occurs through business facilitation, which 
contributes to the formalization of local firms, domestic resource 
mobilization and higher rates of inclusivity and participation in the 
MSME sector.
Systematic research on the impact of 
investment facilitation on FDI is both 
scarce and difficult to conduct because 
of the limited data available on investment 
facilitation measures, the interlinked nature 
of investment facilitation measures with other 
policies and the interdependencies of effects 
with other factors that affect FDI flows.
The lack of conclusive evidence and of 
a definitive estimate of impact has not 
stopped policymakers from pursuing 
investment facilitation efforts in international 
initiatives and national policy measures. 
It is generally accepted that investment 
facilitation is an important component 
of a conducive business environment, 
long identified as one of the three key 
factors influencing FDI, together with 
economic and policy determinants 
(UNCTAD, 1998; Alfaro et al., 2008). 
Facilitation efforts affect several dimensions 
of the business environment, including 
the ease of doing business and the 
quality of investment institutions, which 
directly influence the establishment and 
operations of foreign investors. They 
further affect institutional factors such 
as levels of corruption, rule of law and 
quality of governance, which indirectly 
contribute to improving the attractiveness 
of a location for foreign investment.
The advantage of investment facilitation 
is that it often does not require changes 
in policies or legislation. Most investment 
facilitation practices, from information 
provision to transparency and streamlining, 
are about how rules and regulations are 
communicated and applied and how 
easy they are to comply with, rather than 
their substance. Therefore, unlike other 
FDI determinants, investment facilitation 
measures often require less policy space 
(such as for policy determinants) and 
do not rely on economic conditions 
(such as for economic determinants).
The relevant literature on FDI determinants 
substantially supports the attractiveness of 
investment facilitation measures as policy 
tools for increasing FDI. Empirical studies 
have reached broad consensus on the 
fact that countries with better business 
environments are more likely to attract 
higher FDI flows. The impact of investment 
facilitation measures – as measured through 
their effect on the business environment – is 
likely to be economically sizeable. An early 
simulation by UNCTAD – used to underpin 
its Global Action Menu for Investment 


Chapter IV
Investment facilitation and digital government
135
Facilitation (UNCTAD, 2016) and based on a 
World Bank study analysing the relationship 
between FDI and the number of procedures 
to start a foreign business – suggests 
that aligning developing countries to the 
median level of administrative complexity 
(i.e. reducing procedural complexity in 
countries above the median) would be 
associated with an average increase in 
aggregate FDI stock of 20 per cent. Older 
studies corroborate the finding (Jayasuriya, 
2011; Anderson and Gonzalez, 2013).
Investment facilitation measures can also 
contribute to inclusive and sustainable 
development. Because of their relatively low 
cost (compared with, for example, subsidies, 
incentives or the construction of SEZs), they 
are expected to disproportionally benefit 
smaller and resource-poor economies, 
and in general those that have few other 
levers to attract FDI. The positive effect 
of facilitation practices on governance 
and institutions would benefit countries 
with weaknesses in these areas relatively 
more. Furthermore, investment facilitation 
measures will support FDI in manufacturing 
and services more than in extractives 
(FDI that is mostly resource-seeking and 
less sensitive to other determinants), 
thereby contributing to economic 
diversification. Finally, facilitation measures 
will have a greater impact on FDI by 
SMEs, which tend to be disproportionately 
hindered by administrative hurdles.
Promoting sustainable development through 
investment facilitation is not automatic, 
despite the prominence of sustainable 
development objectives in international 
agreements and instruments, including 
the recent IFD agreement. Targeting 
investment in sectors that contribute more 
to sustainable development, or investors 
with more sustainable operations, can be 
done through typical investment promotion 
measures such as incentives, which can be 
applied selectively and made conditional on 
specific criteria. It is more difficult to envisage 
providing information or transparency 
selectively. The logic and the economies 
of scale of typical investment facilitation 
measures would normally dictate that they 
are applied across the board. The main 
lever that governments can use to support 
sustainable development through investment 
facilitation is to sequence the implementation 
of sector-specific streamlining measures, 
prioritizing relevant sectors (e.g. operating 
licences in the health sector or planning 
permits in the renewable energy sector).
Digital government solutions for business 
and investment facilitation, for the most part, 
just reinforce the effects of such efforts. 
First and foremost, they tend to focus 
implementation efforts on the aspects of 
investment facilitation that are likely to have 
the greatest direct impact on investment 
attraction and business creation. Common 
provisions in investment facilitation policies 
or treaties include elements such as 
investor focal points, dispute prevention 
mechanisms and stakeholder engagement. 
While these are important benefits for 
investors and they have the potential to 
improve governance, institutions and the 
investment climate in the long run, none 
are as immediately and continuously 
relevant to businesses and investors as 
accurate information, transparency of 
rules and regulations, and streamlined, 
efficient and effective administrative 
procedures – all of which feature prominently 
in every objective assessment of the 
relative attractiveness of business and 
investment climates across countries.
Improvements in government digitalization 
more broadly, including in areas beyond 
business and investment facilitation, can 
also positively influence the investment 
climate in a country (Al-Sadiq, 2021). 
Research has shown a positive correlation 
between digital government services and 
FDI inflows, stemming from streamlined 
procedures, improved information access, 
heightened government efficiency, reduced 
corruption and cost-saving mechanisms 
made possible through the consolidation 
of services on a single platform (Opertti 
and Volpe Martincus, 2023).
Countries that rank in the top quartile of 
the EGDI receive more than 10 times the 


World Investment Report 2024
Investment facilitation and digital government
136
average inward FDI flows per capita as 
those in the bottom quartile (UNCTAD, 
2024a). The same ratio holds for gross fixed 
capital formation. This is, of course, largely 
explained by the fact that the EGDI rankings 
correlate closely with GDP per capita and 
the development status of economies, 
with mainly higher-middle-income 
developing countries in the top quartile, 
and LDCs typically in the lower quartiles.
Similar but more nuanced results derive 
from correlating investment, business 
creation and institutional quality with the 
UNCTAD GER ratings, which are less 
obviously aligned with development levels 
and allow for LDCs to leapfrog higher-
income countries in the quality of their 
information portals and online single 
windows. On average, GER ratings still fully 
align with institutional quality (as measured 
by the World Bank’s Governance Index; 
figure IV.14), but the differences between 
the top three quartiles become marginal, 
with significant variance within the top 
quartiles. Those quartiles combine more 
advanced developing economies with 
some LDCs that have created – often with 
technical support, including from UNCTAD 
– high-quality online single windows.
The same analysis of business creation 
rates also shows a positive correlation 
between the presence and quality of 
information portals and single windows for 
business and investment facilitation and the 
establishment of new firms (figure IV.15). 
Average rates of business creation in the 
top three quartiles are again very similar, 
and the rate in the top quartile is slightly 
below that in the second quartile, as a result 
of a combination of lower rates in some 
LDCs and in several higher-income, already 
more mature, developing economies.
Comparing GER ratings with FDI attraction 
rates makes the influence of several 
leapfrogging LDCs in the top quartile 
even more pronounced than for business 
creation rates (figure IV.16). The low levels 
of FDI in these LDCs brings down FDI 
performance in the group of countries 
with the best digital government tools for 
business and investment facilitation by a 
significant margin. Evidently, high-quality 
Figure IV.14	
Digital investment facilitation is associated with higher institutional 
quality​
Institutional quality index by GER quartiles, developing countries, 2022
Sources: UNCTAD, GER.co, and World Bank Governance Indices (2022).
Notes: Quartiles were constructed from the average score between information portals and single windows 
from GER.co data for 2024 (or latest available) in developing countries. The institutional quality index represents 
the average for indicators of government effectiveness, regulatory quality, rule of law, and control of corruption 
on a scale from -2 to 2. It assigns higher scores to countries with better institutional quality, according to 
ratings by non-governmental organizations and international organizations. For better representation, a linear 
transformation was applied to regulatory quality scores.
1.35
1.4
1.45
1.5
1.55
1.6
1.65
1.7
Bottom quartile 4
Quartile 3
Quartile 2
Top quartile 1


Chapter IV
Investment facilitation and digital government
137
Figure IV.15	
Digital investment facilitation is associated with higher rates of business 
creation​
New business index by GER quartiles, developing economies, 2016–2022
Sources: UNCTAD (GER.co) for ratings and World Bank (Entrepreneurship Database, 2016–2022) for business 
creation.​
Notes: Quartiles were constructed from the average score between information portals and single windows 
from GER.co data for 2024 (or the latest available) in developing countries. The new business creation index is 
measured as the number of newly registered companies with limited liability over the total number of companies 
with limited liability in the same year (average, 2016–2022).  In case of missing data for the total number of 
companies with limited liability, the observation from the year before plus the number of newly registered 
companies was used. One outlier (Mauritania) was removed from the first quartile. 
0.102
0.104
0.106
0.108
0.11
0.112
0.114
0.116
Quartile 3
Quartile 2
Top quartile 1
Bottom quartile 4
Figure IV.16	
Digital investment facilitation does not automatically lead to more FDI​
Inward FDI as a percentage of GDP by GER quartiles, developing countries, average 
2021–2023
Sources: UNCTAD for FDI inflows, UNCTADstat for GDP data, and GER.co for ratings.
Notes: FDI is the average of FDI flows between 2021 and 2023. GDP is the average between 2021 and 2022 
(latest year available). 
Abbreviations: FDI = foreign direct investment, GDP = gross domestic product.
Bottom quartile 4
Quartile 3
Quartile 2
Top quartile 1
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06


World Investment Report 2024
Investment facilitation and digital government
138
Box IV.10
Impact assessments of digital government tools for business facilitation
Insights from post-implementation reviews of UNCTAD technical assistance programmes in business facilitation 
underscore that the ability to register a business online represents a critical step for business creation. It eliminates 
a significant barrier to formalization and alleviates the need for MSMEs to visit central government offices, thereby 
improving acccess, enhancing consistency in service delivery and reducing corruption risks. 
Governments also reported the following benefits:
•	 Higher rates of formalization of local businesses, and creation of more businesses (local and foreign) overall
•	 Reduced time, costs, forms and documents required for creating and operating a business
•	 Positive effect on women, young people and rural populations, who previously faced greater obstacles with    
traditional paper-based and urban-based business registration procedures
•	 Increased tax, social security and other government revenues, with single windows paying for themselves in 
two to three years from additional fee generation alone
•	 Greater formal sector employment opportunities
•	 Better data on the business sector, enabling more targeted and inclusive policies, particularly if cross-referenced 
with tax and social security data 
•	 A more client-friendly approach in government administration
•	 Enhanced trade and development, through the use of digital information portals for importers and exporters
Impact measurements of selected projects after the implementation of online single windows for business and 
investment facilitation show positive effects on the participation of women and young people in the economy. 
Impact on women:
•	 In Benin, one third of business owners registering online are women.
•	 In Bhutan, 52 per cent of those applying to register their companies are women.
•	 In El Salvador, 56 per cent of business owners registering online are women.
•	 In Lesotho, before online registration was possible, women held 26 per cent of business permits. Afterward, 
that figure rose to 34 per cent.
Impact on young people:
•	 In Benin, registration by young people (age 18–30) increased 181 per cent in the first two years of operation.
•	 In Mali, registration by young people increased 263 per cent after implementation.
Source: UNCTAD. 
information portals and online single 
windows in and by themselves do not 
lead to higher FDI inflows. Improvements 
in governance and institutions take time 
to affect investor perceptions, and other 
fundamental FDI determinants – ranging 
from macroeconomic and political stability to 
market size and income levels, labour costs 
and the quality of physical infrastructure 
– are ultimately more important. 
The comparison of the correlations of GER 
data with business creation rates, on the one 
hand, and FDI attraction on the other can be 
considered a confirmation that the benefits 
of business and investment facilitation 
are more significant for domestic firms 
than for international investors (box IV.10). 
The latter tend to have more resources 
for engaging local advisers to support 
compliance with regulatory requirements 
and to navigate administrative procedures. 
Domestic MSMEs and informal businesses 
stand to gain much more from streamlined 
procedures for business formalization 
– hence the insistence by UNCTAD 
on combining, as much as possible, 
digital government tools for business 
facilitation and investment facilitation, and 
synergizing programmes for private sector 
development and investment attraction.


Chapter IV
Investment facilitation and digital government
139
The sustainable development impact 
of business and investment facilitation 
measures is also often more tangible 
through their effect on domestic businesses 
and MSMEs. The effect on formalization 
rates is significant, which contributes to 
domestic resource mobilization. There can 
also be positive effects on participation rates 
for women and vulnerable groups in the 
economy, and for rural populations, owing 
to easier access to information through 
remote access to government services.
Finally, the analysis for this report empirically 
evaluated the influence of the quality of 
online business registration portals on FDI 
inflows in a cross-country data regression 
model. Each additional point in the GER 
score is associated with 8 per cent more 
FDI. The effect is stronger for developing 
than for developed countries, presumably 
because of higher marginal gains in 
governance and institutional quality. 
These results are corroborated by other 
studies, which consistently find a positive 
correlation between a favourable business 
environment and FDI inflows. For instance, 
a unit increase in the (now defunct) 
Doing Business rankings leads to higher 
FDI inflows, by $300 million (Jayasuriya, 
2011); moving 1 percentage point closer 
to the frontier regulatory environment is 
associated with an increase in annual FDI 
of between $250 million and $500 million 
(Anderson and Gonzalez, 2013). More 
recent studies suggest that a reduction in 
procedural complexity in countries leads 
to higher FDI inflows of about 4 per cent 
within the first two years following the 
implementation of digital tools (e.g. World 
Bank, 2017). These findings highlight the 
importance of streamlined administrative 
processes in attracting investment. 
Empirical analyses specifically focusing on 
digital government find that accessibility 
to government information and services 
online, as measured by the eGovernment 
Survey Index of UN DESA, is associated 
with about a 2 per cent increase in FDI per 
capita inflows, on average (e.g. Al-Sadiq, 
2021). The positive relationship between 
online digital government tools and FDI 
is attributed to streamlined procedures, 
enhanced access to information, 
improved government efficiency, reduced 
corruption, and cost-saving mechanisms 
facilitated by service consolidation 
on unified platforms (Lögün, 2020; 
Máchová et al., 2018; Al-Sadiq, 2021).
Figure IV.17	
Higher-quality digital investment 
facilitation is associated with more 
investment​
Impact of gains in GER ratings
on inflows, average 2021–2023
(Percentage)
Sources: UNCTAD for FDI inflows, UNCTADstat for 
GDP data and GER.co for ratings.
Notes: Depicts the marginal effects (semi-elasticities) 
of higher quality of information portals and single 
windows on FDI inflows. Vertical lines represent 
confidence intervals at the 90 per cent level. 
Predictions based on an ordinary least squares 
cross-country model, with robust standard errors. 
The independent variable is the average rating 
between information portals and single windows in 
2024 (or latest available); controls include population 
(2021), GDP (2021) and development status.
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
Developing countries
World


World Investment Report 2024
Investment facilitation and digital government
140
E. From online business facilitation 
to digital government
The basic architecture of digital government solutions for 
businesses and investors is fundamentally the same across many 
types of services. Thus, expanding their scope to cover more 
services helps capture economies of scale and scope. Effective 
implementation requires accurate documentation and thorough 
simplification of procedures, and a focus on putting in place 
enabling legislation rather than reforming the laws underpinning 
the procedures. For developing countries, using digital business 
and investment facilitation to strengthen public administration 
more broadly is an important opportunity.
1. The basic architecture of digital government services
Investment operations encompass a range 
of administrative requirements, including 
company registration, obtaining various 
licences and permits (such as investment, 
business activity, environmental and building 
permits), property acquisition registration, 
compliance with social security, pension 
schemes and tax obligations at both 
national and local levels (UNCTAD, 2023e).
The administrative processes associated 
with these obligations all follow a similar 
pattern. Investors submit the necessary 
data, documents and payments to one 
or more administrative bodies. The 
application file is reviewed by the respective 
administrations. Upon approval, the 
data provided is recorded in a registry, 
and a formal certificate – whether 
called a licence, permit, registration, 
declaration or authorization – is issued.
The application file consistently comprises 
three fundamental elements: data (entered 
on a form), documents (such as proof of 
registration in other registries, identity cards 
and authorizations) and payment. The 
processing involves a varying number of 
operators within the authorizing entity that 
assess the file until it is either approved, 
rejected or returned for correction or 
requests for additional information. The 
registry where the information is stored 
can take various forms, ranging from 
a physical logbook to a spreadsheet 
or an online database. Building on this 
standard administrative pattern, the basic 
architecture of digital government services 
mirrors the sequence of steps through a 
series of online interactions (figure IV.18).
An online service is a succession of screens 
and actions actions through which the 
applicant can complete a form, upload the 
necessary documents, make a payment, 
and submit the application. Subsequently, 
one or more operators review the application 
file, deciding to either approve or reject 
it. Once approved, the applicant’s data 
are transmitted to an online registry, and 
a digital registration certificate is issued.
Once the application – a platform or 
interface – has been put in place to manage 


Chapter IV
Investment facilitation and digital government
141
Figure IV.18	
Basic architecture of digital government service​
​
Source: UNCTAD.
Online service
(register, modify, cancel, consult)
Government portal
Registry
Access to services
Authentication
User account
Data (form)
Control
1
Control
n
Generate
certifcate
Documents
Payment
Create
Update
Delete
Consult
interactions with users, the processing 
components that constitute the actual 
service have been developed, and a 
database or registry has been created to 
manage a particular service such as the 
registration of a company name, services 
can be added with essentially the same 
tools. A single service such as business 
registration will usually already comprise a 
“family” of services or multiple versions of 
itself for different types of legal entities, such 
as sole traders, limited liability companies, 
and branches or subsidiaries of foreign 
firms. But services can equally be extended 
to other areas, such as construction 
permits, operating licences or obtaining 
social security or tax registration numbers. 
Digital government services are often 
developed through a series of evolutionary 
steps. Initially, each government agency 
tends to develop its own digital services 
independently, leading to a collection 
of uncoordinated processes. This 
fragmentation forces users to interact 
separately with each agency, inputting 
the same information multiple times. 
Such set-ups lead to discrepancies in 
user data across different registries, 
as updates in one are not reflected in 
others. If an agency requires verification 
of a permit from another, it typically 
requests a physical copy from the user.
6	 See https://e-estonia.com/solutions/x-road-interoperability-services/x-road.
To improve efficiency, some systems allow 
agencies to share applicant data among 
themselves; an example is X-Road in 
Estonia.6 While this reduces redundancy – 
applicants do not need to provide the same 
information multiple times – it still requires 
them to initiate applications with each 
agency separately. This model enhances 
the user experience and ensures data 
quality but depends heavily on inter-agency 
cooperation, which can be a limiting factor.
An integrated services approach further 
consolidates the user experience by enabling 
applicants to interact simultaneously 
with multiple agencies through a single 
service. Applicants fill out one form, upload 
documents once and make a single 
payment, even as their applications are 
processed separately by each relevant 
agency. In this system, which ensures data 
consistency, agencies interact seamlessly 
and offer a unified service to the applicant, 
but they continue to operate independently.
A new approach that holds promise for 
the future is a fully user-centric model in 
which the applicant is placed at the centre 
of public administration (figure IV.19). 
All personal and official data, such as 
registrations and permits, are consolidated in 
an online “safebox” that is accessible to any 
government agency the user has dealings 
with. This fundamentally changes how data 


World Investment Report 2024
Investment facilitation and digital government
142
are managed, by eliminating the need for 
applicants to submit data or documents 
multiple times. Instead, applicants simply 
grant agencies access to their safebox, 
where all required information is stored and 
continually updated. Rather than issuing 
traditional certificates, agencies validate the 
data directly within the safebox, streamlining 
processes and ensuring that all information 
remains accurate and current. Several 
novel technologies are being developed 
to bring the user-centric model closer to 
reality, such as systems that allow users to 
manage access and usage permissions for 
their data, and blockchain-enabled verifiable 
credentials to improve data security.
Looking at these advanced models and 
configurations is especially helpful for 
countries that are at the early stages of 
developing digital government, those 
that have relatively few legacy systems 
in place with limited sunk costs, and 
those where basic services in support of 
business entities of any size can make 
an immediate and sizeable difference 
in the quality of public administration 
and the ease of doing business. 
2. Effective implementation
Facilitation is fundamentally about 
simplifying compliance. It ensures that 
administrative procedures are transparent, 
clearly understood and designed to 
require minimal effort from users. The 
adoption of good business and investment 
facilitation practices demands a significant 
shift in mindset within public agencies 
– from a traditional focus on control 
and enforcement, which primarily aims 
to prevent fraud and detect violations, 
to a supportive role that helps firms 
meet administrative requirements. 
The initial step involves first acknowledging 
that administrative procedures pose 
challenges for firms – whether foreign or 
local, large or small – and then conducting 
an uncompromising analysis of the 
underlying causes. The root causes of 
administrative complexity are mostly 
not in the rules but in the way they 
are applied. Rules can be interpreted 
differently by different parts and levels of 
government. Procedures will vary across 
different agencies and local authorities. 
They evolve over time depending on 
the risk aversity and control mindset of 
Figure IV.19	
Evolution of digital government services
Source: UNCTAD.
Agency 1
Agency 2
Agency 3
Service 1
Service 2
Service 3
Agency 4
Agency 5
Agency 6
Integrated
service
(4, 5, 6)
Agency 1
Agency 2
Agency 3
Service 1
Service 2
Service 3


Chapter IV
Investment facilitation and digital government
143
individual civil servants, or in reaction to 
occasional instances of malfunction or 
malfeasance. The design of procedures to 
implement rules often prioritizes form over 
substance, causing them, over time, to 
depart from the original intent of the rule.
It is therefore important to differentiate 
between administrative procedures – 
which include the interactions, forms, 
information and payments demanded 
by administrations to enforce laws – and 
the actual laws they aim to implement. 
Typically, administrative procedures are more 
complex than the laws they are based on, 
often incorporating unnecessary conditions 
and delays. Streamlining administrative 
procedures, in the vast majority of cases, 
does not necessitate changes to the 
law. It mostly represents a more efficient 
and effective application of the law. 
From a practical perspective, the 
implementation of digital government 
services involves three main steps: 
(1) accurate documentation of the 
procedure that is to be brought online in 
its existing form; (2) design of the online 
service, including, where possible, the 
streamlining of the procedure; and (3) 
implementation of the online service.
Documentation of the procedure for which 
the digital government solution is being 
developed requires the involvement of 
administrative officers from the entities 
involved in the relevant registration or 
authorization processes. It does not require 
any technical expertise on information 
technology (IT) or online systems. Instead, 
it requires detailed knowledge of the 
step-by-step process that the user of 
the service needs to follow to obtain the 
desired certification. The result should 
be a breakdown of the steps, and for 
each step a detailed mapping including 
the entity with which each transaction 
takes place, the requirements for 
each transaction (e.g. information to 
provide, documents to submit, fees to 
pay), the possible scenarios that follow 
(e.g. further information or documents 
needed, referrals to other entities), the 
results of the transaction (e.g. rejections, 
certifications), possible complaints or 
recourse procedures, and the legal basis 
for each transaction and administrative 
requirement. The latter element is needed 
to distinguish between the requirements 
and controls actually required by the law 
and those that have been added over time 
by implementing agencies, as well as to 
identify discretionary aspects of procedures.
The administrative officers responsible for 
providing the service will be familiar with 
individual procedures, yet they may be 
limited in their ability to oversee the complete 
process from the user’s perspective. 
Very often, only after a detailed mapping 
of the process does it become clear 
that the process has many unnecessary 
complexities, redundancies and overlaps, 
such as the need to visit the same entities 
in different steps or the need to supply the 
same information or document multiple 
times. Officers may also not be trained 
in process documentation techniques; 
an important part of capacity-building 
programmes in this area is not about IT, 
but about process mapping and design.
Design of the online service is still not driven 
primarily by IT, although it is important to 
involve project managers who are used 
to translating rules and administrative 
requirements into “code” – logical 
instructions that cover every eventuality 
of the transactions involved (box IV.11).
A service is usually not designed to exactly 
mirror the physical procedure, because 
the inefficiencies identified during the 
documentation process can be reduced 
through a process of streamlining. 
Simplification means focusing on those 
requirements and controls that are required 
by the law, minimizing information and 
documentation required at each step, 
and regrouping or resequencing steps. 
Ultimately, the design of the online service 
involves creating a database by defining 
exactly what fields of data are required, 
designing the user form and document 
upload page, creating approval roles for 
administrative officers and integrating 


World Investment Report 2024
Investment facilitation and digital government
144
online payment (often using a commercial 
provider of online payment services). 
Implementation of the online service 
involves not only the installation of the 
technical elements of the system – through 
either physical servers or cloud-based 
providers – but various other aspects, 
including the management of the transition 
process, with each entity responsible for 
the relevant registrations or authorizations, 
the training of operators in charge of 
approvals or controls, and others who 
will assist the public or staff call centres, 
the testing of the system using real cases 
and focus groups, and a communication 
campaign. Institutional capacity-building, 
both on the service documentation and 
design process and, subsequently, on the 
operation of the system, is crucial to ensure 
continued service development and the 
gradual expansion of digital government 
to cover all services to business.
In this process, effective communication 
on the positive impact of digital investment 
facilitation is crucial to maximize buy-in from 
implementing agencies and to overcome 
resistance. In Benin, the tripling of business 
creation also tripled fee income, generating 
more jobs for government workers (box 
IV.12). In Lesotho, staff using a digital 
business licensing system reported greater 
satisfaction as their role shifted from 
processing forms to advising clients. In 
Bhutan, government staff involvement in 
developing new online services expanded 
their skills and responsibilities, providing 
additional motivation. Digital tools, by 
better capturing data on business creation, 
including user demographics, enable 
policymakers to understand the impact 
of investment facilitation, measure effects 
on communities and ensure inclusivity.
Box IV.11
Bhutan: Empowering civil servants to design their own digital services
In 2021, the Government of Bhutan introduced a groundbreaking government-to-business digital portal specifically 
tailored for cottage and small industries, using the customizable digital platform of UNCTAD. This initiative targets 
firms valued at less than $14,000, which represent 95 per cent of the country’s economy.
The process is streamlined and user-friendly: entrepreneurs can complete a simple form on a mobile phones and 
receive all necessary registration documents instantly and free of charge. The impact was significant: in 2022, about 
1 per cent of the population, or 5,500 people, used the service to register a business. This marked a threefold 
increase in the registration rate, with women making up 52 per cent of the new users. This surge reflected a 
significant transformation in public administration and set a benchmark for digital government worldwide.
The platform empowers civil servants who, after initial training, can independently customize the digital platform to 
add online services. These services now encompass a wide array that includes bus service permits, drone flying 
authorizations and industrial park leases. This approach helps civil servants empathize with users, enhancing their 
understanding of potential bottlenecks and frustrations in the process.
The Government plans to expand the platform over the next two years to include all permits, authorizations and 
procedures. The system could extend to encompass all government departments, allowing civil servants to shift 
their focus towards more strategic tasks by alleviating administrative burdens. This strategic development has 
boosted economic diversification and new businesses, tripling formal employment opportunities, demonstrating 
the impact of digital transformation on economic growth and public administration efficiency.
Source: UNCTAD. See also https://unctad.org/news/bhutans-entrepreneurs-can-now-open-business-under-minute.


Chapter IV
Investment facilitation and digital government
145
Box IV.12
Benin: Using digital government to promote sustainable impact and 
inclusivity
Since 2020, the Investment and Export Promotion Agency of Benin has used the digital government platform 
of UNCTAD to streamline the registration process for foreign and domestic companies. It allows businesses to 
handle all registration steps, including for tax and social security, from a mobile phone. Users fill in one form, scan 
and upload documents, and pay with a credit card or mobile money, reducing the time required from five days 
to just two hours.
The implementation of the digital platform (monentreprise.bj) nearly tripled the number of business registrations. 
the number of business registrations. Notably, a third of these new business owners are women, half are under 
age 30 and half are located in rural areas, indicating broad demographic reach. Interviews with users revealed that 
the system not only facilitates business creation but also helps in business formalization. Formalized businesses 
report greater ease in hiring qualified staff, accessing credit, obtaining insurance, receiving formal training and 
exporting to members of the West African Monetary Union. The revenue generated from the increased number of 
registrations has provided the Agency with additional funds. These funds have been used to expand staff, enhance 
outreach to entrepreneurs and invest further in improving the system, fostering a sustainable impact and inclusivity 
in the country’s business environment.
Source: UNCTAD. See also https://www.gouv.bj/article/512/lapiex-lance-monentreprise.bj.
3. Connecting with wider digital government
The prevailing guidance on digital 
government implementation favours a 
centrally driven approach based on a 
national digital government strategy and 
supported by a digital government authority 
or unit. For example, the Recommendation 
of the Council on Digital Government 
Strategies of the OECD (2024) recommends 
the development of a digital government 
strategy aligned with other sectoral 
strategies; government-wide coordination 
mechanisms; development of digital skills, 
job profiles, technologies, contracts and 
inter-agency agreements; and review of 
legal and regulatory frameworks. A World 
Bank (2016) report, which notes that 30 
per cent of digital government projects fail 
and that only 20 per cent are considered 
successful, explains that this imbalance is 
due not only to technical issues such as 
inadequate infrastructure, interoperability 
and cybersecurity risks, but also to 
policies, legal frameworks and institutional 
factors. The e-Government Survey of 
UN DESA (2022) measures factors such 
as the presence of legal and institutional 
frameworks as the basis for effective 
implementation. Technical assistance 
and capacity-building by development 
agencies generally provide overarching 
assessments of digital government 
readiness and associated policy advice.
Several practical experiences illustrate 
how central steering can be important:
•	
Digital government strategies. 
Successful digital initiatives are often 
underpinned by a comprehensive 
strategy. Bhutan and Uruguay exemplify 
this approach, with their strategic 
frameworks for digitalization. Bhutan 
launched its eGovernment Master 
Plan in 2014, and Uruguay initiated its 
digital agenda with an eGovernment 
section in 2007, culminating in 2021 
in the Plan de Gobierno Digital 2025. 
•	
Digital government entity. The creation 
of institutions to manage and coordinate 
digital strategies can provide valuable 
steering. In Benin, the consolidation of 
digital strategy entities into the Agency 
for Information Systems and Digital in 
2022 and in Uruguay the establishment 
of the Agency for Digital Government, 
Information Society and Knowledge 
in 2005 are notable examples. 


World Investment Report 2024
Investment facilitation and digital government
146
•	
Legal and regulatory framework. 
The development of effective digital 
services can be accelerated by enabling 
legislation in such areas as personal 
data protection, digital payments, 
e-signatures and digital identities. The 
Digital Code (2018) of Benin and the 
National Digital Agenda of El Salvador 
are examples of comprehensive 
legal frameworks that support digital 
strategies, cybersecurity and regulatory 
needs in the digital domain. 
•	
Stakeholder engagement and 
communication. Successful digital 
government initiatives require 
effective stakeholder engagement, 
communication strategies and initiatives 
to build trust to foster adoption. In 
Rwanda, the introduction of a law that 
ensures data protection, coupled with 
educational and awareness initiatives, 
has been credited by the Minister 
of Information and Communications 
Technology and Innovation for a 
30 per cent increase in adoption 
of the e-Government platform.
Central steering and support for the roll-
out of digital government are important 
and help push the necessary enabling 
legislation, budget support and broad-
based stakeholder engagement, yet it can 
also lead to complex, costly and lengthy 
implementation programmes. The basic 
architecture of online services and the 
tenets of effective implementation suggest 
that there is a complementary approach 
that can be used in parallel with or even 
in anticipation of major centralized efforts. 
This approach is particularly helpful for 
developing countries that are still in the early 
stages of government digitalization and 
that lack the significant resources required 
for centralized digitalization projects.
A bottom-up approach, starting from basic 
services for business – usually the first 
government services to be digitalized – and 
gradually expanding to adjacent policy 
areas, has several benefits. It can begin in 
one or very few public sector entities, does 
not necessarily depend on major legislative 
interventions, is relatively low cost and adds 
immediate value to users and revenue-
generating potential for government. Such 
a bottom-up approach can be an integral 
part of a wider digital government strategy, 
as a “sandbox” approach in which new 
digitalization initiatives are rolled out for a 
clearly delimited administrative process 
before expanding to broader applications. It 
allows agencies or subnational entities with 
higher levels of capacity or a higher state 
of readiness to race ahead (box IV.13).
Box IV.13
Togo: Digital investment facilitation by subnational authorities: special 
economic zones
In Togo, digital transformation has significantly enhanced FDI attraction efforts. Launched in 2022, the first 
phase of the country’s investment portal (investirautogo.tg) offers a comprehensive online information service. 
Managed by the Investment Promotion and Free Zone Agency, the portal provides detailed guidance on 
administrative procedures to start and operate a business. It covers nearly 40 procedures and outlines 
more than 150 formalities. It also provides contact points for investors who need assistance. It was used 
by 13,000 investors in 2023. The portal is part of a collaboration between the United Nations Development 
Programme and UNCTAD, begun at the Government’s request and coordinated with the Togo Digital Agency.
The second phase, planned for launch in 2024, is a digital investment window for the Port of Lomé SEZ. It 
will facilitate the digitalization of processes such as authorization requests, employee exemption from social 
charges and vehicle registration. Expansion into the SEZ underscores the comprehensive involvement of 
national institutions in investment facilitation, extending beyond the traditional scope of IPAs.
Source: UNCTAD. See also https://investirautogo.tg.


Chapter IV
Investment facilitation and digital government
147
Implementing agencies can very 
often achieve much independently 
of Government-wide efforts or major 
legislative reform programmes. A balance 
must be found between the need for 
overarching strategies and institutions and 
practical implementation requirements. 
As noted earlier, digitizing administrative 
procedures mostly does not require 
significant changes in laws. This does not 
mean that no legislative action is needed 
to support the development of digital 
government. However, the emphasis 
should be on enabling legislation rather 
than on substantive laws underpinning 
the administrative procedures. And 
while comprehensive legal frameworks 
govern personal data protection, digital 
payments, e-signatures and digital 
identities, basic reforms of mundane 
bureaucratic requirements enabling, for 
example, the acceptance of electronic 
copies of documents, are often sufficient 
to allow agencies to proceed with the 
implementation of digital services. 
Similarly, while the whole-of-government 
approach that is usually advocated should 
be the ultimate goal for the roll-out of digital 
government, it has clear drawbacks for the 
pace of development of individual services. 
Different institutions tend to operate at 
different speeds and find themselves at 
different stages of readiness. Centrally 
steered programmes that aim to bring along 
all public institutions and agencies can miss 
out on opportunities to develop individual 
services more quickly with a limited number 
of first-mover entities (ITU and UNDP
, 2023). 
The bottom-up approach defines a limited 
initial project scope and digitalizes one 
process at a time without necessarily waiting 
for lengthy, government-wide reviews of 
strategy, legality or IT that risk being divorced 
from the reality faced by front-line agencies 
and service staff. It helps minimize resistance 
and builds momentum for broader digital 
transformation at a relatively low monetary 
and political cost. It is an approach that 
learns from the failures of approaches in 
many countries by encouraging agencies 
with innovative mindsets to take the 
first steps, with others joining as the 
advantages of digitalization become clear.
There is significant scope to expand the 
array of services on digital government 
platforms once the core business and 
investment facilitation services (registration, 
tax, social security and operating licences) 
are covered. Using the online single 
window platform developed by UNCTAD, 
El Salvador has added services for the filing 
of accounts, to support MSMEs not only 
in the process of becoming formal but also 
in the effort to stay formal (which requires 
filing periodic accounts and paying taxes) 
(box IV.14). Mali is developing a system 
to speed up approval processes for new 
pharmaceutical products to streamline the 
market for essential medicines (box IV.15). 
And Colombia is piloting an emissions 
registry to allow firms to calculate and report 
emissions in compliance with local legislation 
developed to meet commitments under the 
Paris Agreement (box IV.16). Adding services 
in such specific areas or for sector-specific 
procedures can thus help strengthen the 
sustainable development impact of digital 
business and investment facilitation efforts.
Digital government solutions obviously also 
extend to trade, as observed earlier. The 
ASYCUDA programme of UNCTAD has a 
long track record of implementing online 
single windows for clearance of foreign 
trade procedures (box IV.17). Similar effects 
of economies of scale and scope can be 
observed in trade portals, which aim to 
incorporate as many relevant procedures 
as possible. However, compared with 
business and investment facilitation portals, 
trade portals are more difficult to envisage 
as a basis for wider digital government 
expansion because of the narrower scope 
of services and institutions they involve.


World Investment Report 2024
Investment facilitation and digital government
148
Box IV.15
Mali: Expanding the scope of digital services for business:  
pharmaceutical approval processes
In November 2023, Mali launched a pioneering online pharmaceutical registry, developed in collaboration 
with UNCTAD, the Ministry of Health of Mali and the country’s National Pharmaceutical Association. This 
initiative was spurred by the urgent need for pandemic preparedness underscored by the COVID-19 crisis 
and aims to address major health challenges for the country’s predominantly young population.
The digital registry is designed to enhance the efficiency of the marketing authorization process and ensure 
the safety and quality of medicines. It will improve transparency and traceability, optimize resource use, 
support the growth of the local pharmaceutical industry and combat counterfeiting. According to the United 
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (2023), up to half of the pharmaceuticals in Mali are counterfeit or 
improperly distributed, emphasizing the need for this system.
The online registry will enable pharmaceutical importers, producers and distributors, along with the 
Government, to address supply chain delays and fraud more effectively. This improvement in transparency 
and accessibility is expected to streamline the distribution of medicines and vaccinations. Currently, the 
approval process for importing, distributing or producing medicines is hindered by bureaucratic delays, 
often taking up to 18 months owing to reliance on paper documentation and the requirement for a salaried 
representative’s physical presence. The new system will reduce the approval time to three months.
At present, the system allows online registration of pharmaceutical stakeholders and helps medical authorities 
monitor the entry, production and distribution of products. It also aids in the identification of obsolete and 
unauthorized items and provides data on the locations of products and the needs for them across various 
medical facilities. Although still in its pilot phase, digitalization of this registry holds promise for replication 
and scaling in other developing countries, potentially transforming health care delivery and management.
Source: UNCTAD. See also https://unctad.org/news/magic-malis-digital-pharmaceutical-registry.
Box IV.14
El Salvador: Expanding the scope of digital services for business: 
supporting MSME formalization
In 2018, UNCTAD and the Government of El Salvador launched a digital single window for MSMEs (miempresa.gob.
sv), allowing them to register online with simplified procedures. An important objective was to reduce informality. 
Entrepreneurs can register simultaneously with the ministries of finance, labour and commerce, and the municipality. 
This automates what were previously 12 separate registrations. The system also integrates an online accounting 
tool that supports the filing of annual accounts and can generate six-month tax and social security filings as well 
as 11 annual filings. The purpose of these supporting tools is to help businesses become formal and remain 
formal – which requires periodic filings.  
Many MSMEs are subsistence enterprises or sole traders, in the informal sector. Registrations at the National 
Commission for Micro and Small Businesses increased significantly in 2020 and afterward, especially in the most 
fragile categories. This translated to a steep rise in the numbers of entrepreneurs (+74 per cent) and MSMEs (+63 
per cent) registered for social security in 2021. More than half of these companies were women owned. Their access 
to enterprise loans and safety nets critically contributed to the resilience of the private sector in the pandemic.
Source: UNCTAD. See also https://miempresa.gob.sv.


Chapter IV
Investment facilitation and digital government
149
Box IV.16
Colombia: Expanding the scope of digital services for business: 
reporting carbon emissions
In 2023, the Colombian Ministry of Environment, in collaboration with UNCTAD, initiated the development of 
a digital platform that will allow businesses to report their carbon emissions annually and obtain necessary 
certifications, supporting the country’s commitment to the Paris Agreement objectives.
The registry is set to launch in the latter half of 2024, after final adjustments to the prototype, which was 
presented at the World Investment Forum of UNCTAD in October 2023. It integrates a user-friendly emissions 
calculator and complies with the standards of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, ensuring 
that it is both comprehensive and accessible for companies that are required to report their emissions. It is 
designed to prepare Colombia for upcoming global carbon pricing and tax measures, including the Carbon 
Border Adjustment Mechanism of the European Union.
The platform will be expanded with online services for environmental impact assessment certificates, in an 
aim to streamline the application and review process, which is often criticized for its inefficiency and lack 
of transparency. These assessments are crucial for many sectors in Colombia, in particular construction. 
In addition, a digital registry for green business certificates is being considered. This system would enable 
companies to evaluate their environmental practices against regional standards and qualify for “green 
business” status, which provides benefit from various incentives. These digital innovations not only position 
Colombia as a leader in environmental digitalization but also serve as potential models for other countries 
with similar environmental and climate legislation.
Source: UNCTAD. See also https://unctad.org/news/un-digital-government-awards-celebrate-excellence-
online-public-services.
Box IV.17
ASYCUDA: Online single windows for trade
Since 2012, the ASYCUDA (Automated System for Customs Data) Programme of UNCTAD has partnered 
with governments and international organizations to design, develop and implement an integrated platform for 
international trade. It allows all stakeholders to process clearance of trade procedures, including by submitting 
permit and licence applications online, while also improving information sharing between partner government 
agencies and traders – aligning with Recommendation 33 of the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe 
on single windows and trade facilitation. Electronic single windows for trade are one of the most effective measures 
to enhance trade facilitation in a country, underscored by their inclusion in the WTO Trade Facilitation Agreement.
By digitally connecting partner government agencies, an ASYCUDA single window simplifies trade, reduces 
clearance times and trade costs, ensures transparent and uniform application of duties and taxes, maximizes 
government revenue, helps combat corruption and ensures compliance with standards for public health and safety. 
ASYCUDA-based electronic single windows are active or being implemented in 13 countries (Barbados, Burundi, 
the Comoros, Jamaica, Kazakhstan, Rwanda, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Sao Tome and Principe, Timor-
Leste, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Vanuatu and Zimbabwe).
In 2023 UNCTAD published Roadmap for Building a Trade Single Window, which shares experience, expertise 
and recommendations in a blueprint for designing and implementing tailored, single windows that comply with 
national, regional and international requirements. It is being used as a source by the World Customs Organization 
as it updates its Single Window Compendium. 
Sources: UNCTAD and UNCTAD (2023b). See also https://asycuda.org/en/# and https://unece.org/sites/default/
files/2023-10/Rec33_ECE-TRADE-352-Rev1E.pdf.


World Investment Report 2024
Investment facilitation and digital government
150
F. Conclusions and policy 
implications
Governance and institutional weaknesses have consistently 
featured in research and investor surveys as key challenges to 
the attraction of investment in sustainable development. Digital 
government contributes to good governance and stronger 
institutions. Online tools for business and investment facilitation 
have proven to be a good starting point for the broader 
implementation of digital government. Digital facilitation of 
business and investment is thus a key step in developing broader 
digital government services and, indirectly, a key pillar of the 
promotion of investment in sustainable development.
Investment facilitation is top of mind for 
policymakers worldwide. Investment policy 
measures of national governments aimed at 
facilitating the establishment and operations 
of foreign investors have rapidly increased 
in number since the launch of the UNCTAD 
Action Menu in 2016 – they now make 
up 40 per cent of measures favourable 
to investors. Recent agreements at the 
bilateral, regional and international levels 
more often include provisions on facilitation, 
and the recently finalized IFD agreement 
may provide further impetus for action by 
national policymakers and treaty negotiators. 
As discussed in this chapter, international 
agreements can be catalysts not only for 
investment facilitation but also for digital 
tools for that purpose. In its support 
to discussions on international policy 
instruments, UNCTAD has consistently 
emphasized the need to focus the 
implementation of investment facilitation 
in developing countries on measures with 
the highest rate of return. While investment 
facilitation provisions can cover many 
issues, including dispute prevention, focal 
points and collaborative initiatives, the 
most cost-effective and impactful ones 
revolve around information provision, 
transparency of rules and regulations, and 
streamlining of administrative procedures 
through digital government tools. That is 
because they are important all the time 
(not just on an occasional or project basis), 
they benefit all firms (large and small, 
foreign and local) and they can cover 
all necessary processes for business 
establishment and operation (not just 
procedures specific to foreign investment). 
Developing countries can be at an 
advantage in establishing digital government 
tools for business and investment facilitation. 
They have fewer legacy systems to integrate 
and can adopt the latest solutions. A smaller 
number of institutions and decision-makers 
can also support faster implementation. 
The evidence in this chapter confirms 
that there is a leapfrogging opportunity; 
some of the lowest-income countries have 
created online facilitation platforms that 
can compete with the best. However, the 
development of most of these platforms has 
required technical assistance and support. 
Importantly, the IFD agreement and other 
international cooperation agreements on 
investment aim to accelerate support to 
developing countries for the implementation 
of investment facilitation mechanisms. Such 
Digital 
investment 
facilitation 
measures are 
valuable all the 
time, for all 
firms, in all 
processes


Chapter IV
Investment facilitation and digital government
151
support should focus in large part on the 
development of digital government solutions. 
Governments should adopt a 
comprehensive approach to digital 
investment facilitation, avoiding dedicated 
processes solely for investment 
authorization. Investors are not helped by 
smooth investment approval processes if 
subsequent procedures to establish their 
business operations remain inefficient. 
Governments should progressively 
incorporate all or most procedures and 
services required by both foreign and local 
businesses, such as business registration, 
tax and social security registration, licensing 
and other essential services. This approach 
enables Governments to harness the full 
potential of digitalization and to capture 
economies of scale and scope from the 
implementation of digital platforms. 
But there is no reason to stop at 
the core mandatory procedures for 
business establishment. Countless other 
administrative procedures affecting 
business operations may be sector specific 
or motivated by policy concerns ranging 
from the environment, to health and safety, 
to labour and social issues. The digital 
government tools that are central to effective 
and efficient implementation of business 
and investment facilitation initiatives can 
serve as a foundation for broader digital 
government adoption, making them a 
significant step towards modernizing 
governance and administrative processes. 
As noted in this chapter, digital investment 
tools strengthen governance, enhance 
transparency and lead to more efficient 
administration. Their application more 
generally across government can further 
improve the attractiveness of countries 
to both foreign and local investors. The 
return on investment to governments from 
setting up a digital platform for investment 
facilitation is maximized when more 
procedures are covered. Once a digital 
business registry is established and firms 
have a verifiable online identity, governments 
can relatively easily extend online services 
to licences (sectoral, import-export), 
permits (construction, environmental), 
taxes (registration, filing, payment), social 
security (employer-employee registration, 
filing and payment), land transactions, 
health and safety certifications, sector-
specific procedures such as pharmaceutical 
approval processes, and carbon 
registries. In that way, digital business and 
investment facilitation becomes a stepping 
stone to wider digital government. 
The digital government platform of UNCTAD 
includes a suite of tools and technical 
assistance products aimed at supporting 
developing countries in meeting their 
investment facilitation commitments. 
They include information portals, online 
single windows and regional investment 
facilitation monitors specifically tailored 
for business and investment facilitation. 
Acknowledged by the Donor Committee 
for Enterprise Development as exemplars 
of good practice, these tools have 
garnered widespread attention, being 
accessed 6.2 million times in 2023.
The digital single windows developed by 
UNCTAD can also be extended to other 
areas of government. From a technical 
point of view, their cloud-based approach 
means there is no need for systems 
integration: new databases can be designed 
within the same system and application 
programming interfaces can connect to 
existing registries. New online services can 
be created, with civil servants progressively 
training their colleagues in other agencies 
to use the system or accessing training 
at the Digital Government Academy 
of UNCTAD and the United Nations 
Institute for Training and Research. 
At the request of various Governments, 
UNCTAD has already started developing 
digital single windows that go beyond 
business creation to support business 
operations, with a specific focus on 
the Sustainable Development Goals. 
This effort includes tools to facilitate the 
licensing of the import, distribution and 
local production of pharmaceuticals (using 
Digital business 
and investment 
facilitation tools 
are a stepping 
stone to 
wider digital 
government


World Investment Report 2024
Investment facilitation and digital government
152
standards of the World Health Organization), 
the registration and calculation of 
carbon emissions to assess nationally 
determined contributions and to certify 
carbon credits and debits (following the 
methodology of the Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change), tax and social 
security filings, and the digitalization of 
extended producer responsibility. 
This focus on processes relevant for the 
Sustainable Development Goals shows 
how digital business and investment 
facilitation can be deployed specifically 
to support sustainable development. 
Cases discussed in this chapter provide 
ample evidence of the impact of digital 
business and investment facilitation on 
sustainable development and inclusiveness, 
in particular through rates of participation 
in the economy of women, youth and 
rural communities. Even in countries with 
a significant digital divide, solutions have 
been found to ensure that population 
groups with limited access to the Internet or 
lacking digital skills have reaped the benefits 
of digitalization, e.g. through terminals 
in business registries and municipalities 
and through dedicated support. 
Building on digital business facilitation 
towards wider implementation of digital 
government will have an even bigger 
impact on sustainable development and on 
investment in the Sustainable Development 
Goals. There is strong evidence that 
good governance, transparent rules and 
regulations, and efficient administrative 
procedures have a positive impact 
on FDI. Surveys of investors and IPAs 
consistently show that governance and 
institutional weaknesses are at the heart 
of challenges in attracting investment for 
sustainable development. By supporting the 
development of wider digital government 
applications, technical assistance for 
business and investment facilitation, 
including capacity-building initiatives 
based on international investment policy 
instruments, has the potential to tackle some 
of the root causes of the gap in investment 
for the Sustainable Development Goals.
UNCTAD has acted as a catalyst for 
progress on investment facilitation at the 
national and international levels. It has 
actively supported individual countries, 
regional groups and the international 
community through policy advice, policy 
guidance and knowledge resources. An 
important focus of the organization is now 
on implementation – through technical 
assistance  to Member States on digital 
investment facilitation. The digital tools 
for business and investment facilitation 
included in the UNCTAD digital government 
platform are operational in more than 60 
countries (and the same tools are used for 
trade information portals). Looking ahead, 
UNCTAD will continue to support developing 
countries and – in collaboration with other 
international organizations – look for 
opportunities to maximize the development 
benefits of digital government solutions 
by widening their scope of application.
* * *
Digital business 
and investment 
facilitation 
can support 
inclusive and 
sustainable 
development


World Investment Report 2024
153
References
Alfaro L, Kalemli-Ozcan S and Volosovych V (2008). Why doesn’t capital flow from rich to poor 
countries? An empirical investigation. The Review of Economics and Statistics. 90(2):347–368.
Anderson J and Gonzalez A (2013). Does Doing Business matter for foreign direct investment? 
Doing Business Case Study 47/80647. World Bank. 
ASEAN Secretariat and UNCTAD (2022). ASEAN Investment Report 2022: Pandemic Recovery 
and Investment Facilitation. Jakarta. 
Bioy H, Wang B, Pucci N, Carabia A and Areyada B (2024). SFDR Article 8 and Article 9 funds: Q4 
2023 in review. Morningstar. Available at https://www.morningstar.com/en-uk/lp/sfdr-article8-
article9. 
Climate Bonds Initiative (2021). Green bond pricing in the primary market, January–June 2021. 
Available at https://www.climatebonds.net/files/reports/cbi_pricing_h1_2021_03b.pdf.
Henry J and Furdak R (2022). ESG performance and flows. Available at https://www.man.com/
maninstitute/documents/download/db804-c5788-db188-fe571/Responsible_Investment_ESG_
Performance_and_Flows_-_From_a_Tale_of_Two_Cities_in_2023_to_%28hopefully%21%29_
Great_Expectations_in_2024_English_25-01-2024.pdf.
Hossain S and Rahman Z (2017). Does governance facilitate foreign direct investment in 
developing countries? International Journal of Economics and Financial Issues. 7(1):164–177.
Huck V (2023). Could Europe be ISSB’s best friend... in the US? Corporate Disclosures. Available 
at https://www.corporatedisclosures.org/content/top-stories/could-europe-be-issbs-best-
friend-in-the-us.html. 
International Auditing and Assurance Standards Board. Understanding International Standard on 
Sustainability Assurance 5000. Available at https://www.iaasb.org/focus-areas/understanding-
international-standard-sustainability-assurance-5000.
International Economic Law Clinic (2024). Mapping transparency commitments in IIAs. NUS Centre 
for International Law. Singapore.
IMF (2024). World Economic Outlook, April 2024: Steady But Slow: Resilience Amid Divergence. 
International Monetary Fund. Washington, D.C.
ITU and UNDP (2023). SDG Digital Acceleration Agenda. International Telecommunication Union 
and United Nations Development Programme. Geneva.
Jayasuriya D (2011). Improvements in the World Bank’s Ease of Doing Business rankings: Do they 
translate into greater foreign direct investment? Policy Research Working Paper Series 5787. 
World Bank.
Máchová R, Volejníková J and Lněnička M (2018). Impact of e-government development on the 
level of corruption: Measuring the effects of related indices in time and dimensions. Review of 
Economic Perspectives. 18(2):99–121.
Malone L, Holland E and Houston C (2023). ESG battlegrounds: How the states are shaping 
the regulatory landscape in the U.S. Corporate Governance. Available at https://corpgov.
law.harvard.edu/2023/03/11/esg-battlegrounds-how-the-states-are-shaping-the-regulatory-
landscape-in-the-u-s/.
OECD (2024). Recommendation of the Council on Digital Government Strategies. OECD/
LEGAL/0438. Available at https://www.oecd.org/gov/digital-government/Recommendation-
digital-government-strategies.pdf.
Opertti F and Volpe Martincus C (2023). Investment promotion in the new international context: 
What is the next frontier and how to get there. Columbia FDI Perspectives No. 355. Columbia 
University, Columbia Center on Sustainable Investment.


World Investment Report 2024
154
Reil S, Hamdani K, Barreiros L, Berger A, Contreras R, Kagan Y, Sauvant K, Steneri P and Zhao Q 
(2022). What foreign investors want: Findings from an investor survey of investment facilitation 
measures in Latin America and the Caribbean. International Trade Centre and German 
Development Institute with the Inter-American Development Bank. Available at https://doi.
org/10.2139/ssrn.4018005.
Al-Sadiq A (2021). The role of e-government in promoting foreign direct investment inflows. 
International Monetary Fund Working Papers No. 16(141). 
UNCTAD (1998). World Investment Report 1998: Trends and Determinants (United Nations 
publication. New York and Geneva). 
UNCTAD (2015). Investment Policy Framework for Sustainable Development. UNCTAD/DIAE/
PCB/2015/5. Geneva.
UNCTAD (2016). Global Action Menu for Investment Facilitation. Geneva.
UNCTAD (2017). World Investment Report 2017: Investment and the Digital Economy (United 
Nations publication. Sales No. E.17.II.D.3. New York and Geneva). 
UNCTAD (2018). UNCTAD’s Reform Package for the International Investment Regime (United 
Nations publication. New York and Geneva).
UNCTAD (2019). World Investment Report 2019: Special Economic Zones (United Nations 
publication. Sales No. E.19.II.D.12. Geneva).
UNCTAD (2020a). International Investment Agreements Reform Accelerator. UNCTAD/DIAE/PCB/
INF/2020/8. New York and Geneva. 
UNCTAD (2020b). Post-COVID-19: Investment promotion agencies and the “new normal”. The IPA 
Observer, Special Issue 9. July.
UNCTAD (2021). Digital Economy Report 2021 (United Nations publication. Sales No. E.21.II.D.18. 
Geneva).
UNCTAD (2022). World Investment Report 2022: International Tax Reforms and Sustainable 
Investment (United Nations publication. Sales No. E.22.II.D.20. Geneva).
UNCTAD (2023a). Investment facilitation in international investment agreements: trends and policy 
options. IIA Issues Note No. 3, September. 
UNCTAD (2023b). Roadmap for Building a Trade Single Window. Transport and Trade Facilitation 
Series No. 21.
UNCTAD (2023c). The digital transformation of investment promotion agencies. IPA Observer No. 12 
(UNCTAD/DIAE/PCB/INF/2022/9). Geneva.
UNCTAD (2023d). The evolution of FDI screening mechanisms: Key trends and 
features. Investment Policy Monitor No. 25. February. 
UNCTAD (2023e). Trends in the investment treaty regime and a reform toolbox for the energy 
transition. IIA Issues Note No. 2.
UNCTAD (2023f). World Investment Report 2023: Investing in Sustainable Energy for All (United 
Nations publication. Sales no. E.23.II.D.17. Geneva and New York).
UNCTAD (2024a). Business and investment facilitation: Stepping stones to digital government. Note 
by the UNCTAD secretariat (TD/B/C.II/51). Geneva.
UNCTAD (2024b). Outward FDI policies: Promotion and facilitation – regulation and 
screening. Investment Policy Monitor No. 27. February.
UNCTAD (2024c). Shaping the future of SME sustainability disclosure: A holistic approach. 
UNCTAD input paper for the Group of 20 Sustainable Finance Working Group. 
UNCTAD (2024d). Global Economic Fracturing and Shifting Investment Patterns. A Diagnostic of 
10 FDI Trends and Their Development Implications (UNCTAD/DIAE/2024/1). Geneva.
United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs (2022). E-Government Survey 2022. 
The Future of Digital Government (United Nations publication. Sales No. E.22.II.H.2. New York).


World Investment Report 2024
155
UNECE UN/CEFACT (2020). Recommendation and Guidelines on Establishing a Single 
Window to Enhance the Efficient Exchange of Information between Trade and Government. 
Recommendation No. 33 (United Nations publication. Sales No. 05.II.E.9. New York and 
Geneva).
UNODC (2023). World Drug Report 2023 (United Nations publication. Sales No. E.23.XI.7. New 
York).
United States Securities and Exchange Commission. Final rule: The enhancement and 
standardization of climate-related disclosures for investors. Available at https://www.sec.gov/
rules/2022/03/enhancement-and-standardization-climate-related-disclosures-investors.
Volpe Martincus C, Marra de Artiñano I, Sztajerowska M and Carballo J (2021). Making the Invisible 
Visible: Investment Promotion and Multinational Production in Latin America and the Caribbean. 
Inter-American Development Bank. Washington, D.C.
World Bank (2016). World Development Report 2016: Digital Dividends. Washington, D.C.
World Trade Organization (2023). Investment facilitation self-assessment guide. Restricted document 
(INF/IFD/RD/137).


156
FDI inflows
FDI outflows
Region/economy
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
Worlda
1 376 139
1 729 239
 984 578
1 621 808
1 355 749
1 331 813
1 010 629
1 444 809
 779 507
1 881 922
1 574 724
1 550 584
Developed economies
 674 750
1 024 750
 337 595
 731 843
 426 198
 464 397
 633 813
1 045 960
 396 035
1 376 095
1 023 157
1 059 323
Europe
 320 294
 660 687
 158 933
 178 748
-105 878
 16 493
 535 714
 648 344
-17 470
 705 714
 216 770
 327 855
European Union
 305 556
 627 336
 154 889
 266 502
-84 831
 58 645
 340 138
 644 799
 102 670
 619 677
 169 790
 182 746
Austria
 5 390
 4 905
-9 983
 17 092
 9 326
 4 466
 5 612
 12 486
 7 284
 25 243
 7 523
 9 594
Belgium
 27 137
 11 861
 3 133
 9 905
 11 551
 23 019
 43 581
 6 111
 5 420
 30 095
 20 311
 12 072
Bulgaria
 1 143
 1 835
 3 397
 1 794
 2 771
 3 913
  249
  449
  246
  318
  561
  598
Croatia
 1 199
  402
  146
 4 486
 3 590
 2 749
  206
-118
  35
  926
-254
 1 178
Cyprus
-413
 52 330
-24 451
 7 388
 5 732
 3 447
-6 941
 51 415
-32 965
 3 278
-905
-1 833
Czechia
 11 010
 10 108
 9 411
 9 051
 9 248
 7 785
 8 663
 4 128
 2 990
 7 734
 5 675
 7 052
Denmark
-2 497
 27 029
 1 372
 7 095
 7 750
 8 760
-3 971
 36 425
 9 660
 26 138
 5 868
 15 129
Estonia
 1 426
 3 053
 3 541
  105
 1 009
 4 577
-46
 1 868
  292
-770
  842
 1 506
Finland
-2 172
 13 456
-1 579
 13 290
 5 795
-1 676b
 11 455
 4 865
 5 856
 9 156
 13 275
 1 372b
France
 34 671
 20 426
 13 174
 34 109
 75 979
 42 032
 95 621
 51 459
 23 676
 55 087
 52 776
 72 356
Germany
 72 022
 52 684
 69 954
 51 218
 27 411
 36 698
 97 117
 151 078
 38 700
 147 604
 145 528
 101 254
Greece
 3 973
 5 019
 3 213
 6 328
 8 451
 5 430
  477
  642
  549
 1 109
 3 198
 3 952
Hungary
 6 460
 4 143
 6 842
 8 041
 9 320
 6 016
 3 364
 3 155
 4 436
 4 141
 4 123
 3 299
Ireland
-12 017
 149 433
 102 519
-3 933
-25 058
-9 165
 5 154
 32 083
-11 400
 56 146
 9 395
-6 595
Italy
 37 682
 22 720
-18 576
-2 952
 32 177
 18 219
 31 542
 24 362
 2 929
 26 415
 16 543
 13 014
Latvia
  960
  926
 1 004
 3 303
 1 404
 1 212
  207
-104
  255
 2 324
  115
  582
Lithuania
  972
 1 441
  416
 2 860
 2 214
 1 868
  699
  382
-46
 1 323
  367
  758
Luxembourg
-83 336
 163 718
 9 839
 25 123
-359 331
-62 808
 21 857
 176 767
 148 012
 52 174
-294 199
-23 679
Malta
 4 024
 3 778
 3 921
 28 662
 19 916
 20 900c
 7 401
 6 960
 7 235
 24 676
 24 625
 20 860c
Netherlands
 102 134
 15 940
-81 651
-70 238
-80 438
-168 450
-44 152
 31 023
-173 903
 92 375
 38 227
-142 185
Poland
 15 996
 13 510
 15 195
 29 235
 31 470
 28 685
  891
 1 854
  851
 3 168
 6 325
 10 403
Portugal
 7 181
 12 251
 7 683
 9 615
 9 778
 7 220
 1 375
 4 010
 2 526
 1 468
 2 686
 3 556
Romania
 6 219
 5 791
 3 432
 10 574
 10 572
 7 130
  379
  363
  53
  141
 1 297
  40
Slovakia
 1 675
 2 511
-2 404
 1 821
 2 902
  180
  322
  43
  348
  297
  433
  89
Slovenia
 1 384
 1 463
  220
 1 846
 2 039
 1 103
  281
  610
  519
 1 356
  683
  540
Spain
 58 063
 17 842
 14 239
 38 318
 44 885
 35 914
 37 944
 26 196
 33 539
 17 260
 42 900
 30 335
Sweden
 5 269
 8 761
 20 880
 22 364
 44 706
 29 418
 20 852
 16 286
 25 576
 30 494
 61 873
 47 498
Other Europe
 14 738
 33 352
 4 044
-87 754
-21 047
-42 152
 195 576
 3 545
-120 141
 86 037
 46 980
 145 109
Albania
 1 290
 1 288
 1 108
 1 234
 1 434
 1 630
  83
  128
  88
  63
  181
  265
Belarus
 1 421
 1 293
 1 398
 1 238
 1 603
 2 060
  50
  16
  88
-71
  173
  23
Bosnia and Herzegovina
  581
  458
  480
  683
  775
  946
  2
  35
  73
  46
  50
  48
Iceland
-381
-225
-928
  518
  859
  977
  76
  479
-427
  3
-118
-181
Republic of Moldova
  313
  523
  150
  404
  591
  428
  38
  43
-2
  33
  50
  12
Montenegro
  490
  416
  532
  699
  877
  526
  109
  75
-5
  11
  53
  63
North Macedonia
  725
  446
  230
  556
  785
  667
  12
  40
  53
  98
  96
  101
Norway
 1 044
 17 023
-7 990
 3 825
 9 644
 7 960
 11 181
 14 436
 9 930
 12 842
 13 085
 8 153
Russian Federation
 13 228
 32 076
 10 410
 38 639
-15 205
 8 364
 35 820
 22 024
 6 778
 64 072
 11 510
 29 110
Serbia
 4 091
 4 270
 3 469
 4 590
 4 598
 4 870
  363
  294
  112
  264
  41
  308
Switzerland
-100 954
-84 436
-49 570
-76 785
-43 248
 13 507
 64 955
-46 659
-41 041
-76 161
-74 020
 104 954
Ukraine
 4 732
 6 017
-36
 7 320
  557
 4 247
-127
  842
  22
-198
  344
  42
United Kingdom
 87 837
 53 918
 44 397
-71 174
 14 912
-89 247
 82 961
 11 717
-95 877
 84 918
 95 352
 2 007
North America
 240 896
 280 474
 118 890
 449 818
 378 527
 361 271
-99 358
 112 548
 268 132
 383 404
 449 398
 493 899
Canada
 37 662
 50 544
 25 594
 60 382
 46 175
 50 324
 58 049
 77 492
 43 667
 104 878
 83 012
 89 583
United States
 203 234
 229 930
 93 296
 389 436
 332 352
 310 947
-157 407
 35 056
 224 465
 278 526
 366 386
 404 316
Other developed economies
 113 561
 83 589
 59 773
 103 277
 153 549
 86 632
 197 456
 285 068
 145 374
 286 977
 356 989
 237 568
Australia
 67 569
 38 536
 14 162
 23 855
 63 366
 29 874
 7 825
 8 719
 5 607
 3 100
 118 050
 9 822
Israel
 21 515
 17 363
 20 969
 18 950
 23 031
 16 422
 6 087
 8 690
 4 579
 10 369
 10 246
 9 970
Japan
 9 963
 13 755
 11 768
 34 294
 34 194
 21 433
 144 982
 232 627
 99 708
 208 985
 162 126
 184 022
Republic of Korea
 12 183
 9 634
 8 765
 22 060
 25 045
 15 178
 38 220
 35 239
 34 832
 66 001
 65 799
 34 541
New Zealand
 2 236
 4 296
 3 997
 4 117
 7 903
 3 568
  377
-169
  658
-1 451
  746
-808
Bermuda
  95
  5
  112
  2
  10
  156c
-35
-38
-11
-27
  21
  21c
Developing economiesa
 701 389
 704 489
 646 983
 889 965
 929 551
 867 417
 376 816
 398 849
 383 471
 505 827
 551 567
 491 261
Africa
 43 772
 46 975
 41 048
 82 196
 54 465
 52 633
 7 899
 5 122
 2 465
 5 144
 9 232
  61
North Africa
 15 407
 13 550
 9 797
 9 509
 15 323
 13 461
 2 269
 1 727
  356
  994
 1 171
 1 185
Algeria
 1 475
 1 382
 1 140
  870
  255
 1 216
  854
  31
  15
-52
  85
  84
Egypt
 8 141
 9 010
 5 852
 5 122
 11 400
 9 841
  324
  405
  327
  367
  342
  390
Libya 
..
..
..
..
..
..
  276
  377
-487
-55c
  50c
-164c
Morocco
 3 559
 1 720
 1 419
 2 266
 2 260
 1 095
  782
  893
  458
  644
  641
  836
South Sudan
  60
-232
  18c
  68c
  122c
-6c
..
..
..
..
..
..
Sudan
 1 136
  825
  717
  523
  574
  548c
..
..
..
..
..
..
Tunisia
 1 036
  845
  652
  660
  714
  768
  34
  22
  43
  35
  53
  40
Annex table 1	
FDI flows, by region and economy, 2018–2023
(Millions of dollars)


157
Annex table 1	
FDI flows, by region and economy, 2018–2023
(Continued)
FDI inflows
FDI outflows
Region/economy
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
Other Africa
 28 366
 33 425
 31 251
 72 687
 39 142
 39 171
 5 629
 3 395
 2 109
 4 150
 8 061
-1 124
West Africa
 8 126
 11 976
 10 023
 13 626
 13 065
 12 962
 1 105
 1 269
 2 116
 2 469
 3 249
  755
Benin
  194
  218
  174
  346
  376
  434
  10
  27
  22
  43
  47
  49
Burkina Faso
  268
  163
-102
-80
  670
  85
  68
  16
-7
-43
  24
  5
Cabo Verde
  103
  123
  68
  91
  93
  118
-9
-16
-4
  1
-3
-7
Côte d’Ivoire
  620
  936
  713
 1 377
 1 599
 1 753
  145
  120
  1
  285
  168
  215
Gambia
  52
  71
  190
  249
  236
  208
0.5
-2
-3
-3
  2
-1c
Ghana
 2 989
 3 880
 1 876
 2 613
 1 511
 1 354
  81
  588
  542
  199
  38
  56
Guinea
  353
  43
  174
  201
  650
  893c
-0.3
  1
  2
-3
0.1c
0.1c
Guinea-Bissau
  21
  72
  21
  19
  33
  24
-0.4
0.4
0.3
  1
  1
0.3
Liberia
  129
  87
  738
  536
  960
  745c
  84c
  102c
  80c
  91c
  91c
  87c
Mali
  467
  721
  537
  640
  716
  698
0.3
  1
  1
  56
  44
  23
Mauritania
  773
  887
  931
 1 064
 1 419
  873c
..
..
  6c
  5c
  3c
0.1c
Niger
  466
  717
  361
  595
  966
  966
  39
  32
  15
  39
  9
  40
Nigeria
  775
 2 305
 2 385
 3 313
  895
 1 873
  566
  285
 1 473
 1 818
 2 811
  256
Senegal
  848
 1 065
 1 846
 2 588
 2 929
 2 641
  53
  71
  99
  52
  70
  91
Sierra Leone
  250
  342
  173
  212
  186
  263c
..
..
..
..
..
..
Togo
-183
  346
-59
-136
-173
  34
  70
  43
-112
-71
-54
-60
Central Africa
 8 822
 9 254
 8 917
 6 607
 7 083
 5 875
  79
  422
  279
  498
  490
  151
Burundi
  7
  30
  21
  22
  25
  29c
..
  1
  1
  1
  2
  2c
Cameroon
  765
 1 025
  675
  964
  926
  799c
  108
  126
  84
  55
  27
-109c
Central African 
Republic
  18c
  26c
  2c
  5c
  24c
  39c
..
..
..
..
..
..
Chad
  461c
  567c
  558c
  705c
  614c
  913c
..
..
..
..
..
..
Congo
 4 315c
 3 366c
 4 016c
  532c
  532c
  626b
  14c
  23c
  27c
  25c
  25c
  26c
Democratic Republic 
of the Congo
 1 617
 1 488
 1 647
 1 870
 1 846
 1 635c
  209
  134
  149
  192
  436
  235c
Equatorial Guinea
-144
  821
-9
  562
 1 388
  142c
..
..
..
..
..
..
Gabon
 1 379c
 1 553c
 1 717c
 1 529c
 1 105c
 1 151c
-63c
-34c
..
..
..
..
Rwanda
  382
  354
  260
  399
  496
  523
  18
  5
..
..
..
..
Sao Tome and Principe
  23
  24
  32
  19
  127
  18
  2
  1
  1
-0.04
0.2
-4
East Africa
 7 918
 7 681
 7 439
 10 082
 11 543
 11 226
  248
  174
 1 508
 2 082
 1 709
  721
Comoros
  6
  4
  4
  4
  4
  5c
..
..
..
..
..
..
Djibouti
  170
  175
  158
  168
  191
  137
..
..
..
..
..
..
Eritrea
  61c
-61c
-30c
-31c
-32c
  2c
..
..
..
..
..
..
Ethiopia
 3 360
 2 549
 2 381
 4 260
 3 670
 3 263
..
..
..
..
..
..
Kenya
 1 139
 1 098
 1 510
 1 406
 1 597
 1 504c
  11
  11
 1 297
 1 840
 1 502
  588c
Madagascar
  353
  474
  358
  358
  468
  415c
  118
  102
  119
  114
  142
  119c
Mauritius
  461
  444
  225
  253
  580
  760
  98
  58
  16
  86
  37
  16
Seychelles
-66
  30
  165
  225
  212
  238
  20
  4
  75
  42
  28
-2
Somalia
  408
  447
  534
  601
  636
  677
..
..
..
..
..
..
Uganda
 1 055
 1 303
 1 191
 1 648
 2 953
 2 886
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.4
0.4
United Republic of 
Tanzania
  972
 1 217
  944
 1 190
 1 265
 1 339c
..
..
..
..
..
..
Southern Africa
 3 499
 4 514
 4 871
 42 373
 7 450
 9 109
 4 196
 1 529
-1 793
-899
 2 614
-2 751
Angola
-6 456
-4 098
-1 866
-4 355
-6 599
-2 086
  6
-2 349
  91
-1 057
  41
  33
Botswana
  286
  94
  32
-319
  708
  198c
  82
-20
-68
-33
  10
-38c
Eswatini
  36
  130
  36
  117
  15
  29
-11
  22
-13
  60
-17
-22
Lesotho
  41
  35
  28
-12
-8
-26
..
..
..
..
..
..
Malawi
  77
  55
  252
  129
  243
  208c
-102
  23
-154
  28
  37
  32c
Mozambique
 2 703
 2 212
 3 035
 5 102
 2 458
 2 509
-25
-31
  153
  194
  564
  174
Namibia
  209
-179
-146
  851
 1 072
 2 345
  98
  9
  52
  18
  12
-310
South Africa
 5 450b
 5 125b
 3 062b
 40 215b
 9 231b
 5 233b
 4 076b
 3 147b
-1 951b
  139b
 2 162b
-2 811b
Zambia
  408
  860
  245
  394
-65
  108
  45
  696
  64
-280
-253
  160
Zimbabwe
  745
  280
  194
  250
  395
  588
  27
  32
  33
  32
  58
  31
Asia
 501 858
 497 788
 513 069
 666 542
 677 829
 621 144
 359 770
 346 416
 382 427
 457 597
 470 637
 440 419
East and South-East Asia
 400 933
 397 183
 404 822
 542 477
 538 249
 512 531
 300 620
 292 723
 335 063
 380 875
 369 413
 367 047
East Asia
 254 455
 232 335
 285 512
 334 030
 315 115
 286 214
 243 603
 203 040
 267 099
 289 912
 286 073
 278 533
China
 138 306
 141 225
 149 342
 180 957
 189 132
 163 253
 143 037
 136 908
 153 710
 178 819
 163 120
 147 850
Democratic People’s 
Republic of Korea
  2c
  30c
  6c
  18c
  10c
  13c
..
..
..
..
..
..
Mongolia
 2 174
 2 443
 1 719
 2 173
 2 504
 2 248
  37
  127
  26
  113
  76
  76
Hong Kong, China
 104 246
 73 714
 134 710
 140 186
 109 685
 112 676
 82 201
 53 202
 100 715
 96 428
 106 226
 104 286
Macao, China
 2 613
 6 683
-6 319
 5 280
 3 625
 2 324c
  270
 1 041
 1 148
 3 211
 1 062
 1 607c
Taiwan Province of 
China
 7 114b
 8 240b
 6 053b
 5 416b
 10 158b
 5 700b
 18 058b
 11 763b
 11 500b
 11 341b
 15 589b
 24 714b
South-East Asia
 146 479
 164 848
 119 310
 208 447
 223 134
 226 317
 57 017
 89 683
 67 964
 90 962
 83 339
 88 514
Brunei Darussalam
  517
  375
  577
  205
-292
-51
..
..
..
..
..
..


158
Annex table 1	
FDI flows, by region and economy, 2018–2023
(Continued)
FDI inflows
FDI outflows
Region/economy
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
Cambodia
 3 213
 3 663
 3 625
 3 483
 3 579
 3 959
  124
  102
  127
  92
  151
  151
Indonesia
 20 563
 23 883
 18 591
 21 131
 25 390
 21 628
 8 053
 3 352
 4 448
 3 845
 7 323
 7 070
Lao People’s 
Democratic Republic
 1 358
  756
  968
 1 072
  636
 1 668c
..
..
..
..
0.01
..
Malaysia
 7 618
 7 813
 3 160
 12 173
 16 940
 8 653
 5 114
 6 231
 2 419
 4 676
 13 322
 7 643
Myanmar
 2 892
 2 509
 1 907
 2 067
 1 239
 1 520
..
..
..
..
..
..
Philippines
 9 949b
 8 671b
 6 822b
 11 983b
 5 939d
 6 210d
 4 116b
 3 351b
 3 562b
 2 251b
  308d
 1 251d
Singapore
 73 115
 97 533
 74 857
 126 674
 141 118
 159 670
 23 926b
 67 776b
 39 793b
 61 368b
 52 230b
 62 997b
Thailand
 11 705
 3 765
-6 284
 14 417
 11 082
 4 548
 15 085
 8 410
 17 260
 18 398
 7 365
 10 369
Timor-Leste
  48
-239
-713
-419
-395
  13
..
-3c
-26c
-26c
-34c
-17c
Viet Nam
 15 500
 16 120
 15 800b
 15 660b
 17 900b
 18 500b
  598
  465
  380b
  358b
 2 674b
-950b
South Asia
 52 262
 59 090
 71 050
 52 683
 57 519
 35 974
 11 630
 13 275
 11 206
 17 716
 15 942
 13 524
Afghanistan
  119b
  23b
  13b
  21b
..
..
  39b
  26b
  37b
  31b
..
..
Bangladesh
 3 613
 2 874
 2 564
 2 896
 3 480
 3 004
  23
  28
  12
  92
  53
  30
Bhutan
  6
  3
  1
  1
  15
  18
..
..
..
..
..
..
India
 42 156
 50 558
 64 072
 44 763
 49 380
 28 163
 11 447
 13 144
 11 109
 17 253
 14 618
 13 341
Iran (Islamic Republic of)
 2 373
 1 508
 1 342
 1 425
 1 500c
 1 422c
  75
  85c
  78c
  82c
  100c
  87c
Maldives
  576b
  961b
  441b
  643b
  732b
  762b
..
..
..
..
..
..
Nepal
  67
  185
  126
  196
  65
  74
..
..
..
..
..
..
Pakistan
 1 737
 2 234
 2 057
 2 147
 1 462
 1 818
-21
-85
-45
  242
 1 157
  32
Sri Lanka
 1 614b
  743b
  434b
  592b
  884b
  712b
  68b
  77b
  15b
  17b
  15b
  34b
West Asia
 42 030
 33 293
 30 659
 64 156
 71 857
 65 220
 48 431
 42 944
 38 280
 57 503
 87 255
 58 883
Armenia
  267
  100
  59
  366
  998
  443
  7
-133
-27
  25
  50
  54
Azerbaijan
 1 403
 1 504
  507
-1 708
-4 474
  253
 1 761
 2 432
  825
  77
  172
 1 875
Bahrain
 1 654
 1 548
 1 021
 1 779
 2 760
 6 840
  111
-197
-205
  64
 1 948
 1 113
Georgia
 1 352
 1 354
  595
 1 253
 2 098
 1 595
  340
  282
  23
  322
  332
  53
Iraq
-4 885
-3 508
-2 859
-2 637
-2 088
-5 273c
  188
  194
  147
  135
  238
  279c
Jordan
  955
  730
  760
  622
 1 251
  843
-8
  43
  26
  16
-16
  64
Kuwait
  204
  351
  240
  567
  758
 2 113
 3 715
-2 696
 7 932
 4 666
 24 613
 11 189
Lebanon
 2 658
 1 905
 1 607
  600
  527
  655
  631
  345
  29
-1 339
  66
  73
Oman
 5 602
 1 938
 1 914
 8 793
 5 480
 4 745c
  130
-588
-840
 1 178
  944
  165c
Qatar
-2 186
-2 813
-2 434
-1 093
  76
-474
 3 523
 4 450
 2 730
  160
 2 384
-191
Saudi Arabia
 12 141b
 3 079b
 1 621b
 23 112b
 28 055b
 12 319b
 19 252
 14 553
 5 411
 24 674
 26 962
 16 071
Syrian Arab Republic
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
Türkiye
 12 511
 9 469
 7 663
 11 481
 13 447
 10 439
 3 666
 2 973
 3 233
 5 037
 4 716
 5 774
United Arab Emirates
 10 385
 17 875
 19 884
 20 667
 22 737
 30 688
 15 079
 21 226
 18 937
 22 546
 24 833
 22 328
Yemen
-282c
-371c
..
..
..
..
  4c
  3c
..
..
..
..
State of Palestine
  252
  132
  80
  353
  233
  35c
  31
  56
  59
-58
  13
  36c
Central Asia
 6 633
 8 223
 6 539
 7 226
 10 205
 7 420
-911
-2 526
-2 122
 1 504
-1 974
  966
Kazakhstan
 3 898
 3 284
 3 670
 3 353
 6 541
 3 223
-1 095
-2 620
-2 206
 1 452
-1 535
  913
Kyrgyzstan
  144
  404
-402
  226
  55
  490
  100
  67
  2
  2
-455
  2
Tajikistan
  360b
  364b
  107b
  84b
  174b
  141b
  82b
  23b
  70b
  48b
  12b
  40b
Turkmenistan
 1 607c
 1 854c
 1 436c
 1 287c
  936c
 1 378c
..
..
..
..
..
..
Uzbekistan
  625b
 2 316b
 1 728b
 2 275b
 2 498b
 2 187b
  2b
  3b
  11b
  3b
  4b
  12b
Latin America and the 
Caribbeana
 154 458
 158 201
 91 844
 139 948
 195 859
 193 179
 9 584
 48 449
-504
 41 313
 69 131
 50 077
South America
 106 680
 110 224
 55 592
 94 677
 145 965
 142 769
  232
 36 372
-2 703
 41 362
 52 109
 40 789
Argentina
 11 717
 6 649
 4 884
 6 903
 15 408
 22 911
 1 726
 1 523
 1 177
 1 537
 2 076
 2 403
Bolivia (Plurinational 
State of)
  302
-217
-1 129
  584
  6
  294
-84
  48
-111
  91
-81
  257
Brazil
 59 824
 65 386
 28 322
 50 651
 73 352
 65 897
-16 336
 19 031
-13 415
 20 450
 32 100
 29 920
Chile
 13 031
 14 403
 11 292
 12 627
 16 882
 21 027
 6 934
 11 169
 6 242
 12 024
 11 852
 5 567
Colombia
 11 299b
 13 989b
 7 459b
 9 561b
 17 183b
 17 446b
 5 126b
 3 153b
 1 733b
 3 181b
 3 383b
 1 211b
Ecuador
 1 389
  979
 1 095
  648
  879
  372
..
..
..
..
..
..
Guyana
 1 231
 1 695
 2 086
 4 468
 4 393
 7 198
..
  17
  14
  15
  5
  7
Paraguay
  175
  334
  149
  185
  725
  241
..
..
..
..
..
..
Peru
 6 761
 6 362
-825
 6 272
 12 026
 3 331
  98
 1 087
  392
 1 098
  237
  889
Suriname
  119
-8
0.3
-124
  3
-65
..
..
..
..
..
..
Uruguay
-11
 2 018
  756
 1 937
 3 456
 3 429
  718
  627
-263
  430
  500
-812
Venezuela (Bolivarian 
Republic of)
  844
-1 367
 1 504
  964
 1 651
  688c
 2 051
-159
 1 488
 2 319
 2 089
 1 434c
Central America
 45 062
 44 032
 32 346
 42 638
 46 350
 46 662
 9 065
 11 709
 2 193
-1 025
 15 626
 7 926
Belize
  118
  94
  76
  125
  141
  50
  1
  2
  4
  2
  1
  2
Costa Rica
 2 487
 2 812
 1 763
 3 231
 3 164
 3 921
  53
  117
  118
  85
  104
  88
El Salvador
  826
  636
  24
  386
  171
  760
-0.04
0.4
  22
  12
  29
  29
Guatemala
  981
  976
  935
 3 462
 1 442
 1 552
  201
  180
  149
  476
  723
  665
Honduras
  961
  498
  419
  739
  920
 1 076
  66
  3
  46
  226
  183
  208


159
Annex table 1	
FDI flows, by region and economy, 2018–2023
(Concluded)
FDI inflows
FDI outflows
Region/economy
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
Mexico
 34 101
 34 617
 28 211
 31 829
 36 312
 36 058
 8 489
 10 755
 1 720
-2 125
 14 532
 6 429
Nicaragua
  838
  503
  747
 1 220
 1 294
 1 230
  75
  59
  40
  15
  19
  31
Panama
 4 751
 3 895
  172
 1 646
 2 906
 2 015
  180
  592
  94
  285
  34
  474
Caribbeana
 2 715
 3 945
 3 906
 2 634
 3 544
 3 748
  287
  368
  6
  977
 1 397
 1 363
Antigua and Barbuda
  193b
  118b
  62b
  296b
  326b
  327b
-2b
-15b
  1b
-36b
  14b
  15b
Barbados
  242
  215
  262
  239c
  200c
  225
  9
  28
  8
  18c
  15c
  8c
Dominica
  97b
  76b
  5b
  28b
  12b
  14b
0.1b
0.1b
-0.4b
  2b
-1b
-1b
Dominican Republic
 2 535
 3 021
 2 560
 3 197
 4 099
 4 390
  209
-192
-99
  153
-49
  360
Grenada
  226b
  263b
  160b
  189b
  172b
  181b
  36b
  49b
-45b
-19b
  19b
  21b
Haiti
  105
  75
  25
  51
  39
  32c
..
..
..
..
..
..
Jamaica
  775
  665
  265
  321
  319
  431c
  13
  446
  7
  56
  60
-6c
Saint Kitts and Nevis
  46b
  44b
-0.5b
  25b
  47b
  36b
  56b
  23b
  8b
-3b
-3b
-3b
Saint Lucia
  58b
  94b
  97b
  141b
  78b
  186b
-19b
  64b
-35b
-34b
-29b
  3b
Saint Vincent and the 
Grenadines
  28b
  58b
  57b
  169b
  68b
  79b
  15b
  10b
  3b
-1b
-3b
-3b
Trinidad and Tobago
-700
  184
 1 056
-935
-913
-1 105c
  65
  114
  98
  768
 1 385
 1 008c
Anguilla
  216b
  163b
  69b
  87b
  102b
  147b
  43b
  14b
  2b
-74b
  3b
  5b
Aruba
  110
-136
  137
  143
  261
-178c
  5
-1
  1
  4
  97
  91c
Bahamas (the)
  947
  611
  897
 1 052
 1 255
 1 459
  117
  148
  157
  66
  226
  419
British Virgin Islands
 34 390c
 39 103c
 39 620c
 39 361c
 38 119c
 39 889c
 41 587c
 44 154c
 42 280c
 43 217c
 42 809c
 44 158c
Cayman Islands
 20 681c
 28 165c
 23 621c
 25 893c
 24 590c
 28 134c
 8 261c
 31 630c
 10 835c
 21 232c
 17 990c
 20 422c
Curaçao
..
  203
  156
  146
  164
  155c
..
-11
  7
  3
  11
  10c
Montserrat
  3b
  1b
  3b
  2b
  5b
  7b
..
..
..
..
..
..
Sint Maarten
-48
  74
  22
  27
  17
  37c
  4
  1
  1
  6
  2
  2c
Oceania
 1 301
 1 525
 1 021
 1 279
 1 398
  461
-437
-1 138
-917
 1 772
 2 568
  703
Cook Islands (the)
  12b
  9b
  5b
-2b
  4b
  6c
0.3b
0.3b
0.3b
0.3b
0.3b
0.3c
Fiji
  471
  321
  241
  407
  104
  91
-4
-36
  14
  32
  16
  29
Kiribati
-1
-1
  3
  1
  3
  2c
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1c
Marshall Islands (the)
  10
  4
  3
0.5
  3
  2
..
..
..
..
..
..
Palau
  51
  45
  43
  31
  72
  48c
..
..
..
..
..
..
Papua New Guinea
  306b
  335b
  112b
-11b
  458b
-425c
-578b
-1 211b
-990b
 1 691b
 2 484b
  596c
Samoa
  17
-4
  4
  9
  5
-3
0.04
  4
  2
  1
-0.1
..
Solomon Islands
  25
  33
  9
  28
  44
  25c
  9
  4
  3
  5
  2
  8c
Tonga
  23
-6
  4
  4
  7
  24c
  1
  1
  1
-0.1
0.4
0.3c
Tuvalu
0.3c
0.3c
0.1c
0.2c
0.2c
0.2c
..
..
..
..
..
..
Vanuatu
  37
  53
  41
  43
  11
  9c
  1
  1
  1
0.2
  1
  4c
French Polynesia
  6
  13
-16
-26
-9c
-6c
  38
  21
-3
  13
  6c
  15c
New Caledonia
  345
  723
  572
  794
  696c
  687c
  96
  76
  55
  30
  57c
  51c
Memorandum
Least developed countries 
(LDCs)e
 21 656
 22 494
 23 996
 28 694
 26 668
 31 299
  793
-966
  681
-393
 1 377
 1 160
Landlocked developing 
countries (LLDCs)f
 21 681
 21 975
 15 344
 19 899
 23 599
 24 255
 1 062
  742
-1 408
 2 049
-1 750
 3 488
Small island developing States 
(SIDS)g
 6 228
 7 143
 5 990
 6 061
 7 263
 8 337
  619
  696
  186
 1 111
 1 684
 1 849
Source: UNCTAD, FDI/MNE database (www.unctad.org/fdistatistics).
a Excluding the financial centres in the Caribbean and special-purpose entities in reported countries.
b Asset/liability basis.
c Estimates.
d Directional basis calculated from asset/liability basis.
e Least developed countries include Afghanistan, Angola, Bangladesh, Benin, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, the Central African Republic, Chad, the 
Comoros, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Eritrea, Ethiopia, the Gambia, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Haiti, Kiribati, the Lao People’s Democratic 
Republic, Lesotho, Liberia, Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Mauritania, Mozambique, Myanmar, Nepal, the Niger, Rwanda, Sao Tome and Principe, Senegal, 
Sierra Leone, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Sudan, the Sudan, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tuvalu, Uganda, the United Republic of Tanzania, Yemen and Zambia.
f Landlocked developing countries include Afghanistan, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bhutan, the Plurinational State of Bolivia, Botswana, Burkina Faso, Burundi, 
the Central African Republic, Chad, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lesotho, Malawi, Mali, Mongolia, 
Nepal, the Niger, North Macedonia, Paraguay, the Republic of Moldova, Rwanda, South Sudan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Uzbekistan, Zambia and 
Zimbabwe.
g Small island developing States include Antigua and Barbuda, Barbados, the Bahamas, Cabo Verde, the Comoros, Dominica, the Dominican Republic, Fiji, 
Grenada, Jamaica, Kiribati, Maldives, the Marshall Islands, Mauritius, the Federated States of Micronesia, Nauru, Palau, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and Príncipe, Seychelles, Solomon Islands, Timor-Leste, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tuvalu and 
Vanuatu.


160
Annex table 2	
FDI stock, by region and economy, 2000, 2010, 2022 and 2023
(Millions of dollars)
FDI inward stock
FDI outward stock
Region/economy
2000
2010
2022
2023
2000
2010
2022
2023
Worlda
7 377 201
19 842 937
44 375 102
49 130 846
7 408 709
20 440 527
40 569 644
44 380 560
Developed economies
5 860 038
13 778 925
29 591 913
33 434 653
6 740 421
17 537 053
31 177 995
34 404 485
Europe
2 491 244
8 371 974
16 110 676
17 266 928
3 193 644
10 218 616
17 537 359
18 572 060
European Union
1 882 785
5 902 599
11 672 194
12 453 733
1 967 112
6 952 372
13 530 528
14 499 617
Austria
 31 165
 160 615
 206 490
 226 276
 24 821
 181 638
 253 986
 273 210
Belgium
..
 473 358
 531 007
 577 961
..
 431 613
 685 498
 770 505
Bulgaria
 2 704
 44 970
 57 475
 61 945
  67
 2 583
 3 590
 4 317
Croatia
 2 785
 32 925
 38 365
 42 909
  952
 4 969
 8 045
 8 143
Cyprus
 2 846
 260 132
 63 537
 90 804
  557
 242 556
 28 078
 48 338
Czechia
 21 644
 128 504
 206 338
 216 595
  738
 14 923
 60 806
 69 222
Denmark
 73 574
 96 136
 116 291
 125 051c
 73 100
 163 133
 221 838
 236 967c
Estonia
 2 645
 15 551
 34 289
 40 490
  259
 5 545
 12 289
 14 204
Finland
 24 273
 86 698
 82 980
 149 649b
 52 109
 137 663
 139 076
 210 121b
France
 184 215
 630 710
 947 200
1 012 705
 365 871
1 172 994
1 544 549
1 635 680
Germany
 470 938
 955 881
1 091 561
1 128 259c
 483 946
1 364 565
2 077 987
2 179 240c
Greece
 14 113
 35 026
 50 578
 61 593
 6 094
 42 623
 16 698
 21 324
Hungary
 22 870
 91 015
 107 551
 118 983
 1 280
 23 612
 40 043
 46 097
Ireland
 127 089
 285 575
1 369 156
1 410 084
 27 925
 340 114
1 200 117
1 336 414
Italy
 122 533
 328 058
 458 915
 493 530
 169 957
 491 208
 558 626
 584 031
Latvia
 1 691
 10 869
 24 067
 26 595
  19
  931
 5 730
 6 304
Lithuania
 2 334
 15 455
 27 686
 31 564
  29
 2 647
 6 757
 9 736
Luxembourg
..
 172 257
1 155 656
1 183 734
..
 187 027
1 594 807
1 679 068
Malta
 2 263
 129 770
 491 467
 725 715
  193
 60 596
 477 251
 695 859
Netherlands
 243 733
 588 077
2 775 591
2 678 218
 305 461
 968 105
3 395 399
3 386 269
Poland
 33 477
 187 602
 268 019
 335 540
  268
 16 407
 29 658
 38 212
Portugal
 34 224
 90 900
 177 165
 195 340
 19 417
 52 497
 62 900
 69 041
Romania
 6 953
 68 699
 115 133
 125 555
  136
 2 327
 4 718
 4 902
Slovakia
 6 970
 50 328
 57 372
 60 532
  555
 3 457
 5 428
 5 062
Slovenia
 2 389
 10 667
 21 545
 23 702
  772
 8 147
 9 161
 9 983
Spain
 156 348
 628 341
 812 740
 897 268
 129 194
 653 236
 567 881
 630 189
Sweden
 93 791
 324 478
 384 021
 413 135
 123 618
 377 258
 519 611
 527 177
Other Europe
 608 459
2 469 375
4 438 482
4 813 195
1 226 532
3 266 244
4 006 832
4 072 444
Albania
  247
 3 255
 11 104
 13 985
..
  154
  995
 1 389
Belarus
 1 306
 9 904
 15 440
 15 822
  24
  205
 1 496
 1 470
Bosnia and Herzegovina
  450
 6 709
 9 515
 10 667
..
  211
  736
  814
Iceland
  497
 11 784
 9 070
 9 384
  663
 11 466
 4 797
 5 023
Republic of Moldova
  449
 2 897
 4 933
 5 531
  23
  90
  425
  448
Montenegro
..
 4 231
 5 494
 6 066
..
..
  190
  271
North Macedonia
  540
 4 351
 7 480
 8 421
  16
  100
  166
  210
Norway
 30 265
 167 932
 148 338
 157 160
 34 026
 179 568
 209 589
 202 275
Russian Federation
 29 738
 464 228
 359 982
 278 812
 19 211
 336 355
 299 131
 258 240
Serbia
..
 22 299
 53 499
 60 459
..
 1 960
 4 511
 4 999
Switzerland
 101 635
 648 092
1 038 034
1 136 788
 232 202
1 043 199
1 316 327
1 472 959
Ukraine
 3 875
 52 872
 50 987
 54 261
  170
 6 548
 -867
 -885
United Kingdom
 439 458
1 068 187
2 718 892
3 048 932
 940 197
1 686 260
2 168 530
2 124 191
North America
3 108 255
4 406 182
11 879 938
14 482 837
3 136 637
5 808 053
10 270 591
12 180 818
Canada
 325 020
 983 889
1 495 991
1 665 774
 442 623
 998 466
2 287 758
2 746 892
United States
2 783 235
3 422 293
10 383 947
12 817 063
2 694 014
4 809 587
7 982 833
9 433 926
Other developed economies
 260 539
1 000 769
1 601 299
1 684 888
 410 140
1 510 383
3 370 045
3 651 606
Australia
 121 686
 527 728
 776 764
 807 427
 92 508
 449 740
 655 344
 710 639
Israel
 20 426
 60 086
 229 880
 244 472
 9 091
 67 893
 99 842
 108 680
Japan
 50 323
 214 880
 225 367
 246 801c
 278 445
 831 076
1 948 555
2 132 578c
Korea, Republic of
 43 738
 135 500
 272 328
 284 146
 21 497
 144 032
 647 568
 682 023
New Zealand
 24 101
 59 738
 94 319
 99 128
 8 491
 16 717
 18 608
 17 536
Bermuda
  265c
 2 837
 2 642c
 2 915c
  108c
  925
  129c
  151c
Developing economiesa
1 517 163
6 064 012
14 783 189
15 696 192
 668 288
2 903 474
9 391 648
9 976 074
Africa
 153 062
 620 046
1 045 624
1 036 252
 39 815
 137 363
 296 153
 248 821
North Africa
 45 590
 201 109
 336 039
 354 974
 3 199
 25 770
 40 219
 42 324
Algeria
 3 379c
 19 545
 35 643
 36 860
  205c
 1 505
 2 810
 2 894
Egypt
 19 955
 73 095
 148 888
 158 689
  655
 5 448
 9 190
 9 580
Libya 
  471c
 16 334
 18 462c
 18 462c
 1 903c
 16 615
 20 450c
 20 286c
Morocco
 8 842c
 45 082
 63 278
 69 297
  402c
 1 914
 7 066
 8 076
Sudan
 1 398
 15 690
 30 301c
 30 849c
..
..
..
..
Tunisia
 11 545
 31 364
 39 467
 40 817c
  33
  287
  703
 1 488c
Other Africa
 107 472
 418 937
 709 585
 681 279
 36 616
 111 594
 255 934
 206 496
West Africa
 33 010
 106 590
 210 529
 210 814
 6 381
 18 090
 31 165
 31 268


161
Annex table 2	
FDI stock, by region and economy, 2000, 2010, 2022 and 2023
(Continued)
FDI inward stock
FDI outward stock
Region/economy
2000
2010
2022
2023
2000
2010
2022
2023
Benin
  213
  604
 3 154
 3 711
  11
  21
  376
  440
Burkina Faso
  28
  354
 2 998
 3 193
0.4
  8
  377
  396
Cabo Verde
  192c
 1 367
 2 346
 2 572
..
  2
  94
  106
Côte d’Ivoire
 2 483
 6 978
 13 691
 15 974
  9
  94
 1 404
 1 674
Gambia
  216
  323
 1 176c
 1 384c
..
..
..
..
Ghana
 1 554c
 10 080
 46 006
 47 360
..
  83
 1 830
 1 886c
Guinea
  263c
  486
 5 252c
 6 145c
  12c
  144
  97c
  97c
Guinea-Bissau
  38
  63
  326
  362
..
  5
  11
  12
Liberia
 3 247c
 10 206
 10 889c
 11 633c
 2 188
 4 714
 5 010c
 5 097c
Mali
  132
 1 964
 6 742
 7 697
  1
  18
  317
  352
Mauritania
  146c
 2 372c
 5 825c
 6 702c
  4c
  28c
  3c
  3c
Niger
  45
 2 251
 8 628
 9 926
  1
  9
  391
  446
Nigeria
 23 786
 66 797
 86 239
 73 375
 4 144
 12 576
 18 297
 17 663
Senegal
  295
 1 699
 13 184
 16 358
  22
  263
  991
 1 120
Sierra Leone
  284c
  482
 2 688c
 2 951c
..
..
..
..
Togo
  87
  565
 1 385
 1 469
 -10
  126
 1 966
 1 975
Central Africa
 5 053
 39 227
 120 236
 126 047
 1 651
 2 217
 4 733
 4 884
Burundi
  47c
  13
  255c
  283c
  2c
  2
  8c
  9c
Cameroon
  917c
 3 099c
 6 484
 7 283c
 1 252c
  971c
  734
  625c
Central African Republic
  104
  511
  715c
  754c
  43
..
..
..
Chad
  576c
 3 594c
 8 372c
 9 285c
..
..
..
..
Congo
 1 893c
 9 261c
 34 026c
 34 653c
  40c
  34c
  157c
  183c
Democratic Republic of the Congo
  617
 9 368
 30 995
 32 629c
  34
  229
 3 677
 3 913c
Equatorial Guinea
 1 060c
 9 413c
 19 069c
 19 211c
..
..
..
..
Gabon
 -227c
 3 287c
 16 591c
 17 742c
  280c
  946c
  79c
  79c
Rwanda
  55
  422
 3 237
 3 697
..
  13
  74
  74
Sao Tome and Principe
  11c
  260c
  493
  511c
..
  21c
  5c
  1c
East Africa
 7 202
 37 754
 99 466
 110 318
  387
 1 474
 3 261
 3 993
Comoros
  21c
  60c
  145c
  150c
..
..
..
..
Djibouti
  40
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
Eritrea
  337c
  666c
 1 029c
 1 031c
..
..
..
..
Ethiopia
  941c
 4 206
 35 281
 38 544c
..
..
..
..
Kenya
  932c
 4 967
 9 692
 11 196c
  115c
  62
 2 668
 3 256c
Madagascar
  141
 4 383
 4 120
 4 535c
  9c
  193
  838
  957c
Mauritius
  683
 4 658
 5 894c
 6 418c
  132
  864
  743c
  773c
Seychelles
  515
 2 960
 3 117
 3 354
  130
  290
-1 162
-1 167
Somalia
  4c
  566
 4 923
 5 600
..
..
..
..
Uganda
  807
 5 575
 16 631
 19 517
..
  66
  174
  175
United Republic of Tanzania
 2 781
 9 712
 18 634c
 19 973c
..
..
..
..
Southern Africa
 62 208
 235 365
 279 354
 234 100
 28 198
 89 813
 216 775
 166 352
Angola
 7 977
 32 458
 14 262
 12 177
 -8
 1 870
 5 259
 5 292
Botswana
 1 827
 3 351
 5 194
 5 410c
  517
 1 007
 1 039
  916c
Eswatini
  536
  927
  966
  896
  87
  91
  162
  133
Lesotho
  330
  929
  958
  851
..
..
..
..
Malawi
  358
  963
 1 484
 1 692c
 -5
  45
  243
  276c
Mozambique
 1 249
 4 331
 54 597
 57 281
  1
  3
  7
  7
Namibia
 1 276
 3 595
 7 747
 9 136
  45
  722
 1 034
  697
South Africa
 43 451
 179 565b
 172 210b
 124 025b
 27 328
 83 249b
 207 954b
 157 764b
Zambia
 3 966c
 7 433
 15 384
 15 492c
..
 2 531
  311
  471c
Zimbabwe
 1 238
 1 815
 6 553
 7 141
  234
  297
  766
  796
Asia
1 023 690
3 878 998
11 052 894
11 674 477
 575 247
2 348 138
8 269 297
8 793 808
East and South-East Asia
 908 302
2 888 852
9 210 207
9 845 585
 557 764
2 059 331
7 365 627
7 823 232
East Asia
 650 700
1 738 193
5 704 180
5 976 425
 473 708
1 455 117
5 239 530
5 503 294
China
 193 348c
 586 882c
3 496 380
3 659 633c
 27 768c
 317 211
2 754 810
2 939 100c
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
  77c
  236c
  949c
  963c
..
..
..
..
Mongolia
  182
 8 445
 28 521
 30 697
..
 2 616
  907
 1 024
Macao, China
 2 801c
 13 603
 45 737
 47 955c
..
  550
 13 278
 14 856c
Hong Kong, China
 435 417
1 067 520
2 008 153
2 107 038
 379 285
 943 938
1 975 466
2 028 532
Taiwan Province of China
 18 875
 61 508b
 124 440b
 130 140c
 66 655
 190 803b
 495 068b
 519 782c
South-East Asia
 257 603
1 150 659
3 506 027
3 869 160
 84 056
 604 214
2 126 097
2 319 939
Brunei Darussalam
 3 868c
 4 140
 6 798
 6 753
..
..
..
..
Cambodia
 1 580
 9 026
 44 537
 48 420
  193
  331
 1 321
 1 473
Indonesia
 25 060
 160 735
 264 034
 285 690c
 6 940
 6 672
 104 886
 111 954c
Lao People’s Democratic Republic
  588c
 1 888c
 12 736c
 14 404c
  26c
  68c
  95c
  95c
Malaysia
 52 747
 101 620
 199 206
 201 736
 15 878
 96 964
 137 655
 144 361
Myanmar
 3 752c
 14 507
 38 427
 39 948
..
..
..
..


162
FDI inward stock
FDI outward stock
Region/economy
2000
2010
2022
2023
2000
2010
2022
2023
Philippines
 13 762c
 25 896b
 109 622d
 118 985d
 1 032c
 6 710b
 63 560d
 68 272d
Singapore
 110 570
 633 354b
2 326 998b
2 632 364b
 56 755
 466 723b
1 638 614b
1 792 289b
Thailand
 30 944
 142 334
 292 205
 290 870
 3 232
 24 418
 165 398
 187 893
Timor-Leste
..
  155
  993
 1 018
..
  94
  24
  7
Viet Nam
 14 730c
 57 004c
 210 471c
 228 971c
..
 2 234c
 14 545c
 13 595c
South Asia
 30 743
 269 143
 643 371
 675 576
 2 761
 100 441
 231 859
 245 241
Afghanistan
  17c
  963
 1 613c
 1 613c
..
  16
  165c
  165c
Bangladesh
 2 162
 6 072
 20 755
 20 549
  68
  98
  400
  385
Bhutan
  4c
  204
  419c
  438c
..
..
..
..
India
 16 339
 205 580
 510 703
 536 930
 1 733
 96 901
 222 628
 235 956
Iran (Islamic Republic of)
 2 597c
 28 953
 61 636c
 63 058c
  411c
 1 713c
 4 239c
 4 325c
Maldives
  128c
 1 114c
 6 718c
 7 479c
..
..
..
..
Nepal
  72c
  239
 2 187
 2 067
..
..
..
..
Pakistan
 6 919
 19 828
 25 292
 28 610
  489
 1 362
 2 894
 2 850
Sri Lanka
 2 505
 6 190
 14 047
 14 831
  60
  351
 1 534
 1 560
West Asia
 72 352
 619 425
 982 875
 931 257
 14 672
 172 001
 654 509
 707 394
Armenia
  513
 4 405
 7 124
 7 499
..
  150
  571
  618
Azerbaijan
 1 791
 14 253
 32 503
 32 745
  1
 5 790
 26 981
 28 717
Bahrain
 5 906
 15 154
 36 245
 43 084
 1 752
 7 883
 20 955
 22 068
Georgia
  762
 8 518
 22 329
 24 354
  118
  848
 3 249
 3 529
Iraq
 -48
 7 965
..
..
..
  632
 3 389
 3 598c
Jordan
 3 135
 21 899
 38 496
 39 534
  44
  473
  681
  745
Kuwait
  608
 11 884
 15 091
 16 648
 1 428
 28 189
 45 818
 50 246
Lebanon
 14 233
 44 285
 70 604
 71 260
  352
 6 831
 14 729
 14 802
Oman
 2 577c
 14 987
 51 324c
 56 069c
..
 2 796
 6 057c
 6 222c
Qatar
 1 912
 30 549
 27 610
 27 136c
  74
 12 995
 50 054
 49 862c
Saudi Arabia
 17 577b
 176 378b
 268 947b
 215 524b
 5 285c
 26 528
 187 068
 203 768
Syrian Arab Republic
 1 244
 9 939c
 10 743c
 10 743c
..
  5
  5c
  5c
Türkiye
 18 812
 188 308
 202 503
 156 537
 3 668
 22 509
 54 082
 60 041
United Arab Emirates
 1 069c
 63 869
 194 300
 224 987
 1 938c
 55 560
 239 880
 262 208
Yemen
  843c
 4 858c
 1 942c
 1 942c
  13c
  571c
  672c
  672c
State of Palestine
 1 418c
 2 176
 3 116
 3 195c
..
  241
  318
  292c
Central Asia
 12 293
 101 577
 216 441
 222 059
  49
 16 365
 17 303
 17 941
Kazakhstan
 10 078
 82 648
 154 419
 157 198
  16
 16 212
 16 792
 17 381
Kyrgyzstan
  432
 1 698
 3 506
 3 810
  33
  2
  26
  27
Tajikistan
  136
 1 226
 3 329
 3 333
..
..
  283
  323
Turkmenistan
  949c
 13 442c
 41 537c
 42 915c
..
..
..
..
Uzbekistan
  698c
 2 564
 13 649
 14 804
..
  152
  202
  210
Latin America and the Caribbeana
 338 557
1 550 274
2 653 078
2 953 403
 53 170
 417 359
 820 142
 928 378
South America
 186 425
1 085 464
1 727 712
1 898 677
 43 634
 288 295
 604 267
 677 146
Argentina
 67 601
 85 591
 116 698
 128 855
 21 141
 30 328
 45 781
 48 299
Bolivia (Plurinational State of)
 5 188
 6 890
 9 839
 9 633
  29
  8
  854
 1 167
Brazil
..
 640 330
 878 144
 997 570
..
 149 333
 299 369
 365 813
Chile
 45 753
 160 904
 250 062
 267 132
 11 154
 61 126
 134 744
 137 182
Colombia
 11 157
 82 991b
 234 231b
 254 329b
 2 989
 23 717b
 73 295b
 73 295b
Ecuador
 6 337
 11 858
 22 292
 22 664
..
..
..
..
Guyana
  756
 1 784
 17 074
 10 279
  1
  2
  78
  47
Paraguay
 1 003
 3 555
 7 666
 8 906
..
..
..
..
Peru
 11 062
 42 976
 129 221
 132 546
  505
 4 265
 10 124
 10 885
Suriname
..
..
 1 936
 1 853
..
..
  202
  213
Uruguay
 2 088
 12 479
 34 653
 38 326
  138
  345
 6 898
 6 091
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)
 35 480
 36 107
 25 897
 26 585c
 7 676
 19 171
 30 735
 32 169c
Central America
 139 768
 417 113
 843 099
 968 310
 8 534
 126 025
 208 553
 242 658
Belize
  294
 1 454
 2 679
 2 812
  42
  49
  76
  78
Costa Rica
 2 809
 15 936
 52 474
 55 165c
  22
 1 135
 3 758
 3 769c
El Salvador
 1 973
 7 284
 10 100
 10 841
  104
  1
 1 689
 1 720
Guatemala
 3 420
 4 554
 22 409
 24 080
  93
  452
 2 936
 3 618
Honduras
 1 392
 6 951
 18 557
 19 633
..
  867
 2 877
 3 132
Mexico
 121 691
 355 512
 662 718
 778 371
 8 273
 119 967
 190 122
 222 742
Nicaragua
 1 414
 4 681
 12 500
 13 730
..
  181
  818
  849
Panama
 6 775
 20 742
 61 662
 63 676
..
 3 374
 6 277
 6 751
Caribbeana
 12 365
 47 697
 82 267
 86 417
 1 002
 3 039
 7 322
 8 574
Antigua and Barbuda
..
..
 2 090b
 2 390b
..
..
  91b
  99b
Barbados
  308
 4 970
 8 544c
 8 769c
  41
 4 058
 3 858c
 3 866c
Dominica
..
..
  517b
  537b
..
..
  3b
  2b
Annex table 2	
FDI stock, by region and economy, 2000, 2010, 2022 and 2023
(Continued)


163
Annex table 2	
FDI stock, by region and economy, 2000, 2010, 2022 and 2023
(Concluded)
Source: UNCTAD, FDI/MNE database (www.unctad.org/fdistatistics).
a Excluding the financial centres in the Caribbean and special-purpose entities in reporting countries.
b Asset/liability basis.
c Estimates. 
d Directional basis calculated from asset/liability basis.
e Least developed countries include Afghanistan, Angola, Bangladesh, Benin, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, the Central African Republic, Chad, the 
Comoros, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Eritrea, Ethiopia, the Gambia, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Haiti, Kiribati, the Lao People’s Democratic 
Republic, Lesotho, Liberia, Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Mauritania, Mozambique, Myanmar, Nepal, the Niger, Rwanda, Sao Tome and Principe, Senegal, 
Sierra Leone, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Sudan, the Sudan, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tuvalu, Uganda, the United Republic of Tanzania, Yemen and Zambia.
f Landlocked developing countries include Afghanistan, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bhutan, the Plurinational State of Bolivia, Botswana, Burkina Faso, Burundi, 
the Central African Republic, Chad, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lesotho, Malawi, Mali, Mongolia, 
Nepal, the Niger, North Macedonia, Paraguay, the Republic of Moldova, Rwanda, South Sudan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Uzbekistan, Zambia and 
Zimbabwe.
g Small island developing States include Antigua and Barbuda, the Bahamas, Barbados, Cabo Verde, the Comoros, Dominica, the Dominican Republic, Fiji, 
Grenada, Jamaica, Kiribati, Maldives, the Marshall Islands, Mauritius, the Federated States of Micronesia, Nauru, Palau, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and Príncipe, Seychelles, Solomon Islands, Timor-Leste, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tuvalu and 
Vanuatu.
FDI inward stock
FDI outward stock
Region/economy
2000
2010
2022
2023
2000
2010
2022
2023
Dominican Republic
 1 673
 18 793
 51 982
 56 372
..
  743
  917
 1 277
Grenada
..
..
 1 990b
 2 153b
..
..
  99b
  112b
Haiti
  95
  625
 2 031
 2 063c
..
..
..
..
Jamaica
 3 317
 10 855
 18 332
 18 763c
  709
  176
 1 136
 1 131c
Saint Kitts and Nevis
..
..
 1 676b
 1 709b
..
..
  102b
  100b
Saint Lucia
..
..
 1 865b
 2 004b
..
..
  638b
  635b
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
..
..
 1 601b
 1 683b
..
..
  93b
  91b
Trinidad and Tobago
 7 280c
 17 424
 9 922
 9 218c
  293c
 2 119
 5 269
 6 167c
Anguilla
..
..
 1 382b
 1 528b
..
..
  94b
  96b
Aruba
 1 161
 4 567
 4 686
 4 508c
  675
  682
  760
  852c
Bahamas (the)
 3 865c
 13 160
 28 512
 29 904
  547c
 2 538
 7 572
 7 991
British Virgin Islands
 30 289c
 265 783c
1 028 356c
1 068 246c
 69 041c
 376 866c
 128 306c
 172 465c
Cayman Islands
 27 316c
 161 916c
 572 927c
 601 061c
 21 643c
 89 316c
 362 435c
 382 857c
Curaçao
..
  527
 1 081c
 1 236c
..
  32
 1 002c
 1 012c
Montserrat
..
..
  42b
  49b
..
..
..
..
Sint Maarten
..
  256
  190c
  224c
..
  10
  107c
  111c
Oceania
 1 854
 14 694
 31 593
 32 060
  56
  614
 6 055
 5 067
Cook Islands (the)
..
..
  181c
  187c
..
..
  14c
  14c
Fiji
  356
 2 963
 5 755
 5 855
  39
  47
  125
  163
Kiribati
..
  5
  11
  13c
..
  2
  1
  1c
Marshall Islands (the)
  20
  120
  170
  164
..
..
..
..
Palau
  173
  232
  858
  905c
..
..
..
..
Papua New Guinea
  935
 3 748
 4 878c
 4 454c
  1c
 -5c
 4 168c
 3 078c
Samoa
  77
  220
  318
  315
..
  14
  51
  51
Solomon Islands
  106c
  552
  652
  681c
..
  27
  77
  77c
Tonga
  19c
  220c
  108c
  132c
  14c
  58c
  50c
  50c
Tuvalu
..
  5
  9c
  9c
..
..
..
..
Vanuatu
  61c
  454
  636
  647c
..
  23
  29
  28c
French Polynesia
  146c
  442c
 1 110c
 1 104c
..
  144c
  354c
  368c
New Caledonia
 -41c
 5 726c
 16 908c
 17 595c
  2c
  304c
 1 187c
 1 237c
Memorandum
Least developed countries (LDCs)d
 35 969
 161 402
 429 955
 459 109
 2 604
 11 515
 22 890
 23 988
Landlocked developing countries (LLDCs)f
 33 630
 183 972
 444 859
 468 390
 1 025
 29 288
 53 514
 56 413
Small island developing States (SIDS)g
 18 806
 80 554
 155 252
 163 726
 1 906
 11 076
 19 815
 21 560


World Investment Report 2024
164
WIR past issues
WIR 2023:  Investing in Sustainable Energy for All
WIR 2022:  International Tax Reforms and Sustainable Investment
WIR 2021:  Investing in Sustainable Recovery
WIR 2020:  International Production Beyond the Pandemic
WIR 2019:  Special Economic Zones
WIR 2018:  Investment and New Industrial Policies
WIR 2017:  Investment and the Digital Economy
WIR 2016:  Investor Nationality: Policy Challenges
WIR 2015:  Reforming International Investment Governance
WIR 2014:  Investing in the SDGs: An Action Plan
WIR 2013:  Global Value Chains: Investment and Trade for Development
WIR 2012:  Towards a New Generation of Investment Policies
WIR 2011:  Non-Equity Modes of International Production and Development
WIR 2010:  Investing in a Low-Carbon Economy
WIR 2009:  Transnational Corporations, Agricultural Production and Development
WIR 2008:  Transnational Corporations and the Infrastructure Challenge
WIR 2007:  Transnational Corporations, Extractive Industries and Development
WIR 2006:  FDI from Developing and Transition Economies: Implications for Development
WIR 2005:  Transnational Corporations and the Internationalization of R&D
WIR 2004:  The Shift Towards Services
WIR 2003:  FDI Policies for Development: National and International Perspectives
WIR 2002:  Transnational Corporations and Export Competitiveness
WIR 2001:  Promoting Linkages
WIR 2000:  Cross-border Mergers and Acquisitions and Development
WIR 1999:  Foreign Direct Investment and the Challenge of Development
WIR 1998:  Trends and Determinants
WIR 1997:  Transnational Corporations, Market Structure and Competition Policy
WIR 1996:  Investment, Trade and International Policy Arrangements
WIR 1995:  Transnational Corporations and Competitiveness
WIR 1994:  Transnational Corporations, Employment and the Workplace
WIR 1993:  Transnational Corporations and Integrated International Production
WIR 1992:  Transnational Corporations as Engines of Growth
WIR 1991:  The Triad in Foreign Direct Investment