THE STATUTES OF THE REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE
ROAD TRAFFIC ACT 1961
2020 REVISED EDITION
This revised edition incorporates all amendments up to and
including 1 December 2021 and comes into operation on 31 December 2021.
Prepared and Published by
THE LAW REVISION COMMISSION
UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF
THE REVISED EDITION OF THE LAWS ACT 1983
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


Road Traffic Act 1961
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
Section
1.
Short title
2.
Interpretation
PART 1
REGISTRATION AND LICENSING OF VEHICLES
3.
Vehicles to which this Part applies
4.
Classification of motor vehicles
5.
Prohibition of vehicles not complying with rules as to
construction, etc.
5A.
No riding of personal mobility devices, etc., on roads
5B.
No riding of personal mobility device, etc., when towed by
motor vehicle
6.
Rules as to use and construction of vehicles
6A.
Alteration of fuel-measuring equipment
6B.
Leaving Singapore in motor vehicle with altered fuel‑measuring
equipment
6C.
Trials and use of autonomous motor vehicles, etc.
6D.
Exemptions and modified application of laws to approved trials
and special uses
6E.
Interfering with autonomous motor vehicle trial, etc.
7.
Savings
8.
Definition of licence
9.
Appointment of Registrar, Deputy Registrar and assistant
registrars
10.
Registration of vehicles
10A.
Vehicles not to be registered without permits issued by Registrar
10B.
Heavy vehicle not to be registered without valid vehicle parking
certificate
11.
Charge of tax on vehicles
11AA. Vehicular emissions tax
11A.
Restricted licences and supplementary licences
11B.
Taxes and fees payable upon loss of exempt status
12.
Vehicles licensed outside Singapore
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024
1
2020 Ed.


Section
13.
Commencement and duration of licences
14.
[Repealed]
15.
Using and keeping of vehicle without licence
16.
Presumption as to use or keeping of vehicle
17.
Continuous liability for duty
18.
Suit for recovery of tax
19.
Issue and exhibition of licences
20.
Number of persons carried on vehicle
21.
Late application for licence
22.
Surrender of licences
23.
Vehicle destroyed, exported, etc.
23A.
Duty of manufacturers and dealers to notify Registrar and
owners of safety-related defects in vehicles
24.
Alteration of vehicle or of its use
25.
Visitors’ vehicles
26.
Registration and identification marks
27.
Cancellation of registration
28.
General licences
28A.
Special purpose licences
29.
Offences in connection with registration and licensing of
vehicles
29A.
Court may order offender to pay arrears of taxes
30.
Power to seize and sell vehicles
31.
Limitation on bringing of proceedings for recovery of
over‑payment of tax
32.
[Repealed]
33.
Exemptions and application to vehicles belonging to
Government
33A.
[Repealed]
33B.
[Repealed]
34.
Rules for purposes of this Part
PART 1A
ROAD-USER CHARGES
34A.
Interpretation of this Part
34B.
Levying of road-user charge
34C.
Electronic or computerised or other charge collecting facilities
34D.
Rules for purposes of this Part
34E.
Registrar’s power of inspection and seizure, etc.
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
2
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


PART 2
LICENSING OF DRIVERS AND RIDERS
Division 1 — Driving of motor vehicles except
test‑needed‑to‑ride‑on‑road vehicles
Section
34F.
Application of Division
35.
Licensing of drivers, etc.
35AA. Court to order forfeiture of vehicle for person driving motor
vehicle without driving licence
35A.
Power of Deputy Commissioner of Police to revoke driving
licence
35B.
Licensee may make representations against revocation of
driving licence
35C.
Surrender of driving licence
36.
Prescribed test of competence to drive for grant of driving
licence
37.
Provisions as to physical fitness of applicants for driving
licences
38.
Recognition of foreign driving licences and driving permits
39.
Production of driving licences
40.
Possession of driving licence belonging to another person
41.
[Repealed]
42.
Disqualification for offences
42A.
Disqualification for failing to attend court
43.
Provisions as to disqualifications and suspensions
44.
Recording of particulars of convictions or disqualifications by
Deputy Commissioner of Police
45.
Power of Deputy Commissioner of Police to suspend driving
licence
46.
Licensee may make representations against suspension of
driving licence
47.
Surrender and return of driving licence
47A.
Effect of suspension of licence by Deputy Commissioner of
Police
47B.
Disqualification or suspension to continue in certain
circumstances
47C.
Immediate suspension of driving licence in certain
circumstances
47D.
Definition of serious injury
47E.
Penalties for offences under sections 47(5) and 47C(7)
Road Traffic Act 1961
3
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


Section
47F.
Prohibition order against holders of foreign driving licences
Division 2 — Competency test for riding
test‑needed‑to‑ride‑on‑road vehicle on road
47G.
Unauthorised riding of test‑needed‑to‑ride‑on‑road vehicle
47H.
Grant of competency test certificate for road‑only PAB
47I.
Validity of competency test certificate for road‑only PAB
47J.
Unlawful use of competency test certificate for road‑only PAB
47K.
Allowing untested rider, etc., on road
47L.
Production of competency test certificate
47M.
Production of false, etc., competency test certificate
47N.
Power to seize competency test certificate
Division 3 — Miscellaneous
48.
Rules for purposes of this Part
49.
Exemption
PART 3
LICENSING OF DRIVING INSTRUCTORS AND
DRIVING SCHOOLS
50.
Definition of driving instructor
51.
Licensing of driving instructors
52.
Application for instructor’s licence
53.
Revocation or suspension of instructor’s licence
54.
Licensing of driving school
55.
Application for driving school licence
56.
Cash deposit
57.
Revocation of driving school licence and forfeiture of deposit
58.
Notice to owner of driving school
59.
Refusal to grant or renew licence
60.
Appeal to Minister or Commissioner of Police
61.
Rules for purposes of this Part
PART 4
GENERAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO
ROAD TRAFFIC
Division 1 — Provisions as to driving and
offences in connection therewith
62.
Restriction on driving or riding by young persons
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
4
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


Section
62A.
Restriction on driving certain categories of heavy motor vehicles
63.
Rate of speed
64.
Reckless or dangerous driving
65.
Driving without due care or reasonable consideration
65AA. Court to order forfeiture of motor vehicle for reckless or
dangerous driving, etc.
65A.
Collision of heavy motor vehicles and public service vehicles
with buildings or structures
65B.
Use of mobile communication device while driving
66.
[Repealed]
67.
Driving while under influence of drink, etc.
67A.
Enhanced penalties for offenders with previous convictions
under certain sections
68.
Being in charge of motor vehicle when under influence of drink,
etc.
69.
Preliminary breath tests
70.
Provision of specimen for analysis
71.
Protection of hospital patients
71A.
Evidence in proceedings for offences under sections 67 and 68
71B.
Deputy Commissioner of Police may require registered medical
practitioner to send blood specimen for laboratory test
72.
Interpretation of sections 67 to 71B, etc.
73.
Pillion riding
74.
Drivers and pillion riders of motor cycles to wear protective
helmets
75.
Wearing of seat belts
76.
Sale of seat belts
77.
Requirements as to employment of drivers and attendants
78.
Restriction on number of trailers drawn
79.
Offence for driving heavy motor vehicle without police escort
80.
[Repealed]
81.
Duty to give information
82.
Amendment of Third Schedule
83.
Liability of owner of vehicle for specified offence
Division 2 — Accidents
84.
Duty to stop in case of accident
85.
Inquiry into accident
Road Traffic Act 1961
5
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


Division 3 — Miscellaneous
Section
86.
Power of Authority to authorise carriage of greater weights on
specified roads
87.
Power to order production of vehicle and licence
88.
Fee for inspection of vehicle
89.
Rules prescribing fees
90.
Test of satisfactory condition of vehicle
91.
Vehicle without test certificate cannot be used
92.
Power to inspect premises
93.
Power to examine vehicles
94.
Weighing of vehicles
95.
Power to seize vehicles
95A.
Power to immobilise or seize and detain vehicle belonging to
person against whom warrant of arrest is in force
95B.
Forfeiture by Authority of seized non‑compliant power‑assisted
bicycles, etc.
96.
Taking of motor vehicle without owner’s consent
97.
Restriction on persons taking hold of motor vehicle in motion
98.
Application to vehicles belonging to Government and armed
forces
PART 5
PUBLIC SERVICE VEHICLES
99.
Application of this Part
100.
Classification and descriptions of public service vehicles
101.
Prohibition of use of unlicensed public service vehicles
102.
Issue of public service vehicle licences
102A.
Modification of public service vehicle licence conditions
102B.
Appeal to Minister
103.
Maximum number of new public service vehicle licences
104.
Transfer of public service vehicle licences
105.
Markings of public service vehicles
106.
Rates of hire
107.
Responsibility of owner of public service vehicles
108.
Revocation and suspension of licences
109.
Public stands
110.
Vocational licences
110A.
General suspension of participating bookable drivers
110B.
Interpretation of sections 110A and 111
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
6
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


Section
111.
Rules for purposes of this Part
PART 6
PROVISIONS AS TO USE OF HIGHWAYS
112.
Issue by Minister of highway code for guidance of users of roads
113.
Power to restrict use of vehicles on specified roads
114.
Traffic regulation on special roads
114A.
Regulation of use of excluded vehicles on expressways
115.
Power of Authority temporarily to prohibit or restrict traffic on
roads
116.
Restriction of competitions and speed trials
117.
Court to order forfeiture of vehicle
118.
Power to prohibit or restrict use of vehicles on certain bridges
119.
Power to place traffic signs
120.
Duty to comply with traffic directions and traffic signs
121.
Pedestrian crossings
122.
Leaving vehicles in positions likely to cause danger, obstruction
or undue inconvenience
123.
Removal or immobilisation of abandoned or illegally parked
vehicles, etc.
123A.
Removal of stationary vehicles from expressways
124.
Provisions with respect to stretching of ropes, etc., across roads
125.
Application to vehicles and drivers in the service of Government
126.
Goods vehicles not to be used for passengers
127.
Power of arrest, stopping and detention
127A.
Power to require evidence of identity in certain cases
127B.
Screening, etc., bus passengers and entrants to bus interchanges
127C.
Bringing dangerous items into bus or bus interchange
128.
Police officer not in uniform to produce identification card
PART 7
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
129.
False statements, forging of licences, etc.
130.
Presumptions
131.
Offences and penalties
131A.
Service of summonses and other documents
131B.
Offences by bodies corporate, etc.
132.
[Repealed]
Road Traffic Act 1961
7
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


Section
133.
Traffic ticket notice
134.
Forms of notices for purposes of section 133
135.
Composition of offences
136.
Payment for licences by cheque
137.
Moneys received under this Act
138.
Registrar and Deputy Commissioner of Police to be informed of
convictions
139.
Provisions as to evidence
139AA. Court may take into account compounded offences for purposes
of sentencing
139A.
Authentication of documents
140.
General provisions as to rules
141.
Rules to be presented to Parliament
142.
Power to exempt
142A.
Designation of Minister of State and Parliamentary Secretary to
hear appeals
142B.
Authorisation of security officers to regulate traffic
143.
Regulation of traffic in connection with events, etc.
144.
Property left in public service vehicles
145.
Protection from personal liability
First Schedule — Specified Acts
Second Schedule — Classification and descriptions of
public service vehicles
Third Schedule — Specified offences
An Act for the regulation of road traffic and the use of vehicles and
the user of roads and for other purposes connected therewith.
[4/2006; 10/2017]
[1 January 1963: Sections 13 to 21 ;
23 November 1963: Sections 1 to 12, 22 to 78 and
80 to 90 ;
8 August 1985: Section 91, renumbered as section 147
in the 1985 Reprint of the Road Traffic Act ]
Short title
1. This Act is the Road Traffic Act 1961.
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
8
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


Interpretation
2.—(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires —
“Authority” means the Land Transport Authority of Singapore
established under the Land Transport Authority of Singapore
Act 1995;
“automated
vehicle
technology”
means
any
particular
technology that —
(a) relates
to
the
design,
construction
or
use
of
autonomous motor vehicles; or
(b) otherwise relates to advances in the design or
construction of autonomous motor vehicles;
“autonomous motor vehicle” means a motor vehicle equipped
wholly or substantially with an autonomous system (also
commonly known as a driverless vehicle), and includes a
trailer drawn by such a motor vehicle;
“autonomous system”, for a motor vehicle, means a system that
enables the operation of the motor vehicle without the active
physical control of, or monitoring by, a human operator;
“bicycle” means a vehicle that —
(a) has 2 wheels held one behind the other in a frame;
(b) is steered by handlebars attached to the front wheel;
(c) has pedals; and
(d) is built to be propelled solely by human power;
“carriage of goods” includes the haulage of goods;
“cart” includes a wagon, handcart or trolley used or constructed
for the carriage of goods;
“Commissioner of Police” means the public officer appointed
under section 6(1) of the Police Force Act 2004;
“company” means any company as defined in the Companies
Act 1967 and includes any company to which Division 2 of
Part 11 of that Act applies, any company formed pursuant to
any other Act or by royal charter or letters patent, a limited
Road Traffic Act 1961
9
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


liability partnership and any other body corporate formed or
incorporated by or under any written law;
“competency test certificate”, for a class or description of
test‑needed‑to‑ride‑on‑road vehicle, means —
(a) for any road-only PAB — a certificate granted under
section 47H(1) certifying that an individual has
passed the prescribed test of competence for that
class or description of power‑assisted bicycle; or
(b) for any other test‑needed-to‑ride‑on‑road vehicle,
which is either a bicycle or power‑assisted bicycle —
a certificate granted under section 23F of the Active
Mobility Act 2017 certifying that an individual has
passed the test of competence prescribed under that
Act for that class or description of bicycle or
power‑assisted bicycle;
“Deputy Commissioner of Police”, in relation to any provision
of this Act or rules or any other subsidiary legislation made
under this Act, means the Deputy Commissioner of Police
designated by the Commissioner of Police for the purposes of
that provision, and includes any police officer who —
(a) is not below the rank of sergeant; and
(b) is
authorised
under
the
hand
of
the
Deputy
Commissioner of Police for the purposes of that
provision, to exercise the powers of that Deputy
Commissioner of Police;
“de‑registered vehicle” means a vehicle the registration of which
has been cancelled by the Registrar under section 27(1);
“diameter”, in relation to the wheel of a vehicle or trailer, means
the overall diameter measured between the 2 opposite points
on the surface of a tyre which are furthest apart;
“driver” —
(a) in relation to a trailer, includes a driver of a vehicle by
which the trailer is drawn, and “drive” is to be
construed accordingly;
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
10
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(b) where a separate person acts as a steersman of a
motor vehicle, includes that person as well as any
other person engaged in the driving of the vehicle,
and “drive” is to be construed accordingly; and
(c) includes the rider of a bicycle and any person
propelling a tricycle or trishaw or pushing or
pulling a cart, and “drive” is to be construed
accordingly;
“driving licence” means a licence to drive a motor vehicle
granted under the provisions of Part 2;
“exempt ride‑hail service operator” has the meaning given by
the Point‑to‑Point Passenger Transport Industry Act 2019;
“fare”, in relation to a public service vehicle, includes —
(a) the amount of any rate, fee, levy and charge and any
other valuable consideration (however described) for
a journey by the public service vehicle; and
(b) the provision of, or arrangements for, a discount,
concession, allowance, rebate or credit applying in
relation to any amount in paragraph (a);
“foreign driving licence” means a driving licence or permit (not
being a provisional driving licence or permit) issued by a
competent authority in another country between which and
Singapore there is in force a treaty for the recognition of
driving licences or permits issued in the countries which are
parties to the treaty;
“goods” includes goods or burden of any description;
“goods vehicle” means a motor vehicle constructed or adapted
for use for the carriage of goods or a trailer so constructed or
adapted;
“Minister” means —
(a) except as provided in paragraphs (b) and (c), the
Minister charged with the responsibility for land
transport;
Road Traffic Act 1961
11
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(b) for the purposes of the whole of Parts 2 and 3 and
sections 75(1), 82, 112(1), (3) and (4), 113(1) and (2),
114(1), 116(2), 121(2) and 143(3) and (11), the
Minister charged with the responsibility for law and
order; and
(c) for the purposes of sections 131B(7), 135(2), 140(1)
and (2), 142 and 142A(1), the Minister charged with
the responsibility for land transport or the Minister
charged with the responsibility for law and order, as
appropriate;
“mobility scooter” and “motorised wheelchair” have the
meanings given by the Active Mobility Act 2017;
“motor fuel” has the meaning given by the Customs Act 1960;
“motor vehicle” means a vehicle that —
(a) is propelled wholly or partly by a motor or by any
means other than human or animal power; and
(b) is used or intended to be used on any road;
“on‑demand passenger transport service” and “on‑demand ride
booking
service”
have
the
meanings
given
by
the
Point‑to‑Point Passenger Transport Industry Act 2019;
“outsourced enforcement officer”, in relation to any provision of
this Act or subsidiary legislation made under this Act, means
an individual who —
(a) is appointed under section 11 of the Land Transport
Authority of Singapore Act 1995;
(b) is authorised by or under that Act to exercise any
powers under any provision of this Act or subsidiary
legislation made under this Act, as the case may be;
and
(c) is acting within that authorisation;
“owner”, in relation to a vehicle which is the subject of a hiring
agreement or hire purchase agreement, means the person in
possession of the vehicle under that agreement;
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
12
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


“paid driver” means a person who drives a motor vehicle in
return for a salary or other remuneration;
“park” means to bring a motor vehicle or a trailer to a stationary
position and cause it to wait for any purpose other than that of
immediately taking up or setting down persons, goods or
luggage;
“parking place” has the meaning given by the Parking Places
Act 1974;
“participate”, in relation to an autonomous motor vehicle trial
regulated under section 6C, means —
(a) undertake the trial; or
(b) operate an autonomous motor vehicle in the trial;
“personal mobility device” has the meaning given by the Active
Mobility Act 2017;
“police officer” includes any person employed for police duties
in the Singapore Police Force constituted under the Police
Force Act 2004;
“power‑assisted bicycle” means a bicycle that —
(a) is equipped with an electric motor; and
(b) may be propelled by human power or by the electric
motor with which it is equipped, or by both;
“prescribed test of competence”, in relation to riding a
test‑needed‑to‑ride‑on‑road vehicle on a road, means —
(a) for any road‑only PAB — a test of subject matter
prescribed by rules made under section 48 to test an
individual’s knowledge of safe driving or riding
practices and law on public paths and roads; or
(b) for any other test‑needed-to‑ride‑on‑road vehicle —
a test of subject matter prescribed by regulations
made under the Active Mobility Act 2017 to test, for
the purposes of Division 2A of Part 3 of that Act, an
individual’s knowledge of safe driving or riding
practices and law on public paths and roads;
Road Traffic Act 1961
13
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


“public place” means any place or premises, whether privately
owned or not, to which the general public or any section of
the general public is permitted to have access, whether on
payment or otherwise;
“public service vehicle” means a vehicle used or kept for use for
the carriage, for hire or reward, of —
(a) in the case of a motor car which does not ply for hire
on any road but is hired under a contract, express or
implied, for the use of the car as a whole, the driver of
the car or any passenger; or
(b) in any other case, any passenger,
but excludes any vehicle constructed for use on fixed rails or
specially prepared ways;
“registered medical practitioner” has the meaning given by the
Medical Registration Act 1997;
“Registrar” means the Registrar of Vehicles or the Deputy
Registrar or an assistant registrar appointed under section 9;
“replacement vehicle” means a vehicle to which a permit issued
under section 10A for another vehicle has been transferred
pursuant to rules made under section 10A(4)(ha);
“ride‑hail service” has the meaning given by the Point‑to‑Point
Passenger Transport Industry Act 2019;
“road” means any public road and any other road to which the
public has access, and includes —
(a) any road within Pulau Bukom;
(b) any road within the limits of any installation of the
Singapore Armed Forces declared by the Minister by
notification in the Gazette to be an installation to
which this Act applies;
(c) any bridge over which a road passes; and
(d) any road, to which the public does not have access,
which the Minister charged with the responsibility
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
14
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


for transport prescribes, by notification in the
Gazette, to be a road to which this Act applies;
“road‑only PAB” means a power‑assisted bicycle that —
(a) is within a class or description that is prescribed in
rules made under section 48 for the purposes of
section 47G(1); and
(b) is not intended for use on any public path within the
meaning of the Active Mobility Act 2017;
“rules” means rules made under this Act;
“security officer” means a licensed security officer within the
meaning of the Private Security Industry Act 2007 who is
authorised by the Deputy Commissioner of Police or the
Authority (as appropriate) under section 142B to regulate
traffic under any provision of this Act;
“street‑hail service” has the meaning given by the Point‑to‑Point
Passenger Transport Industry Act 2019;
“street‑hail service licence” means a street‑hail service licence
granted
under
the
Point‑to‑Point
Passenger
Transport
Industry Act 2019 to provide a street‑hail service;
“street‑hail service licensee” means a person to whom a
street‑hail
service
licence
is
granted
(on renewal
or
otherwise) or deemed granted under the Point‑to‑Point
Passenger Transport Industry Act 2019;
“test authority”, for a class or description of a road‑only PAB,
means an individual designated by the Minister charged with
the responsibility for law and order to be a test authority for
that class or description of test‑needed‑to‑ride‑on‑road
vehicle;
“test‑needed‑to‑ride‑on‑road vehicle” means —
(a) a bicycle or power‑assisted bicycle within a class or
description of bicycle or power‑assisted bicycle that
is prescribed for the purposes of Division 2A of Part 3
of the Active Mobility Act 2017; or
Road Traffic Act 1961
15
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(b) a road‑only PAB;
“trailer” means a vehicle drawn by a motor vehicle;
“tricycle” means a vehicle with 3 wheels that —
(a) has pedals;
(b) is built to be propelled solely by human power by use
of those pedals; and
(c) is constructed or adapted for the carriage of goods
only;
“use” means use on a road;
“vehicle” means any vehicle whether mechanically propelled or
otherwise;
“weight unladen” means the weight of a vehicle inclusive of the
body and all parts (the heavier being taken where alternative
bodies or parts are used) which are necessary to or ordinarily
used with the vehicle when working on a road but exclusive
of any driver or attendant.
[24/2010; 25/2011; 7/2012; 37/2012; 23/2013; 28/2014;
31/2015; 3/2017; 10/2017; 38/2018; 2/2019; 20/2019;
12/2021]
(2) For the purposes of this Act, except section 38, a person is a
resident of Singapore, or is deemed to have taken up residence in
Singapore, if the person resides in Singapore for a continuous period
of 6 months and any temporary period or periods of absence during
that period of 6 months is immaterial.
[24/2010]
PART 1
REGISTRATION AND LICENSING OF VEHICLES
Vehicles to which this Part applies
3. Subject to section 33, this Part applies to all vehicles and trailers.
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
16
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


Classification of motor vehicles
4.—(1) For the purposes of this Act, motor vehicles are divided into
the following classes:
(a) heavy locomotives; that is to say, motor vehicles which are
not constructed themselves to carry any load (other than
water, fuel, accumulators and other equipment and
materials used for the purpose of propulsion, loose tools
and loose equipment) and the weight of which unladen
exceeds 11,500 kilograms;
(b) light locomotives; that is to say, motor vehicles which are
not constructed themselves to carry any load (other than
any of the articles specified in paragraph (a)) and the
weight of which unladen does not exceed 11,500 kilograms
but exceeds 7,250 kilograms;
(c) motor tractors; that is to say, motor vehicles which are not
constructed themselves to carry any load (other than any of
the articles specified in paragraph (a)) and the weight of
which unladen does not exceed 7,250 kilograms;
(d) heavy motor cars; that is to say, motor vehicles (not being
vehicles classified under this section as motor cars) which
are constructed themselves to carry a load or passengers
and the weight of which unladen exceeds 2,500 kilograms;
(e) motor cars; that is to say, motor vehicles (not being
vehicles classified under this section as motor cycles)
which are constructed themselves to carry a load or
passengers and the weight of which unladen —
(i) does not exceed 3,000 kilograms in the case of motor
vehicles which are —
(A) constructed
solely
for
the
carriage
of
passengers and their effects;
(B) adapted to carry not more than 7 passengers
exclusive of the driver; and
(C) fitted with tyres of the prescribed type; and
(ii) in any other case does not exceed 2,500 kilograms;
Road Traffic Act 1961
17
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(f) motor cycles and power‑assisted bicycles; that is to say,
motor vehicles with less than 4 wheels and the weight of
which unladen does not exceed 400 kilograms;
(g) invalid carriages; that is to say, motor vehicles which are
specially designed and constructed and not merely adapted
for the use of persons suffering from some physical
disability and are used solely by those persons and the
weight of which unladen does not exceed 250 kilograms.
[3/2017]
(2) The Authority may make rules for subdividing any class of
motor vehicles whether according to weight, construction, nature of
tyres, use or otherwise and making different provision with respect to
each subdivision and varying in respect of any class the maximum or
minimum weight fixed by this section.
(3) Any reference in this Part to a class of motor vehicles includes a
reference to any subdivision of such a class.
(4) For the purposes of this Part —
(a) in any case where a motor vehicle is so constructed that a
trailer may by partial superimposition be attached to the
vehicle in such manner as to cause a substantial part of the
weight of the trailer to be borne by the vehicle, that vehicle
is deemed to be a vehicle itself constructed to carry a load;
(b) in the case of a motor vehicle fitted with a crane, dynamo,
welding plant or other special appliance or apparatus
which is a permanent or essentially permanent fixture, the
appliance or apparatus is not to be deemed to constitute a
load but is deemed to form part of the vehicle; and
(c) a side-car attached to a motor cycle is, if it complies with
the prescribed conditions, to be regarded as forming part of
the vehicle to which it is attached and not as being a trailer.
Prohibition of vehicles not complying with rules as to
construction, etc.
5.—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, it is not lawful to use a
vehicle or trailer which does not comply with the rules as to
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
18
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


construction, weight and equipment applicable to the class or
description of vehicles to which the vehicle or trailer belongs.
(2) The Authority may, by notification in the Gazette, authorise,
subject to any restrictions and conditions that may be specified in the
notification, the use of special vehicles or trailers or special types of
vehicles or trailers which are constructed either for special purposes
or for tests or trials and of new or improved types of vehicles or
trailers whether wheeled or wheel-less.
(3) The Authority may at any time revoke, vary or amend a
notification made under this section.
(3A) Subsections (2) and (3) do not apply to or in relation to the use
of wholly or substantially autonomous motor vehicles operated with
automated vehicle technology.
[10/2017]
(4) Subject to this section, it is not lawful to sell or to supply or to
offer to sell or supply a vehicle or trailer for delivery in such a
condition that the use thereof in that condition would be unlawful by
virtue of this section.
(5) A person who alters (whether in the course of repair or
otherwise) a vehicle or trailer so as to render its condition such that
the use of the vehicle or trailer in that condition would be unlawful by
virtue of this section, shall be guilty of an offence.
[10/2017]
(5A) It is presumed, until the contrary is proved, that a person alters
(whether in the course of repair or otherwise) a vehicle or trailer as to
render its condition such that the use of the vehicle or trailer in that
condition would be unlawful by virtue of this section (called in this
section non‑compliant) if it is proved —
(a) that the accused had possession of the vehicle or trailer;
(b) that the vehicle or trailer was not non‑compliant when the
accused acquired possession of it; and
(c) that at that time or soon after the vehicle or trailer (as the
case may be) ceased to be in the accused’s possession, the
vehicle or trailer is non‑compliant.
[10/2017]
Road Traffic Act 1961
19
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(5B) In this section, “alter” includes causing or authorising a person
to alter, and offering to alter.
[10/2017]
(6) If a vehicle or trailer is used or is sold, supplied, offered or
altered in contravention of this section, any person who so uses the
vehicle or trailer or causes or permits the vehicle or trailer to be so
used or so sells, supplies, offers or alters it or causes or permits it to be
so sold, supplied, offered or altered shall be guilty of an offence.
(7) Any person who is guilty of an offence under subsection (5) or
(6) shall be liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding $5,000 or to
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 3 months or to both and, in the
case of a second or subsequent conviction, to a fine not exceeding
$10,000 or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 6 months or to
both.
[10/2017]
(7AA) Despite subsection (7), where the vehicle involved in an
offence is a power-assisted bicycle, then a person who is guilty of an
offence under subsection (5) or (6) shall be liable on conviction —
(a) where the person is an individual —
(i) to a fine not exceeding $20,000 or to imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 24 months or to both; but
(ii) where the individual is a repeat offender, to a fine not
exceeding $40,000 or to imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 48 months or to both; or
(b) in any other case —
(i) to a fine not exceeding $40,000; but
(ii) where the person is a repeat offender, to a fine not
exceeding $80,000.
[9/2020]
(7A) Where in any proceedings relating to an offence under
subsection (6), it is proved to the satisfaction of the court that a
vehicle or trailer is used or caused or permitted to be used in
contravention of this section, the court may, upon the application of
the Public Prosecutor, make an order for the vehicle or trailer to be
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
20
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


detained for a period not exceeding 3 months (called in this section
the detention period) by the Registrar or an authorised officer.
[37/2012]
(7B) Any vehicle or trailer detained pursuant to subsection (7A)
must be kept at such place of safety as may be determined by the
Registrar or an authorised officer.
[37/2012]
(7C) The Registrar or an authorised officer shall not be liable for —
(a) any damage to or loss of a vehicle or trailer during the
period when the vehicle or trailer is in the possession of the
Registrar or the authorised officer which is not wilfully or
negligently caused by the Registrar or the authorised
officer in the exercise of his or her powers under this
section; or
(b) any depreciation in the value of the vehicle or trailer
because of the detention of the vehicle or trailer.
[37/2012]
(7D) At the end of the detention period of any vehicle or trailer, the
Registrar or an authorised officer must, as soon as is reasonably
practicable, notify the person in whose name the vehicle or trailer is
registered that the vehicle or trailer is released from detention and of
the procedure by which the person may secure the release of the
vehicle or trailer.
[37/2012]
(7E) If the vehicle or trailer is not claimed by the person notified
under subsection (7D), or another person authorised in writing by that
person, within 3 calendar days after the date of its release as stated in
the notice in subsection (7D), the person notified under that
subsection shall be liable for all charges reasonably incurred by the
Registrar or an authorised officer in storing the vehicle or trailer in the
place of safety thereafter.
[37/2012]
(7F) Any person who, without lawful authority, removes or causes
to be removed any vehicle or trailer from the place of safety at which
it is detained during its detention period shall be guilty of an offence.
[37/2012]
Road Traffic Act 1961
21
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(7G) If any vehicle or trailer detained pursuant to subsection (7A) is
not claimed by or on behalf of the person notified under
subsection (7D), the Registrar or an authorised officer may, after
giving one month’s notice in the Gazette of his or her intention to do
so, sell the vehicle or trailer by public auction or otherwise dispose of
the vehicle or trailer in any manner that he or she thinks fit.
[37/2012]
(7H) The proceeds (if any) from the sale or disposal of any such
vehicle or trailer under subsection (7G) must be applied —
(a) firstly, in payment of any licence fee which may be due in
respect of the vehicle or trailer;
(b) secondly, in payment of expenses occasioned by the sale or
disposal and any charges reasonably incurred in storing,
detaining or otherwise carrying out the provisions of this
section; and
(c) thirdly, any damage caused to any property of the
Government by the unlawful use of the vehicle or trailer,
and the surplus (if any) must be paid to the person in whose name the
vehicle or trailer was registered at the time of its sale or disposal or, if
not claimed by such person within 12 months after the date of the sale
or disposal, is forfeited to the Government.
[37/2012]
(7I) The Registrar or an authorised officer may reject any transfer
of ownership or cancellation of registration of a vehicle or trailer if
the Registrar or the authorised officer has reason to believe that any
person is guilty of an offence under subsection (6).
[37/2012]
(8) In any proceedings for an offence under subsection (6) in
respect of the sale, supply, offer or alteration of a vehicle or trailer, it
is a defence to any prosecution for an offence under this section, if the
accused proves, on a balance of probabilities, that —
(a) a contract or arrangement has been entered into, or an
understanding has been arrived at, for the non‑compliant
vehicle or trailer to be exported (whether or not the accused
is a party to that contract, arrangement or understanding);
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
22
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(b) the accused sells the non‑compliant vehicle or trailer in the
course of, or for the purpose of, the non‑compliant vehicle
or trailer being exported; and
(c) the accused does not offer that non‑compliant vehicle or
trailer for sale in Singapore and the sale is not a retail sale.
[3/2017]
(9) It is also a defence to any prosecution for an offence under this
section, if the accused proves, on a balance of probabilities, that —
(a) the accused had received from the person to whom the
non‑compliant vehicle or trailer was sold, evidence
purporting to show that the person does not intend to use
the vehicle or trailer on any road; and
(b) it was reasonable to, and the accused did accept, that
evidence as correct.
[3/2017]
(10) In this section —
“authorised officer” means any employee of the Authority who
is duly authorised by the Registrar in writing to act under this
section;
“non‑compliant vehicle or trailer” means a vehicle or trailer
which does not comply with the rules as to construction,
weight and equipment applicable to the class or description of
vehicles to which the vehicle or trailer belongs;
“repeat offender”, for an offence under subsection (5) or (6)
involving
a
power-assisted
bicycle
read
with
subsection (7AA), means a person who —
(a) is convicted, or found guilty, of such an offence
(called the current offence); and
(b) has been convicted or found guilty (whether before,
on or after 3 April 2020) of an offence under
subsection
(5)
or
(6)
(whether
involving
a
power‑assisted bicycle) on at least one other earlier
occasion within the period of 5 years immediately
Road Traffic Act 1961
23
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


before the date on which the person is convicted or
found guilty of the current offence.
[3/2017; 9/2020]
No riding of personal mobility devices, etc., on roads
5A.—(1) An individual must not ride a personal mobility device or
drive a mobility scooter or motorised wheelchair on a road at any
time.
[3/2017; 38/2018]
(2) However, subsection (1) does not apply to an individual who is
crossing a road in or on a personal mobility device, a mobility scooter
or a motorised wheelchair —
(a) if the individual crosses the road by the shortest safe route,
and does not stay on the road longer than necessary to cross
the road safely; or
(b) if —
(i) there is, in the case of a rider of a personal mobility
device, an obstruction on a shared path or footpath
(within
the
meaning
of
the
Active
Mobility
Act 2017) adjacent to the road (called an adjacent
area), or there is an obstruction on any public path
(within the meaning of that Act) adjacent to the road
(also called an adjacent area) in the case of a driver of
a mobility scooter or a motorised wheelchair;
(ii) it is impracticable to travel on the adjacent area; and
(iii) the individual travels no more than reasonably
necessary along the road to avoid the obstruction.
[3/2017; 38/2018]
(3) An individual who contravenes subsection (1) shall be guilty of
an offence and shall be liable on conviction —
(a) to a fine not exceeding $2,000 or to imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 3 months or to both; and
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
24
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(b) if the individual is a repeat offender, to a fine not
exceeding $5,000 or to imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 6 months or to both.
[3/2017]
No riding of personal mobility device, etc., when towed by
motor vehicle
5B.—(1) An individual must not ride a personal mobility device or
drive a mobility scooter or motorised wheelchair on a road at any time
while the individual riding the personal mobility device, or driving
the mobility scooter or motorised wheelchair, is towed by a motor
vehicle or is otherwise holding on to a motor vehicle.
[38/2018]
(2) An individual who contravenes subsection (1) shall be guilty of
an offence and shall be liable on conviction —
(a) to a fine not exceeding $2,000 or to imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 3 months or to both; and
(b) if the individual is a repeat offender, to a fine not
exceeding $5,000 or to imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 6 months or to both.
[3/2017]
Rules as to use and construction of vehicles
6.—(1) The Authority may make rules generally as to the use of
vehicles and trailers, their construction and equipment and the
conditions under which they may be used and, in particular, may
make rules —
(a) to regulate the width, height, wheel base, length and
overhang of vehicles and trailers and the load carried
thereby, the diameter of wheels and the width, nature and
condition of tyres of vehicles and trailers and to prohibit
the use of any tyres likely to cause damage to the roads;
(b) to prohibit excessive noise due to the design or condition of
the motor vehicle or trailer or the loading thereof;
(c) to regulate the maximum weight unladen of heavy
locomotives and heavy motor cars and the maximum
Road Traffic Act 1961
25
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


weight laden of motor vehicles and trailers and the
maximum weight to be transmitted to the road or any
specified area thereof by a motor vehicle or trailer of any
class or description or by any part or parts of the vehicle or
trailer in contact with the road and the conditions under
which the weights may be required to be tested;
(d) to prescribe the particulars to be marked on vehicles and
trailers;
(e) to specify the number and nature of springs and brakes on
vehicles and trailers and to secure that springs, brakes,
silencers and steering gear are efficient and kept in proper
working order and for empowering any person or classes of
persons named or described in those rules to test and
inspect those springs, brakes, silencers and steering gear on
a road or, subject to the consent of the occupier of the
premises, on any premises;
(f) to regulate the appliances to be fitted —
(i) for signalling the approach of a vehicle or enabling
the driver of a motor vehicle to become aware of the
approach of another vehicle from the rear;
(ii) for intimating any intended change of speed or
direction of a motor vehicle; or
(iii) for measuring or indicating or measuring and
indicating the amount of motor fuel in any fuel
tank of a motor vehicle,
(f) and to regulate or prohibit the use of any such appliance
and to secure that they are efficient and kept in proper
working order;
(g) to regulate the lights to be carried by vehicles and trailers
whether in respect of the nature of such lights, the positions
in which they must be fixed and the periods during which
they must be lighted or otherwise;
(h) to prescribe the safety equipment to be installed in
vehicles;
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
26
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(i) to control, in connection with the use of a motor vehicle,
the emission of smoke, oily substance, ashes, water, steam,
visible vapour, noxious fumes, sparks, cinders, gas or grit;
(j) to regulate the towing or drawing of vehicles by motor
vehicles and the manner of attachments;
(k) to prohibit in connection with the use of a motor vehicle the
use of any appliance or the commission of any act which is
likely to cause annoyance or danger;
(l) to regulate the number of trailers that may be attached in
train to any motor vehicle, the manner of attachment and
the manner in which the trailers are kept under control and
the maximum weight thereof;
(m) to prescribe the number of persons to be employed in
driving or attending motor vehicles or trailers and to
regulate the duties and conduct of those persons;
(n) to prescribe a maximum speed for motor vehicles of any
class or description and to provide for exemption in special
cases; and
(o) to regulate or prohibit either generally or in specified areas
or roads and either at all times or between specified hours
the use of horns or other warning appliances.
[25/2011]
(2) The Authority may make different rules for different classes or
descriptions of vehicles for the same class or description of vehicles
in different circumstances.
(3) The Authority may by such rules confer on the Registrar or an
authorised officer a discretion to waive, in any particular case, the
operation of any rules made under this section subject to any
conditions that the Registrar or the authorised officer may impose.
[37/2012]
(4) In this section, “authorised officer” means any employee of the
Authority, or any other person, who is duly authorised by the
Registrar in writing to carry out any particular function or to exercise
any particular power under any rules made under this section.
[37/2012]
Road Traffic Act 1961
27
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


Alteration of fuel-measuring equipment
6A.—(1) A person must not alter the fuel-measuring equipment of
a motor vehicle for the purpose of preventing the fuel-measuring
equipment from duly measuring or indicating the quantity of motor
fuel in any fuel supply tank of the motor vehicle.
[25/2011]
(2) Any person who contravenes subsection (1) shall be guilty of an
offence and shall be liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding
$5,000 or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 3 months.
(3) Where there is found any artificial or mechanical means which,
either alone or in conjunction with additional artificial or mechanical
means not found, could be used for altering or facilitating the
alteration of the index of the fuel-measuring equipment, or which
would make the fuel-measuring equipment false or unjust in
measuring or indicating the quantity of motor fuel in any fuel
supply tank of that motor vehicle, the person having custody or
control of the motor vehicle at the time the artificial or mechanical
means are found is presumed, until the contrary is proved, to have
abetted
the
alteration
of
the
fuel-measuring
equipment
in
contravention of subsection (1).
[25/2011]
(4) In this section and section 6B, “fuel-measuring equipment”, in
relation to a motor vehicle, means any instrument or appliance, or a
combination of instruments or appliances, capable of or constructed
for measuring or indicating or measuring and indicating the quantity
of motor fuel in any fuel supply tank of the motor vehicle and
includes in particular any fuel gauge or fuel sensoring device.
[25/2011; 23/2013]
Leaving Singapore in motor vehicle with altered
fuel‑measuring equipment
6B.—(1) Any person, being in charge of a motor vehicle, who
leaves or attempts to leave Singapore in the motor vehicle knowing
that the fuel‑measuring equipment of the motor vehicle has been
altered for the purpose of preventing it from duly measuring or
indicating the quantity of motor fuel in any fuel supply tank of the
motor vehicle shall be guilty of an offence and shall be liable on
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
28
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


conviction to a fine not exceeding $5,000 or to imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 3 months.
[23/2013]
(2) In proceedings for an offence under subsection (1), it is
presumed until the contrary is proved —
(a) that the person in charge of a motor vehicle has attempted
to leave Singapore in the motor vehicle if the motor vehicle
is driven past the Customs gantry before the departure bay
of the Immigration Checkpoint at any place prescribed for
the purposes of section 136 of the Customs Act 1960; and
(b) that the person in charge of a motor vehicle knew that the
fuel‑measuring equipment of the motor vehicle has been
altered for the purpose of preventing it from duly
measuring or indicating the quantity of motor fuel in the
fuel supply tank if there is found in the motor vehicle or on
him or her, at the time he or she leaves or attempts to leave
Singapore in the motor vehicle, any artificial or mechanical
means which, either alone or in conjunction with additional
artificial or mechanical means (whether or not found) —
(i) could be used for altering or facilitating the alteration
of the index of the fuel‑measuring equipment of the
motor vehicle; or
(ii) would make the fuel‑measuring equipment false or
unjust in measuring or indicating the quantity of
motor fuel in any fuel supply tank of the motor
vehicle.
[23/2013]
Trials and use of autonomous motor vehicles, etc.
6C.—(1) The Minister may make rules to —
(a) provide for the regulation by the Authority of —
(i) the undertaking of any trial of automated vehicle
technology or an autonomous motor vehicle on any
road (called in this section and sections 6D and 6E an
approved trial), despite section 5; or
Road Traffic Act 1961
29
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(ii) the use on a road of an autonomous motor vehicle
(called in this section and sections 6D and 6E an
approved special use), despite section 5;
(b) require the person authorised under the rules to undertake
the approved trial or carry out the approved special use
(called in this section and section 6D the specified
person) —
(i) to have in place liability insurance before the
approved trial or approved special use starts, and
to ensure that it is in force at all times during the
period of the approved trial or approved special use;
or
(ii) to deposit with the Authority a security of a type, and
of an amount not lower than an amount, prescribed in
those rules;
(c) require the specified person to cause to be published (at the
person’s cost), before the approved trial or approved
special use starts, a notice about the approved trial or
approved special use, in a manner as will secure adequate
publicity for the approved trial or approved special use,
including —
(i) the area or areas of Singapore in which the trial or
special use is approved to be undertaken or carried
out;
(ii) the period during which the trial or special use is
approved to take place; and
(iii) the name of each person participating in the
approved trial or who may carry out the approved
special use;
(d) provide for grant of an authorisation by the Authority to the
specified person to undertake an approved trial or carry out
an approved special use to be subject to conditions, and for
the modification of those conditions by the Authority from
time to time after affording the specified person concerned
a reasonable opportunity to be heard;
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
30
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(e) limit the period that an approved trial or approved special
use may be undertaken or carried out;
(f) prescribe
the
weather
and
any
climatic
or
other
circumstances when an approved trial or approved
special use may or may not be undertaken or carried out,
as the case may be;
(g) prescribe the construction, design or use of infrastructure
technology, equipment or devices in relation to the
autonomous
motor
vehicle
or
automated
vehicle
technology involved in the approved trial or approved
special use, including requiring that the vehicle —
(i) be equipped to capture and store sensor data and
video footage from the vehicle; and
(ii) have a failure alert system that allows a specified
person or participant in the approved trial or
approved special use to take immediate manual
control of the vehicle when a failure of the
autonomous system or other emergency is detected;
(h) prescribe the use of the autonomous motor vehicles in the
approved
trial
or
approved
special
use,
and
their
construction, design and equipment, for the safety of
other road users or for public safety or both;
(i) require the keeping of records by the specified person, and
the giving of information to the Authority or any other
person designated by the Authority (such as sensor data
and video footage from the autonomous motor vehicle)
about
the
approved
trial
or
approved
special
use
undertaken or carried out, including the automated
vehicle technology involved in the trial or special use;
(j) provide the grounds under which any authorisation granted
under the rules to undertake an approved trial or carry out
an approved special use may be cancelled in whole or part,
or suspended in whole or part, after affording the specified
person concerned a reasonable opportunity to be heard
Road Traffic Act 1961
31
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


unless it is not practicable or desirable to do so in the
circumstances of the case, including if —
(i) the Authority is of the opinion that it is no longer in
the public interest for the approved trial or approved
special use to continue; or
(ii) the specified person authorised to undertake the
approved trial or carry out the approved special use
contravenes or has contravened, or fails or has failed
to comply with, a condition of its authorisation, a
condition of an exemption contained in the rules or
any other provision in the rules;
(k) provide for a right to appeal to the Minister (whose
decision on appeal is final) against any decision made by
the Authority under the rules cancelling or suspending any
authorisation granted under the rules to undertake an
approved trial or carry out an approved special use, and the
procedure for those appeals;
(l) prescribe the fees (either by specifying amounts or by
prescribing a method of calculation) in relation to
applications or requests to, or the doing of anything by,
the Authority under the rules made under this section;
(m) provide that any contravention of any provision of the rules
made under this section shall be an offence punishable with
a fine not exceeding $10,000; and
(n) prescribe any saving and transitional provisions that may
be necessary or expedient.
[10/2017]
(2) In making any rules under this section for an approved trial or
approved special use, the Minister must take reasonable steps to
prevent information —
(a) that is commercially sensitive in nature; and
(b) that is the subject of a request to the Minister by a person
connected with the approved trial or approved special use,
or the proposed approved trial or proposed approved
special use, for the information to be kept confidential,
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
32
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


from being published or otherwise made public under this Part.
[10/2017]
(3) This section and all rules made under this section continue in
force until the end of 24 August 2027.
[12/2021]
(4) The Minister may at any time before the end of the period
mentioned in subsection (3), revoke or amend any rules made under
this section and without affording anyone prior opportunity to be
heard.
[10/2017]
(5) All rules made under this section must be presented to
Parliament as soon as possible after publication in the Gazette.
[10/2017]
(6) In this section, “liability insurance”, in relation to an approved
trial or approved special use, means a policy of insurance
indemnifying the owner and any authorised driver or operator of a
vehicle or trailer used in that trial or special use —
(a) in relation to death or bodily injury caused by, or arising
out of, the use of the vehicle or trailer on a road; and
(b) in relation to damage to property caused by, or arising out
of, the use of the vehicle or trailer on a road.
[10/2017]
Exemptions and modified application of laws to approved
trials and special uses
6D.—(1) Rules made under section 6C for an approved trial or an
approved special use may, for the purpose of that trial or special
use —
(a) exempt (with or without conditions) from the application
of section 5 or other specified provisions of this Act or its
subsidiary legislation, or any other applicable written law,
any of the following:
(i) the specified person authorised to undertake the
approved trial or carry out the approved special use;
Road Traffic Act 1961
33
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(ii) any other person or class of persons participating in
the approved trial or carrying out the approved
special use;
(iii) any vehicle or trailer used in the approved trial or
approved special use; and
(b) provide for the application of specified provisions of this
Act or its subsidiary legislation, or any other applicable
written law, affecting —
(i) the specified person authorised to undertake the
approved trial or carry out the approved special use;
(ii) any other person or class of persons participating in
the approved trial or carrying out the approved
special use; or
(iii) any vehicle or trailer used in the approved trial or
approved special use,
(b) with prescribed exceptions, modifications and adaptations.
[10/2017; 20/2019]
(2) Where a provision of this Act or its subsidiary legislation
mentioned in subsection (1)(a) or (b) is not a law which the Minister
is charged with the responsibility for, the Minister must consult with
the Minister charged with the responsibility for law and order before
granting the exemption or modifying the provision, as the case may
be.
[10/2017]
(3) If a person contravenes or fails to comply with a condition of an
exemption contained in any rules made under section 6C, the
exemption does not, while the contravention or non‑compliance
continues, operate in that person’s favour.
[10/2017]
(4) If, by virtue of subsection (3), a person is guilty of an offence
under a provision of this Act or its subsidiary legislation from which
the person was exempted by an exemption, the person may be
proceeded against for that offence.
[10/2017]
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
34
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(5) In this section, “other applicable written law” means —
(a) the Bus Services Industry Act 2015;
(b) the Motor Vehicles (Third‑Party Risks and Compensation)
Act 1960;
(c) the Point‑to‑Point Passenger Transport Industry Act 2019;
or
(d) the Public Transport Council Act 1987.
[20/2019]
Interfering with autonomous motor vehicle trial, etc.
6E.—(1) A person who, without reasonable excuse —
(a) hinders or obstructs an approved trial or the carrying out of
an approved special use; or
(b) interferes with any equipment or device in or on an
autonomous motor vehicle, or relating to any automated
vehicle technology, used in an approved trial or approved
special use,
shall be guilty of an offence and shall be liable on conviction to a fine
not exceeding $5,000.
[10/2017]
(2) In proceedings for an offence under subsection (1), it is a
defence for the defendant to prove, on a balance of probabilities, that
the defendant did not know, and could not reasonably have known,
that the activity that caused the hindrance, obstruction or interference
would cause the hindrance, obstruction or interference, as the case
may be.
[10/2017]
(3) To avoid doubt, this section does not affect the operation of the
Computer Misuse Act 1993.
[10/2017; 9/2018]
Savings
7. Nothing in this Part authorises any person to use any vehicle or
trailer so constructed or used as to cause a public or private nuisance
Road Traffic Act 1961
35
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


or be deemed to affect the liability by virtue of any act or otherwise of
the driver or owner so using such a vehicle.
Definition of licence
8. In this Part, “licence” means a vehicle licence issued under the
provisions of this Part.
Appointment of Registrar, Deputy Registrar and assistant
registrars
9.—(1) The Authority must appoint one of its officers as the
Registrar of Vehicles who must carry out any duties that may be
assigned to him or her under this Act and the rules.
[10/2017]
(2) The Authority may appoint from among its officers a Deputy
Registrar and any number of assistant registrars that may be required
for the purposes of this Act.
(3) The Authority may give to the Registrar any directions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, that it may consider
necessary for carrying out the provisions of this Part, and may vary or
revoke those directions, and the Registrar must comply with any
directions so given.
(4) The Registrar must make publicly available the forms of
licences and of applications for the licences and all declarations,
notices, returns, books of accounts and other documents required by
the rules or otherwise by law required with respect to any matter to
which this Act relates.
[10/2017]
Registration of vehicles
10.—(1) Except as otherwise provided by this Act and the rules, no
person may keep or use a vehicle unless it has been registered under
this Act and its registration under this Act has not been cancelled.
[10/2017]
(2) The Registrar may charge any fees that may be prescribed for
the registration of a vehicle under this Act.
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
36
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(3) Any person who contravenes subsection (1) shall be guilty of an
offence and shall be liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding
$2,000 or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 3 months or to
both and, in the case of a second or subsequent conviction, to a fine
not exceeding $5,000 or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding
6 months or to both.
[10/2017]
Vehicles not to be registered without permits issued by
Registrar
10A.—(1) No vehicle may be registered or, except as otherwise
provided by this Act and the rules, continue to be registered under this
Act unless there is in force a permit issued by the Registrar
authorising the registration of the vehicle.
[10/2017]
(2) Except as otherwise provided by this Act or the rules, a permit
must be issued upon the payment of a levy.
[10/2017]
(3) The Minister may by notification in the Gazette, prescribe a
limit on the number of permits to be issued by the Registrar under
subsection (1) and the Minister may prescribe different limits for
vehicles belonging to any category, class or description.
(4) The Minister may make rules for carrying out or giving effect to
this section and, in particular, the rules may —
(a) provide for the issue of permits under this section to
successful applicants who submitted bids for the permits;
(b) require fees and deposits to be paid for the submission of
applications for the issue of permits under this section, and
provide for the forfeiture of deposits for non-compliance
with any conditions governing the submission of such
applications;
(c) prescribe
the
levy,
or
the
method
or
manner
for
determining the amount of the levy, payable for a permit
issued or transferred under this section;
(d) prescribe the period for which a permit issued under this
section is in force and different periods may be prescribed
Road Traffic Act 1961
37
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


for vehicles belonging to different categories, classes or
descriptions;
(e) prescribe the conditions upon which permits are issued or
transferred under this section;
(f) provide for a rebate on all or any part of the levy payable
for the issue or transfer of a permit under this section, in
such circumstances as may be permitted by the rules;
(g) provide for the cancellation of a permit issued or
transferred under this section and the refund of all or
part of the levy paid for the issue or transfer of the permit in
such circumstances as may be permitted by the rules;
(h) provide for the transfer of permits under this section at any
time prior to the registration of a vehicle authorised by the
permit;
(ha) provide for the transfer of permits under this section to
facilitate the replacement of defective vehicles;
(i) provide for the issue of permits, whether with or without
the payment of a levy, for vehicles which were registered
under this Act prior to 2 April 1990;
(j) provide for the renewal of a permit before or after its expiry
and the levy and any other fee to be paid therefor;
(k) exempt any particular vehicle or class of vehicles from the
payment of the levy for a permit issued or transferred under
this section; and
(l) provide for all matters which are required or permitted to
be prescribed or which are necessary or convenient to be
prescribed for carrying out or giving effect to this section.
[7/2012]
Heavy vehicle not to be registered without valid vehicle
parking certificate
10B.—(1) No heavy vehicle may be registered under this Act
unless the person applying for the registration of the heavy vehicle
satisfies the Registrar that the person has been issued by the relevant
authority under the Parking Places Act 1974 with a vehicle parking
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
38
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


certificate or any other document in respect of the parking of the
heavy vehicle for the period for which the heavy vehicle is to be
licensed.
(2) In this section and sections 19(3)(f) and 34(1)(r), “heavy
vehicle” has the meaning given by the Parking Places Act 1974.
[4/2006]
Charge of tax on vehicles
11.—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules, a tax
must be charged in respect of —
(a) the first registration of every vehicle under this Act;
(aa) the registration under this Act of a de‑registered vehicle;
and
(b) every vehicle used or kept on any road in Singapore.
[23/2013; 10/2017]
(2) The tax must be paid upon a licence to be taken out by the
person keeping the vehicle.
(3) The tax chargeable under subsection (1)(a) or (aa) in respect of
a vehicle is of such an amount as the Minister may prescribe and the
Minister may prescribe different taxes for vehicles of different
classes, categories or descriptions or vehicles used for different
purposes.
[23/2013]
(4) The tax chargeable under subsection (1)(b) in respect of a
vehicle of any description is chargeable by reference to such annual
or semi-annual rate as may be prescribed by the Minister from time to
time.
(5) Any rates prescribed by the Minister may be so made to apply
only to vehicles of a specified class, category or description and the
Minister may prescribe different rates for vehicles of different
classes, categories or descriptions or vehicles used for different
purposes.
(6) The Minister may, subject to any conditions that he or she thinks
fit to impose, prescribe —
Road Traffic Act 1961
39
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(a) a rebate on all or any part of the tax payable for vehicles of
a specified class, category or description; and
(b) different rates of rebate or the methods for determining the
amount of the rebate for vehicles of different classes,
categories or descriptions or vehicles used for different
purposes.
(7) For the purposes of the tax, insofar as it is chargeable in respect
of the use or keeping of a vehicle on a road, a vehicle is deemed —
(a) to be chargeable with the like tax as on the occasion of the
issue of the vehicle licence or last vehicle licence issued for
the vehicle under this Act, and to be so chargeable by
reference to the prescribed rate applicable to the vehicle on
that occasion; or
(b) if no vehicle licence has been issued for the vehicle under
this Act, to be chargeable by reference to the prescribed
rate applicable to the vehicle.
(7A) In respect of a replacement vehicle —
(a) the tax chargeable under subsection (1)(a) applies as if the
replacement vehicle had been first registered under this
Act on the same date as the defective vehicle which it
replaced; and
(b) the tax chargeable under subsection (1)(b) applies as if the
replacement vehicle had been used or kept on any road in
Singapore since that same date.
[7/2012]
(8) Nothing in this section operates so as to render lawful the
keeping of a vehicle for any period, in any manner or at any place, if
to do so would be unlawful apart from this section.
(9) Any person who gives any incorrect information in relation to
any matter affecting the amount of tax chargeable under this section
shall be guilty of an offence and shall be liable on conviction to a fine
not exceeding $10,000 or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding
6 months, and the court shall order the person to also pay the amount
of tax which has been undercharged.
[12/2021]
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
40
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(9A) The amount of tax undercharged which is ordered under
subsection (9) to be paid may be recovered according to the law for
the time being in force for the recovery of fines.
[12/2021]
(10) The Registrar may compound any offence punishable under
subsection (9) by collecting from the person reasonably suspected of
having committed the offence a sum not exceeding $1,000 and the
amount of the tax undercharged, and may before judgment stay or
compound any proceedings thereunder.
Vehicular emissions tax
11AA.—(1) In addition to the taxes under section 11, a tax (called
in this Act the vehicular emissions tax) is to be charged in respect of
the first registration, on or after 1 January 2018, of any taxable
vehicle, being a vehicle —
(a) that is within a prescribed class or category, or of a
prescribed description; and
(b) that has an emission level for any prescribed vehicular
emission (including a deemed emission level) that exceeds
the maximum level of the neutral emission band prescribed
for the vehicle.
[24/2017]
(2) The vehicular emissions tax under subsection (1) —
(a) must be paid upon the first registration of a taxable vehicle
by the person keeping the taxable vehicle; and
(b) is the amount prescribed for that taxable vehicle.
[37/2012; 24/2017]
(3) Where a person who is registered as the owner of a vehicle
(called in this section the replaced vehicle) replaces that vehicle with
another vehicle (called in this section the replacement vehicle) that is
a taxable vehicle, the person must pay a tax —
(a) of an amount by which the vehicular emissions tax
chargeable on the replacement vehicle (calculated for the
purposes of this subsection as if the replacement vehicle
was first registered on the same date as the replaced
Road Traffic Act 1961
41
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


vehicle), exceeds the vehicular emissions tax chargeable
on the replaced vehicle; or
(b) if any carbon emissions tax was chargeable on the replaced
vehicle, of an amount by which the carbon emissions tax
chargeable on the replacement vehicle (calculated for the
purposes of this subsection as if the replacement vehicle
was first registered on the same date as the replaced
vehicle), exceeds the carbon emissions tax chargeable on
the replaced vehicle.
[24/2017]
(4) The difference in tax mentioned in subsection (3) is payable to
the Registrar without demand within the prescribed time from the
date the Registrar registers the particulars of the replacement vehicle.
[37/2012]
(5) The Minister may, subject to any conditions that he or she thinks
fit to impose, prescribe —
(a) a rebate on all or any part of the tax payable under
section 11(1)(a) for any taxable vehicle that has an
emission level for any one or more prescribed vehicular
emissions, that is below the minimum level of the neutral
emission band prescribed for that emission in relation to a
vehicle of that class, category or description, or used for a
particular purpose; and
(b) different amounts of rebate or different methods for
determining the amount of the rebate for taxable vehicles
of different classes, categories or descriptions or used for
different purposes.
[24/2017]
(6) The Minister may make rules for carrying out or giving effect to
this section and for prescribing anything which may be prescribed
under this section and, in particular, the rules may —
(a) prescribe different amounts of vehicular emissions tax
chargeable for taxable vehicles of different classes,
categories or descriptions or used for different purposes;
(b) prescribe different neutral emission bands for different
prescribed vehicular emissions;
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
42
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(c) prescribe different neutral emission bands for vehicles of
different classes, categories or descriptions or used for
different purposes; and
(d) provide for the method or criteria for the method of
determining or deeming the emission level of any
prescribed vehicular emission of any taxable vehicle, and
provide different methods or criteria for taxable vehicles of
different classes, categories or descriptions or used for
different purposes.
[24/2017]
(7) Nothing in this section operates so as to render lawful the
keeping of a vehicle for any period, in any manner or at any place, if
to do so would be unlawful apart from this section.
[37/2012]
(8) Any person who gives any incorrect information in relation to
any matter affecting the amount of vehicular emissions tax
chargeable or any rebate that may be granted under this section
shall be guilty of an offence and shall be liable on conviction to a fine
not exceeding $10,000 or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding
6 months, and the court shall order the person to also pay the amount
of vehicular emissions tax, or the tax payable under section 11(1)(a),
which has been undercharged.
[37/2012; 24/2017; 12/2021]
(8A) The amount of the vehicular emissions tax, or the tax payable
under section 11(1)(a), which has been undercharged and ordered
under subsection (8) to be paid may be recovered according to the law
for the time being in force for the recovery of fines.
[12/2021]
(9) The Registrar may —
(a) compound any offence punishable under subsection (8) by
collecting from the person reasonably suspected of having
committed the offence —
(i) a sum not exceeding $1,000; and
(ii) the amount of the vehicular emissions tax, or the tax
payable under section 11(1)(a), which has been
undercharged; and
Road Traffic Act 1961
43
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(b) compound any offence punishable under subsection (8) as
in force immediately before 1 January 2018, by collecting
from the person reasonably suspected of having committed
the offence —
(i) a sum not exceeding $1,000; and
(ii) the amount of the carbon emissions tax, or the tax
payable under section 11(1)(a), which has been
undercharged,
and may before judgment stay or compound any proceedings
thereunder.
[24/2017]
(10) In this section —
“carbon emissions tax” means the tax chargeable under
section 11AA(1) as in force immediately before 1 January
2018;
“neutral emission band”, in respect of any vehicular emission,
means the range of emissions from a minimum level to a
maximum level, prescribed for a vehicle of any class,
category or description or used for any purpose;
“vehicular emission” means a pollutant that is attributable to the
combined driving cycle of a vehicle.
[24/2017]
Restricted licences and supplementary licences
11A.—(1) The Registrar may, upon application by the owner of a
motor vehicle in such circumstances as may be prescribed, issue a
licence subject to the restriction that the motor vehicle must not be
driven on any road or on any specified road during specified days or
times unless there is in force a supplementary licence for that motor
vehicle.
(2) The Minister may make rules for carrying out or giving effect to
this section and, in particular, those rules may —
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
44
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(a) provide for the issue of supplementary licences, whether at
prescribed fees or without charge, and regulate their use
and exhibition; and
(b) provide for all matters necessary or incidental to allow
subsection (1) to apply or cease to apply to motor vehicles
of any description, including the re-registration of the
vehicles and the imposition of any fee or levy in
connection with the re-registration.
(3) Any person who drives a motor vehicle, issued with a licence
subject
to
the
restriction
mentioned
in
subsection
(1),
in
contravention of the restriction or any owner of such a motor
vehicle who causes or permits the vehicle to be so driven shall be
guilty of an offence and shall on conviction be punished with —
(a) a fine not exceeding $5,000; and
(b) in the case of a second or subsequent conviction, a fine not
exceeding $10,000.
(4) Any person who —
(a) falsifies an identification mark or plate prescribed in the
case of a motor vehicle issued with a licence subject to the
restriction mentioned in subsection (1); or
(b) displays, or causes or permits to be displayed, a falsified
identification mark or plate on the motor vehicle,
shall be guilty of an offence and shall on conviction be punished with
a fine not exceeding $20,000 or with imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 12 months or with both.
(5) Despite the provisions of any written law to the contrary, a
District Court or Magistrate’s Court has the jurisdiction to try any
offence under this section and to impose the maximum penalty
prescribed therefor.
Taxes and fees payable upon loss of exempt status
11B.—(1) This section applies to and in relation to any vehicle in
respect of which a relevant impost is otherwise payable upon the first
registration, continued registration or the keeping or use on roads, of
Road Traffic Act 1961
45
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


the vehicle, if not for any of the following events (whether happening
before, on or after the date of commencement of section 6 of the Road
Traffic (Amendment) Act 2021):
(a) the operation of section 14 which is repealed by the Road
Traffic (Amendment) Act 2021;
(b) an exemption under section 33;
(c) an exemption under any order made under section 142.
(2) Upon the happening, on or after the date of commencement of
section 6 of the Road Traffic (Amendment) Act 2021, of a
disqualifying event for a relevant impost relating to a vehicle
which has not ceased to be kept or used on any road in Singapore and
has not been destroyed or removed from Singapore, a tax is payable
as follows:
(a) upon the happening of the earlier of the following:
(i) at the end of one month after the disqualifying event
for the relevant impost happens;
(ii) the
re‑registration
of
the
vehicle
after
the
disqualifying event for the relevant impost;
(b) at the end of any period of extension allowed by the
Registrar for payment of that tax.
(3) The tax under subsection (2) is payable and recoverable from
the person who is keeping or using the vehicle when the disqualifying
event happens for a relevant impost with respect to that vehicle.
(4) The tax under subsection (2) with respect to a vehicle is as
follows, whichever being applicable:
(a) where the disqualifying event relates to any tax payable
under section 11 upon the first registration of a vehicle —
an amount worked out in the prescribed manner, which
must not exceed the amount of the tax that would have
been payable under section 11(1)(a) on the first registration
of the vehicle if not for an event in subsection (1)(a), (b)
or (c);
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
46
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(b) where the disqualifying event relates to any levy payable
under section 10A — an amount worked out in the
prescribed manner, which must not exceed the amount of
the
levy
that
would
have
been
payable
under
section 10A(2) on the first registration of the vehicle
with a permit if not for an event in subsection (1)(a), (b)
or (c);
(c) where the disqualifying event relates to any other relevant
impost — an amount worked out in the prescribed manner,
which must not exceed the total amount of the relevant
impost that would have been payable if the event in
subsection (1)(a), (b) or (c) did not happen.
(5) To avoid doubt, a vehicle to which this section applies may be
the subject of different disqualifying events for different relevant
imposts.
(6) To ascertain the relevant impost that was not payable upon the
first registration, continued registration or the keeping or use on
roads, of the vehicle concerned, any rebate from that relevant impost
that may be claimed under section 11 when the vehicle was first
registered must be reckoned.
(7) Any person who gives any incorrect information in relation to
any matter affecting the amount of tax chargeable under this section
shall be guilty of an offence and shall be liable on conviction to a fine
not exceeding $10,000 or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 6
months, and the court shall order the person to pay the amount of tax
which has been undercharged.
(8) The amount of the tax under this section which has been
undercharged and ordered under subsection (7) to be paid may be
recovered according to the law for the time being in force for the
recovery of fines.
(9) The Registrar may compound any offence punishable under
subsection (7) by collecting from the person reasonably suspected of
having committed the offence a sum not exceeding $1,000 and the
amount of the tax undercharged, and may before judgment stay or
compound any proceedings thereunder.
Road Traffic Act 1961
47
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(10) In this section —
“disqualifying event”, in relation to a relevant impost for a
vehicle, means any of the following, whichever happens first:
(a) the expiry of any period the relevant impost is not
payable with respect to the vehicle because of an
event in subsection (1)(a), (b) or (c);
(b) the cancellation of the registration of the vehicle
under section 27(1) or (1A);
(c) the first breach of any condition (whether a condition
precedent or a condition subsequent) that the
exemption described in subsection (1)(a), (b) or (c)
with respect to the vehicle is subject;
“relevant impost”, in relation to any vehicle, means any of the
following taxes, fees or levies otherwise payable in respect of
the vehicle if not for an event in subsection (1)(a), (b) or (c):
(a) any fee payable under section 10;
(b) any levy payable under section 10A(2);
(c) any tax payable under section 11;
(d) any carbon emission tax payable under section 11AA
as in force immediately before 1 January 2018, or any
vehicular emission tax payable under that section as
in force on or after that date.
[Act 12 of 2021 wef 03/01/2022]
Vehicles licensed outside Singapore
12.—(1) Where any vehicle not registered under this Act is kept or
used on any road in Singapore by a person who is —
(a) a citizen of Singapore;
(b) a resident of Singapore; or
(c) the holder of a work pass issued under the Employment of
Foreign Manpower Act 1990,
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
48
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


the tax chargeable under section 11(1)(a) must be paid in respect of
the vehicle by the person keeping or using it in Singapore as if that
vehicle is first registered and used in Singapore.
[30/2007]
(2) Any person who has in his or her possession or comes into
possession of, or uses, a motor vehicle in respect of which a licence
issued under the provisions of any law of any country relating to
motor vehicles is in force must inform the Registrar, within the
prescribed period, if he or she is a resident of Singapore or takes up
residence in Singapore.
(3) For the purposes of this section, a person is deemed to be a
resident of Singapore if he or she —
(a) has been granted the status of a permanent resident of
Singapore by the competent authority, even though he or
she may not have a place of residence in Singapore; or
(b) resides in Singapore for a continuous period of 6 months
and any temporary period or periods of absence during that
period is immaterial.
(4) Any person who fails to comply with subsection (2) shall be
guilty of an offence and shall be liable on conviction to a fine not
exceeding $2,000 or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding
3 months and, in the case of a second or subsequent conviction, to a
fine not exceeding $5,000 or to imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 6 months.
Commencement and duration of licences
13.—(1) A vehicle licence may be taken out —
(a) for any period of 6 months or 12 months; and
(b) for any shorter period that the Registrar may approve,
and is to, unless the Registrar otherwise determines, first have effect
on the first day of the month in which the licence is applied for or on
the day following the expiry of the last vehicle licence issued for the
vehicle under this Act.
(2) A licence which first has effect before the day on which it is
issued shall not affect any criminal liability incurred before that day.
Road Traffic Act 1961
49
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


14. [Repealed by Act 12 of 2021 wef 03/01/2022]
Using and keeping of vehicle without licence
15. Any person who uses or keeps on any road any vehicle for
which a licence is not in force, not being a vehicle exempted from tax
under this Act by virtue of the provisions of any written law, shall be
guilty of an offence and —
(a) shall be liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding $2,000;
or
(b) if it has been proved to the satisfaction of the court that the
person had the intention to evade payment of any tax
chargeable under this Act, shall be punished on conviction
with a fine of an amount equal to 3 times the tax payable —
(i) if a vehicle licence had been taken out for the period,
beginning with the expiry of the vehicle licence last
in force for the vehicle before the date of the offence;
or
(ii) if there has not at any time before that date a vehicle
licence in force for the vehicle, beginning with the
first day of the month in which the vehicle was first
kept by that person,
(b) and ending with the last day of the month during which the
offence was committed.
Presumption as to use or keeping of vehicle
16.—(1) For the purposes of this Part, it is presumed, until the
contrary is proved, that a person keeps or uses a vehicle on a road in
Singapore if it is proved —
(a) for a vehicle registered under this Act, that the person is, at
the material time, recorded as the owner of that vehicle in a
register of vehicles;
(b) for a vehicle the registration of which under this Act is
cancelled under section 27(1) or has lapsed, that the person
is last recorded as the owner of that vehicle in a register of
vehicles; or
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
50
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(c) for a vehicle that is not registered under this Act and is not
a vehicle mentioned in paragraph (b), that the person has a
legal right to possession of the vehicle (including any
person who has the use of the vehicle under a lease or
hire‑purchase agreement, but not the lessor while the
vehicle is being leased under any such agreement).
[10/2017]
(2) In subsection (1), “register of vehicles” means the register
required by rules made under section 34 to be maintained by the
Authority for the purposes of section 10.
[10/2017]
Continuous liability for duty
17.—(1) Subject to this section, a person who for any period keeps
a vehicle in respect of which tax under this Act has at any time
become chargeable shall, whether or not it is still a mechanically
propelled vehicle, be liable to pay tax under this Act in respect of the
vehicle for that period.
(2) A person shall not be liable by virtue of subsection (1) to pay tax
under this Act in respect of a vehicle —
(a) for any period for which tax under this Act in respect of the
vehicle has been paid and has not been repaid in
consequence of the surrender of a licence;
(b) for any period in respect of which the person has, in
accordance with the rules, given notice to the Registrar that
the vehicle will not be used or kept on a public road during
that period; and
(c) for any period by reference to which there was calculated
an amount ordered to be paid by the person as a fine
pursuant to section 15(b).
[29/2018]
(3) A person is not, by virtue of subsection (2)(b), exempt from the
person’s liability for any period under subsection (1) in respect of a
vehicle if at any time during that period the person or any other person
with the firstmentioned person’s consent uses or keeps the vehicle on
Road Traffic Act 1961
51
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


a public road and no vehicle licence is in force for the vehicle at that
time.
(4) For the purposes of subsection (3), the consent mentioned in
that subsection is presumed to have been given unless the contrary is
shown, but any use or keeping of the vehicle in question as respects
which the vehicle is exempt by virtue of any written law for the time
being in force from tax under this Act is to be disregarded.
(5) Sums payable under this section by way of tax in respect of a
vehicle accrue due for every period of a calendar month at one‑sixth
of the semi-annual rate of tax applicable to the vehicle at the relevant
time.
Suit for recovery of tax
18.—(1) Despite the provisions of any other written law, any tax
chargeable under this Act may be sued for by way of a specially
indorsed originating claim.
[Act 25 of 2021 wef 01/04/2022]
(2) In any suit under subsection (1), the production of a certificate
signed by the Registrar giving the name and address of the defendant
and the amount of tax from the defendant in respect of any vehicle
kept by the defendant is sufficient evidence of the amount due and
sufficient authority for the court to give judgment for that amount.
Issue and exhibition of licences
19.—(1) Every person applying for a vehicle licence must make
such a declaration and furnish such particulars with respect to the
vehicle for which the licence is to be taken out or otherwise as may be
prescribed.
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act as to general licences and
provisions as to the transfer of licences to replacement vehicles, every
vehicle licence is issued for the vehicle specified in the application for
the licence and does not entitle the person to whom it is issued to use
or keep any other vehicle.
[7/2012]
(3) The Registrar is not required to issue any vehicle licence for
which application is made unless he or she is satisfied —
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
52
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(a) that the licence applied for is the appropriate licence for the
vehicle specified in the application and all fees and taxes
due and payable in respect of the vehicle and any penalty
recoverable from the registered owner of the vehicle under
this Act or the rules have been paid;
(b) in the case of an application for a licence for a vehicle
purporting to be the first application for a licence for the
vehicle, that a licence has not previously been issued for
that vehicle;
(c) that there is no warrant of arrest issued under section 120 of
the Criminal Procedure Code 2010 against the applicant in
respect of any offence committed by the applicant under
this Act or the rules or any written law specified in Part 1 of
the First Schedule;
(d) that either —
(i) for the period of the licence there will be in force the
policy of insurance or the security required by law in
relation to the use of the motor vehicle by the
applicant or by other persons on the applicant’s order
or with the applicant’s permission; or
(ii) the motor vehicle is a vehicle to which section 3 of
the
Motor
Vehicles
(Third-Party
Risks
and
Compensation) Act 1960 does not apply at any
time when it is being driven by the owner thereof or
by an employee of the owner in the course of the
employee’s employment or is otherwise subject to
the control of the owner;
(e) in the case of a motor vehicle to which section 91 applies,
that a test certificate in respect of the vehicle has been
issued at any time within 3 months prior to the issue of the
vehicle licence or within any other period that the Registrar
may approve; and
(f) in the case of a heavy vehicle, that for the period of the
licence there will be in force a vehicle parking certificate or
such other document issued by the relevant authority under
Road Traffic Act 1961
53
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


the Parking Places Act 1974 in respect of the parking of the
heavy vehicle.
[15/2010; 10/2017]
(4) Without affecting subsection (3), the Registrar may refuse to
issue a vehicle licence if he or she is satisfied that the vehicle in
respect of which the licence is to be issued is registered in the name of
a person who, pursuant to a warrant of court, has been arrested in
connection with an offence under this Act or the rules or any written
law specified in Part 1 of the First Schedule and the offence has not
been tried and determined by the court.
[10/2017]
(5) Rules made under this Act may provide for the issue of a new
licence in the place of a licence which has been damaged, rendered
illegible, lost or destroyed, and for the information to be furnished
and the fee to be paid for the issue of a new licence.
[4/2006]
(6) Any vehicle licence may be transferred in the prescribed
manner.
(7) Subject to subsection (8), the Minister may, by notification in
the Gazette, amend Part 1 of the First Schedule.
(8) The Minister must, before exercising his or her powers under
subsection (7), consult the Minister responsible for the written law to
which the amendment relates.
Number of persons carried on vehicle
20.—(1) The Registrar may determine and enter in the records
maintained under rules made under section 34(1)(g) the maximum
number of persons that may be carried in a heavy motor car or motor
car or on a motor cycle, and must inform the registered owner of the
vehicle of that number.
[4/2006]
(2) Any person who drives a motor vehicle carrying persons in
excess of the maximum number of persons determined under
subsection (1) for the motor vehicle shall be guilty of an offence.
[4/2006]
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
54
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


Late application for licence
21. If a licence is applied for a vehicle after the date of expiry of the
last licence issued for the vehicle, a late application fee as may be
prescribed is payable for the issue of the licence.
[4/2006]
Surrender of licences
22. The holder of a licence may at any time surrender the licence to
the Registrar in the prescribed manner and on so surrendering the
licence is entitled, if the holder satisfies the prescribed requirements,
to receive from the Registrar, by way of rebate of tax paid upon the
surrendered licence, a sum equal to the amount of tax which had been
charged for the remaining number of calendar months or part thereof
for which the licence would have been in force.
Vehicle destroyed, exported, etc.
23.—(1) The holder of a licence may at any time notify the
Registrar that the holder’s vehicle has been destroyed or exported or
will cease to be kept or used on any road.
(2) Except as otherwise prescribed, the Registrar, on being satisfied
in any manner that he or she requires that the vehicle has been
destroyed or exported or will cease to be kept or used on any road,
must refund to the holder of the licence a sum equal to the amount
which has been charged for the number of calendar months or part
thereof for which the licence would have continued to be in force.
[7/2012]
Duty of manufacturers and dealers to notify Registrar and
owners of safety-related defects in vehicles
23A.—(1) Any person being a manufacturer or dealer of vehicles
must, on becoming aware of any safety-related defect in any vehicle
manufactured or sold by the person, cause a notice of the defect to be
given to —
(a) the Registrar;
(b) each person who has obtained such a vehicle from the
manufacturer or dealer; and
Road Traffic Act 1961
55
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(c) each current owner of such a vehicle as determined
from —
(i) any warranty issued by the manufacturer or dealer
with respect to the functioning of the vehicle that has,
to the knowledge of the manufacturer or dealer, been
given, sold or transferred to the current owner; or
(ii) the vehicle registration records as kept by the
Registrar.
(2) Where the Registrar is satisfied that the name of the current
owner of a vehicle cannot reasonably be determined by a
manufacturer or dealer in accordance with subsection (1)(c), the
Registrar may —
(a) order the manufacturer or dealer to give notice of the defect
by publication in all daily newspapers in Singapore or by
dissemination in such alternative medium for such period
as the Registrar may determine; or
(b) order that the current owner need not be notified.
(3) A notice required to be given under subsection (1) or (2) must be
in such form as the Registrar may require and must —
(a) contain a description of the defect, an evaluation of the
safety risk arising from it and the directions for rectifying
it; and
(b) state the time and place at which the person to whom the
notice is given may present the person’s vehicle in order
that the defect may be rectified by the manufacturer or
dealer or the manufacturer’s or dealer’s agent.
(4) Any manufacturer or dealer of vehicles who causes any notice
to be given under subsection (1) or (2) in connection with any
safety‑related defect in any vehicle manufactured or sold by the
manufacturer or dealer must —
(a) within a period of one month from the date on which the
notice is given; and
(b) thereafter, within any subsequent period that the Registrar
may require,
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
56
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


submit to the Registrar a report in such form and containing such
information relating to the safety‑related defect and its rectification as
the Registrar may require.
(5) Any person who, being a manufacturer or dealer of vehicles —
(a) fails to comply with the requirements of subsection (1), (3)
or (4) or any order given by the Registrar under
subsection (2)(a); or
(b) fails to rectify or secure the rectification by the person’s
agent of any safety-related defect in any vehicle that is
presented for rectification pursuant to a notice given by the
manufacturer or dealer under this section,
shall be guilty of an offence and shall be liable on conviction —
(c) to a fine not exceeding $2,000 for each vehicle in respect of
which the offence is committed, subject to a maximum fine
of $50,000; and
(d) in the case of a continuing offence, to a further fine not
exceeding $500 for every day or part of a day during which
the offence continues after conviction.
(6) Despite the provisions of any written law to the contrary, a
District Court or Magistrate’s Court has jurisdiction to try any offence
under subsection (5) and to impose the maximum penalty prescribed
therefor under that subsection.
(7) Any person who, being the owner of a vehicle in respect of
which a notice has been given by a manufacturer or dealer under this
section, fails to produce the vehicle for rectification within the period
specified in the notice or any other period that the Registrar may
allow shall be guilty of an offence.
(8) The Authority, with the approval of the Minister, may make
rules for the purposes of carrying this section into effect.
(9) In this section —
“dealer” means a person who is engaged in the business of
importing or selling vehicles;
Road Traffic Act 1961
57
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


“safety-related defect”, in relation to a vehicle, means a feature
of the design or construction of the vehicle that is liable to
cause significant risk of personal injury or death to any
person using the vehicle or any other road user, and includes
any defect relating to a component of the vehicle that is
bought by the manufacturer of the vehicle from a supplier and
sold by the manufacturer of the vehicle together with the
vehicle as original equipment.
Alteration of vehicle or of its use
24.—(1) Where a vehicle licence has been taken out for a vehicle at
any rate prescribed under this Act and the vehicle is, at any time while
the licence is in force, used in an altered condition or in a manner or
for a purpose which brings it within, or which if it was used solely in
that condition or in that manner or for that purpose would bring it
within, a description of vehicle to which a higher rate of tax is
applicable under this Act, tax at that higher rate becomes chargeable
in respect of the licence for the vehicle.
(2) Where tax at a higher rate becomes chargeable under
subsection (1) in respect of any vehicle licence, a new vehicle
licence is deemed to be in force, for the period beginning with the
date on which the higher rate of tax becomes chargeable and expiring
at the end of the period for which the original vehicle licence was
issued, on payment of the difference between the amount payable on
the new licence and the amount to be refunded on the surrender of the
original vehicle licence in accordance with section 22.
[10/2017]
(2A) Subsection (2) does not validate the use of a vehicle between
the time a vehicle licence is deemed by that subsection to be in force
for that vehicle and the date the vehicle licence is actually issued, if
later.
[10/2017]
(3) Where a vehicle licence has been taken out for a vehicle, and by
reason of the vehicle being used as mentioned in subsection (1), a
higher rate of tax becomes chargeable and tax at the higher rate was
not paid before the vehicle was so used, the person so using the
vehicle shall be guilty of an offence.
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
58
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


Visitors’ vehicles
25.—(1) Rules made under this Part may modify the provisions of
this Part in the case of motor vehicles brought temporarily by persons
resident outside Singapore and intending to make only a temporary
stay in Singapore.
(2) The rules may —
(a) provide for the issue of a permit, in respect of a vehicle not
registered under this Act that is brought into Singapore
from any place outside Singapore (called in this section
and section 34D a foreign vehicle), authorising the keeping
and use in Singapore of the vehicle for any period that the
Registrar may determine;
(b) prescribe the manner of application for the permit;
(c) prescribe the fees and charges payable for the issue of the
permit in accordance with any rates that may be approved
by the Minister;
(d) prescribe the conditions for the issue of the permit;
(e) provide for the extension of the period of validity of the
permit;
(f) provide for the cancellation of the permit;
(g) provide for the permit to be stored in any electronic form
that the Authority may determine;
(h) regulate the use of the permit;
(i) [Deleted by Act 1 of 2006]
(j) provide for the levy of a tax for the keeping or use of a
foreign vehicle in Singapore in accordance with any rates
that may be prescribed by the Minister;
(k) prescribe the manner in which any fee or tax payable under
the rules is to be levied and collected, including the use of
electronic or computerised or other facilities, and the use
by the foreign vehicle concerned of specified points of exit
from Singapore, for that purpose;
Road Traffic Act 1961
59
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(l) prescribe the records to be kept by the Registrar in
connection with the rules; and
(m) empower the Registrar and any officer authorised by him
or her to prohibit the entry by driving into, or exit by
driving from, Singapore of any vehicle —
(i) if any charge, fee or tax payable in respect of the
vehicle under this Act or any of its subsidiary
legislation is in arrears;
(ii) if any charge or fee payable in respect of the vehicle
under the Parking Places Act 1974 or any of its
subsidiary legislation is in arrears; or
(iii) which
the
Registrar
or
officer
so
authorised
reasonably
believes
has
been
used
in
the
commission of an offence under this Act or the
Parking
Places
Act
1974
or
any
subsidiary
legislation made under either Act, or under the
Environmental
Protection
and
Management
(Vehicular Emissions) Regulations.
[1/2006; 10/2017; 38/2018]
(3) Any rates prescribed by the rules may be made to apply only to
vehicles of a specified class, category or description, and the Minister
may prescribe different rates for vehicles of different classes,
categories or descriptions or for vehicles used for different purposes.
(4) Where a person is convicted of an offence under any of the
rules, the court before which the person is convicted may, in addition
to the punishment prescribed for the offence, order the person to pay
the
amount
of
any
charges,
fees
or
taxes
mentioned
in
subsection (2)(m) that may be certified by an officer appointed by
the Authority to be due and payable by the person at the date of the
person’s conviction, and the amount may be recovered according to
the law for the time being in force for the recovery of fines.
[10/2017]
(5) For the purposes of this section, reference to a person resident
outside Singapore does not include a reference to a citizen of
Singapore or a person who holds a valid entry permit or re-entry
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
60
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


permit
issued
by
the
Controller
of
Immigration
under
the
Immigration Act 1959.
[10/2017]
Registration and identification marks
26.—(1) On the issue of a licence under this Part for a vehicle other
than a bicycle, it is the duty of the Registrar to register the vehicle in
the prescribed manner without any further application in that behalf
by the person taking out the licence.
(2) Subject to this section, the Registrar must assign a separate
number to every vehicle registered with him or her and a mark
indicating both the registered number of the vehicle and the fact that it
has been registered in Singapore must be fixed on the vehicle or on
any other vehicle drawn by the vehicle or on both in the prescribed
manner.
(3) The Registrar must, on any application for the registration of a
bicycle made to him or her in the prescribed manner and on payment
of the prescribed fee, register the bicycle in the prescribed manner,
assigning a separate number to every bicycle registered with him or
her, and a mark indicating both the registered number and the fact that
it has been registered must be fixed on the bicycle in the prescribed
manner.
(4) If the mark to be fixed in accordance with this Act is not so
fixed, or if being so fixed it is in any way obscured or rendered or
allowed to become or to remain not easily distinguishable, the person
driving the vehicle or having charge of the vehicle while it is being
used shall be guilty of an offence.
(5) A person charged under this section with having an obscured
mark or with obscuring a mark or rendering or allowing it to become
or to remain not easily distinguishable shall not be liable to be
convicted on the charge if the person proves that the person has taken
all steps reasonably practicable to prevent the mark being obscured or
not easily distinguishable.
(6) A person shall not be liable to be convicted under this section if
the person proves that —
Road Traffic Act 1961
61
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(a) the person had no reasonable opportunity of registering the
vehicle in accordance with this section; and
(b) the vehicle is being driven on the road for the purpose of
being so registered.
Cancellation of registration
27.—(1) The Registrar may cancel the registration of a vehicle —
(a) if the permit issued under section 10A authorising the
registration of the vehicle under this Act has been
cancelled or has expired and has not been restored or
renewed within the time prescribed therefor by this Act or
any rules;
(b) if no licence under section 19 has been taken out for the
vehicle for a period exceeding 3 years by the registered
owner who has notified the Registrar that the registered
owner will not use the vehicle during that period;
(c) if the tax chargeable under section 11(1)(b) has not been
paid by the registered owner of the vehicle for a period of
12 months or any longer period;
(d) if the Registrar is satisfied that the vehicle —
(i) has ceased to be kept or used on any road in
Singapore;
(ii) has been or will, within the prescribed period, be
destroyed or removed from Singapore;
(iii) has become wholly unfit for further use; or
(iv) has been lost through theft or criminal breach of trust
and the prescribed period after the loss has lapsed;
(da) if the Registrar becomes aware of a circumstance that
would have required or permitted the Registrar to refuse to
register the vehicle, had the Registrar been aware of the
circumstance immediately before registering the vehicle;
(e) if the vehicle exceeds the age-limit prescribed for the class
or description of vehicles to which the vehicle belongs; or
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
62
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(f) if the vehicle has been forfeited pursuant to any written
law.
[4/2006; 37/2012; 23/2013; 10/2017]
(1A) In addition to subsection (1), the Registrar may cancel the
registration of a vehicle registered under any particular class,
category or description or purpose of use if the Registrar is
satisfied that —
(a) the vehicle has been so permanently altered (on or after the
date of commencement of section 8 of the Road Traffic
(Amendment) Act 2021 and whether in the course of repair
or otherwise) so as to render its construction, weight and
equipment or condition such that the vehicle no longer
conforms to the class, category or description it is
registered under; or
(b) the use of the vehicle has so materially changed (on or after
the date of commencement of section 8 of the Road Traffic
(Amendment) Act 2021) such that the use of the vehicle
does not conform to the purpose of use it is registered for.
[Act 12 of 2021 wef 03/01/2022]
(2) Where the registration of a vehicle is cancelled under
subsection (1) or (1A), the registered owner or the person in
possession of the vehicle must produce proof to the satisfaction of the
Registrar that the vehicle has been removed from all roads in
Singapore, or has been destroyed or removed from Singapore, within
one month of the date of the cancellation or any other period that the
Registrar may approve unless the vehicle is re‑registered within that
period.
[4/2006; 23/2013]
[Act 12 of 2021 wef 03/01/2022]
(3) Any person who fails to comply with subsection (2) shall be
guilty of an offence and shall be liable on conviction to a fine not
exceeding $2,000 or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding
3 months and, in the case of a second or subsequent conviction, to a
fine not exceeding $5,000 or to imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 6 months.
[4/2006]
Road Traffic Act 1961
63
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


General licences
28.—(1) Any person being a manufacturer or repairer of or a dealer
in vehicles may apply to the Registrar in the prescribed manner to be
allowed, in lieu of taking out a licence under this Part for each vehicle
kept or used by the person, to take out a general licence in respect of
all vehicles kept or used by the person.
(2) Subject to subsection (5), the Registrar, upon receiving an
application under subsection (1), may —
(a) if satisfied as to the bona fides of the applicant; and
(b) on payment by the applicant of the prescribed levy,
issue a general licence to the applicant either unconditionally or
subject to any conditions that the Registrar thinks fit to impose.
(3) The holder of any licence issued under this section is not entitled
by virtue of that licence to use —
(a) more than one vehicle at any one time except in the case of
a motor vehicle drawing a trailer and used for the
prescribed purposes; or
(b) any vehicle for any purpose other than such purposes as
may be prescribed.
(4) Nothing in this section operates to prevent a person entitled to
take out a general licence from holding 2 or more such licences.
(5) A general licence must not be issued until the applicant has
produced to the Registrar such evidence as the Registrar may require
that either —
(a) for the period of the licence there will be in force the policy
of insurance or the security required by law in relation to
the use of the vehicle by the applicant or by other persons
on the applicant’s order or with the applicant’s permission;
or
(b) the vehicle is a vehicle to which section 3 of the Motor
Vehicles (Third-Party Risks and Compensation) Act 1960
does not apply at any time when it is being driven by the
owner thereof or by an employee of the owner in the course
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
64
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


of the employee’s employment or is otherwise subject to
the control of the owner.
(6) Provision may be made by rules under this Act for the issue of
more than one type of general licence and for assigning a general
identification mark to a person holding any licence issued under this
section.
(7) No general licence may be assigned or transferred and the
holder of any general licence who assigns or transfers or attempts to
assign or transfer the licence shall be guilty of an offence.
(8) The Registrar may suspend or revoke a general licence if he or
she is satisfied —
(a) that the issue of the licence has been procured by fraud or
misrepresentation; or
(b) that the person to whom the general licence was issued has
contravened or failed to comply with any of the provisions
of this Act or the rules or with any condition of the general
licence.
[10/2017]
(9) Upon the suspension or revocation of a licence under
subsection (8), the holder of the general licence must surrender the
general licence to the Registrar.
(10) If any person is aggrieved by the refusal of the Registrar to
issue a general licence or by the suspension or revocation of a general
licence, the person may appeal to the Minister.
(11) The Minister must, on any appeal, make any order in the matter
that he or she thinks just and the Registrar must comply with any
order so made.
(12) Any order made by the Minister under subsection (11) is final.
Special purpose licences
28A.—(1) Any person intending to keep or use any vehicle for
purposes of research and development or for any other special
purpose (but not an approved trial or approved special use within the
meaning of section 6C) may apply to the Registrar for a licence
Road Traffic Act 1961
65
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(called in this Part a special purpose licence) allowing the person to
keep or use the vehicle on a road.
[10/2017]
(2) Sections 10 and 11 do not apply in respect of a vehicle that is
licensed under this section.
(3) Upon receiving an application under subsection (1) and upon
payment by the applicant of the prescribed levy, the Registrar may
issue a special purpose licence to the applicant either unconditionally
or subject to any conditions that the Registrar thinks fit to impose.
(4) The Registrar may suspend or cancel a special purpose licence if
the vehicle in respect of which the special purpose licence has been
issued is kept or used in contravention of —
(a) any of the provisions of this Act or the rules; or
(b) any of the conditions subject to which the special purpose
licence was issued.
[10/2017]
(5) The Registrar must not issue a special purpose licence in respect
of any vehicle until the applicant for the special purpose licence has
produced to the Registrar such evidence as the Registrar may require
that either —
(a) for the period of the special purpose licence there will be in
force the policy of insurance or security required by law in
relation to the use of the vehicle by the applicant or by any
other person on the applicant’s order or with the applicant’s
permission; or
(b) the vehicle is a vehicle to which section 3 of the Motor
Vehicles (Third-Party Risks and Compensation) Act 1960
does not apply at any time when it is being driven by the
owner thereof or by an employee of the owner in the course
of the employee’s employment or when it is otherwise
subject to the control of the owner.
(6) A special purpose licence issued to any person under this
section is not transferable to any other person and the holder of any
special purpose licence who transfers or attempts to transfer the
holder’s licence to any other person shall be guilty of an offence.
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
66
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(7) A person to whom a special purpose licence is issued under this
section must, within one month after the licence is cancelled under
subsection (4) or lapses, or any longer period that the Registrar may
allow in any particular case, do one of the following in relation to the
vehicle in respect of which the special purpose licence was issued:
(a) register the vehicle;
(b) remove the vehicle from use on all roads in Singapore and
produce proof of that to the satisfaction of the Registrar;
(c) destroy or export the vehicle and produce proof of that to
the satisfaction of the Registrar.
[10/2017]
(8) A person who fails to comply with subsection (7) shall be guilty
of an offence and shall be liable on conviction —
(a) to a fine not exceeding $2,000 or to imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 3 months; and
(b) in the case of a second or subsequent conviction, to a fine
not exceeding $5,000 or to imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 6 months.
[10/2017]
Offences in connection with registration and licensing of
vehicles
29.—(1) If any person possesses or uses any vehicle, other than a
bicycle or a trishaw, for which a licence under this Part is not in force
or causes or permits it to be so used or, being the holder of a general
licence or general licences issued under this Act, uses at any one time
a greater number of vehicles than the person is authorised to use by
virtue of that licence or those licences, the person shall be guilty of an
offence and shall be liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding
$2,000.
[10/2017]
(2) If any person uses a bicycle which has not been registered or a
trishaw which has not been licensed under this Part, the person shall
be guilty of an offence and shall be liable on conviction to a fine not
exceeding $100.
(3) [Deleted by Act 10 of 2017]
Road Traffic Act 1961
67
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(4) Where a licence has been taken out for a motor vehicle to be
used solely for a certain purpose and the motor vehicle is, at any time
during the period for which the licence is in force, used for some other
purpose, the person so using the motor vehicle or causing or
permitting it to be so used shall, if the rate of fee chargeable in respect
of a licence for a motor vehicle used for that other purpose is higher
than the rate chargeable in respect of the licence held by the person,
be guilty of an offence and shall be liable on conviction to a fine not
exceeding $1,000 and, in the case of a second or subsequent
conviction, shall in addition be liable to imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 3 months.
(5) If in any proceedings under this section any question arises —
(a) as to the number of motor vehicles used;
(b) as to the character, weight and horsepower of any motor
vehicle;
(c) as to the number of seats provided in a motor vehicle; or
(d) as to the purposes for which any motor vehicle has been
used,
it is sufficient for a witness for the prosecution to give evidence on
oath that, in consequence of inquiries which the witness has made or
of reports which the witness has received, the witness has reasonable
grounds for believing that —
(e) the number of motor vehicles used;
(f) the character, weight and horsepower of any motor vehicle;
(g) the number of seats provided in a motor vehicle; or
(h) the purposes for which any motor vehicle has been used,
or any one or more of these facts was or were such as would be
necessary to establish the offence charged.
(6) Thereupon the burden is on the defendant to prove that the
number of motor vehicles used or the character, weight and
horsepower of any motor vehicle, the number of seats provided in
a motor vehicle or the purposes for which any motor vehicle has been
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
68
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


used (as the case may require) was or were in fact such that the
offence charged was not in law committed by the defendant.
Court may order offender to pay arrears of taxes
29A.—(1) Where a person is convicted of an offence under
section 15 or 29, the court before which the person is convicted
may, in addition to the punishment prescribed for the offence, order
the person to pay the amount of any taxes as may be certified by an
officer appointed by the Authority to be due and payable under
section 11(1)(b) by the person at the date of the person’s conviction.
(2) The amount under subsection (1) may be recovered according to
the law for the time being in force for the recovery of fines.
Power to seize and sell vehicles
30.—(1) If any tax payable in respect of any vehicle remains unpaid
after one month commencing from the date of expiry of the licence
last in force for the vehicle, the Registrar may issue a warrant in the
prescribed form directing the officer named therein to seize the
vehicle and recover the tax due from the proceeds of the sale of the
vehicle.
(2) The person to whom any warrant is addressed may break open
in the daytime any house or building for the purpose of the seizure of
the vehicle pursuant to the warrant.
(3) Any fees prescribed by the Authority are payable by way of
costs in the case of the issue of a warrant for the recovery of any tax
under this section.
Limitation on bringing of proceedings for recovery of
over‑payment of tax
31. No proceedings may be brought for enforcing any repayment of
tax to which a person may be entitled in respect of any over-payment
of tax made on a vehicle licence taken out by the person, unless the
proceedings are brought before the end of the 12 months beginning
with the end of the period in respect of which the licence was taken
out.
32. [Repealed by Act 4 of 2006]
Road Traffic Act 1961
69
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


Exemptions and application to vehicles belonging to
Government
33.—(1) The Minister may, in special cases and for a particular
occasion, exempt any vehicle or type of vehicle from the operation of
all or any of the provisions of this Part or from the taxes, fees or levies
payable thereunder or may reduce those taxes, fees or levies.
(2) This Part applies to vehicles belonging to the Government.
33A. [Repealed by Act 38 of 2018]
33B. [Repealed by Act 38 of 2018]
Rules for purposes of this Part
34.—(1) The Minister may make rules for any purpose for which
rules may be made under this Part and for prescribing anything which
may be prescribed under this Part, and otherwise for the purpose of
carrying this Part into effect and, in particular, may make rules —
(a) to regulate the registration and licensing of vehicles, to
prescribe the forms of application for and the contents of
vehicle licences, and to provide special facilities for the
licensing of motor vehicles brought into Singapore from
places outside Singapore;
(b) [Deleted by Act 4 of 2006]
(c) to
prescribe
the
size,
shape
and
character
of
the
identification marks or the signs to be fixed on any
vehicle and the manner in which those marks or signs are to
be
secured,
sealed,
displayed
and
rendered
easily
distinguishable whether by night or by day and to
prohibit
those
marks,
signs
and
seals
from
being
tampered with;
(d) to provide for the marking of prescribed particulars on any
vehicle;
(da) to require any person to whom any vehicle is sold or
disposed of or any person who sold or disposed of any
vehicle to furnish any particulars of the sale or disposal that
the Registrar may require;
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
70
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(db) to require any person who is, in the course of business,
selling or supplying, or offering or exposing for sale or
supply, by retail, any vehicle on any premises or place —
(i) to display warning notices about prescribed vehicles
or trailers which do not comply with the rules made
under section 6 as to construction, weight and
equipment applicable to the class or description of
vehicles to which that vehicle or trailer belongs; or
(ii) to display in a prescribed manner or not to display
any
vehicles
or
trailers
mentioned
in
sub‑paragraph (i), or advertisements about the
vehicles or trailers, at the premises or place;
(e) to prescribe the form of, and the particulars to be included
in, the register with respect to vehicles for which a general
licence has been taken out by a manufacturer, repairer or
dealer and the identification marks to be carried by any
such vehicle and to define the purposes for which the
holder of a general licence may use a vehicle under the
general licence;
(f) to extend any provisions as to registration and provisions
incidental to those provisions to any vehicle in respect of
which taxes chargeable under this Part are not payable and
to provide for the identification of the vehicle;
(g) to provide for information contained in any records
maintained by the Registrar with respect to the marking,
registration, licensing or keeping of vehicles to be made
public or to be made available, either without payment or
on payment of the prescribed fee, to any persons that may
be determined by or under the rules;
(h) with respect to the form and particulars to be included in a
notice under section 17(2)(b), the manner of giving the
notice and the time at which it is to be treated as being
given;
Road Traffic Act 1961
71
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(i) for securing that notice under section 17(2)(b) is not given
in respect of a period of less than 30 days or more than
12 months;
(j) as to the mode of calculating the period in respect of which
notice under section 17(2)(b) is to be treated as given;
(k) with respect to the mode of proving the giving of the said
notice;
(l) for deeming the said notice to have been given in relation
to a vehicle in respect of any period or at any time if in the
circumstances of any particular case the Minister considers
it reasonable to do so;
(m) to make provision with respect to the furnishing of
information and production of certificates of insurance or
security
and
with
respect
to
the
registration
and
identification
of
such
vehicles
(including
vehicles
belonging to the Government);
(n) to prescribe the particulars to be marked on vehicles and
trailers;
(o) to prescribe —
(i) the fees and costs payable for the recovery of any tax
payable under this Act, whether by instalment or
otherwise; and
(ii) any interest or charge payable for the late payment,
or the payment by instalment, of any tax payable
under this Act;
[Act 4 of 2008 wef 01/04/2024]
(p) to prohibit the registration under this Act of used vehicles
beyond a prescribed age-limit;
(q) to prescribe a levy for the re-registration of a used vehicle
in the name of the purchaser of the vehicle;
(r) to regulate the registration, licensing, keeping and use of
heavy vehicles; and
(s) to regulate the registration and licensing of a replacement
vehicle, and to deem the date of registration of the
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
72
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


replacement vehicle to be the same as that of the vehicle
which it replaced for any of the purposes of this Act.
[4/2006; 7/2012; 3/2017; 10/2017]
(2) Rules
made
under
this
section
for
the
purposes
of
subsection (1)(da) or (db) may provide that any contravention of
any provision of the rules involving a power-assisted bicycle shall be
an offence and the offender may be liable on conviction —
(a) where the person is an individual — to a fine not exceeding
$20,000 or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding
24 months or to both; or
(b) in any other case — to a fine not exceeding $40,000.
[9/2020]
(3) Every amount collected before the date of commencement of
the
Statutes
(Miscellaneous
Amendments)
Act
2008
as,
or
purportedly as, interest or a charge for the late payment, or the
payment by instalment, of any tax payable under this Act shall be
deemed to be and always to have been validly collected, and no legal
proceedings shall lie or be instituted or maintained in any court of law
on account of or in respect of any such collection.
[Act 4 of 2008 wef 01/04/2024]
PART 1A
ROAD-USER CHARGES
Interpretation of this Part
34A. In this Part —
“authorised officer” means any employee of the Authority, or
any other person, who is duly authorised by the Registrar in
writing to carry out any particular function or to exercise any
particular power under this Part;
“prescribed hours” means the hours prescribed by the Minister
for the levying of a road-user charge in respect of any
specified road;
Road Traffic Act 1961
73
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


“road-user charge” means the charge payable for riding, driving
or moving a motor vehicle on a specified road during the
prescribed hours;
“specified road” means any road or part thereof as may be
specified in rules made under this Part.
[1/2006]
Levying of road-user charge
34B.—(1) The Minister may prescribe road-user charges to be paid
in connection with the use of any specified road.
(2) All road-user charges collected under this Part must be paid into
the Consolidated Fund.
Electronic or computerised or other charge collecting facilities
34C. The Authority may install or cause to be installed on any road
in respect of which a road-user charge is levied under this Part any
electronic or computerised or other facilities that the Authority thinks
fit for the purpose of collecting the road-user charge and may also
install or cause to be installed any ancillary facilities that the
Authority thinks necessary.
Rules for purposes of this Part
34D.—(1) The Minister may make rules for the purposes of
carrying this Part into effect and, in particular, may make rules —
(a) specifying the roads in respect of which, and the days and
hours during which, a road-user charge is levied;
(b) prescribing the amount of road-user charge to be levied in
respect of any specified road and for this purpose,
road‑user
charges
of
different
amounts
may
be
prescribed in respect of —
(i) different specified roads or parts thereof;
(ii) different hours of the day or different days of the
week; and
(iii) different classes, categories or descriptions of
vehicles;
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
74
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(ba) empowering the Registrar and any officer authorised by
the Registrar to prohibit the entry into or exit from
Singapore of any foreign vehicle if any unpaid road-user
charges under this Act in respect of that vehicle is in
arrears;
(c) prescribing the manner in which road-user charges are
levied and collected, including the use of electronic or
computerised or other facilities therefor, and for this
purpose, the rules may —
(i) require all vehicles (whether registered in Singapore
or elsewhere) to be installed with such devices and
appurtenances and in such manner as may be
prescribed before they may be ridden, driven or
moved on a specified road during the prescribed
hours;
(ii) [Deleted by Act 1 of 2006]
(iii) prohibit the sale, supply, installation, repair or
maintenance
of
any
device
or
appurtenance
prescribed under sub‑paragraph (i) by any person
not authorised by the Registrar to do so; and
(iv) specify the conditions under which any device or
appurtenance prescribed under sub‑paragraph (i)
may be removed from one vehicle and installed in
another or transferred from one person to another;
and
(d) prescribing the records to be kept by the Registrar in
connection with this Part and regulating the disclosure by
the Registrar of any information in those records.
[1/2006; 10/2017]
(2) Where a person is convicted of an offence under the rules, the
court before which the person is convicted may, in addition to the
punishment prescribed for the offence, order the person to pay the
amount of road-user charge as may be certified by an officer
appointed by the Authority in that behalf to be due from the person at
the date of the conviction and the amount may be recovered according
to the law for the time being in force for the recovery of fines.
Road Traffic Act 1961
75
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


Registrar’s power of inspection and seizure, etc.
34E.—(1) The Registrar may, by written notice, require the owner
of any vehicle in which any device or appurtenance has been installed
for the purpose of this Part to produce the vehicle before the Registrar
or an authorised officer at the time and place appointed by the
Registrar in order that the Registrar or authorised officer may inspect
or test the device or appurtenance.
(2) The Registrar or authorised officer may remove from a vehicle
which has been produced before him or her pursuant to subsection (1)
any device or appurtenance which has been installed in the vehicle for
the purpose of this Part if the Registrar or authorised officer is of the
opinion that the device or appurtenance cannot be properly inspected
or tested without being so removed.
(3) If, upon inspecting the device or appurtenance, the Registrar or
authorised officer is satisfied that there is or has been any
contravention of any of the provisions of this Part or the rules
made under section 34D concerning the device or appurtenance, the
Registrar
or
authorised
officer
may
remove
the
device
or
appurtenance from the vehicle and dispose of it in any manner that
he or she thinks fit.
(4) Any person who fails to comply with a notice issued under
subsection (1) shall be guilty of an offence.
(5) Where a person on whom a notice is served under subsection (1)
fails to comply with the notice, the Registrar or an authorised officer
may seize and detain the vehicle in order to carry out any inspection
or test under subsection (1).
(6) Where any vehicle is seized and detained under subsection (5),
the Registrar or authorised officer must immediately inform the
owner of the vehicle in writing of the seizure and detention and if the
vehicle is not claimed by its owner within 3 months of the date of its
seizure —
(a) the Registrar or authorised officer may, after giving
one month’s notice in the Gazette, sell the vehicle by
public auction or otherwise dispose of the vehicle in any
manner that he or she thinks fit; and
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
76
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(b) the proceeds (if any) from the sale or disposal of the
vehicle must be applied in payment of any road-user
charges which may be due in respect of the vehicle and of
any charges incurred in carrying out the provisions of this
section and the surplus (if any) must be paid into the
Consolidated Fund, if unclaimed by the owner within a
period of 12 months.
PART 2
LICENSING OF DRIVERS AND RIDERS
[12/2021]
Division 1 — Driving of motor vehicles except
test‑needed‑to‑ride‑on‑road vehicles
[12/2021]
Application of Division
34F. This Division does not apply to or in relation to the riding of
any test‑needed‑to‑ride‑on‑road vehicle on any road.
[12/2021]
Licensing of drivers, etc.
35.—(1) Except as otherwise provided in this Act, a person must
not drive a motor vehicle of any class or description on a road unless
the person is the holder of a driving licence authorising him or her to
drive a motor vehicle of that class or description.
(2) A person must not employ or permit another person to drive a
motor vehicle on a road unless the person so employed or permitted to
drive is the holder of such a driving licence.
(3) Any person who contravenes subsection (1) or (2) shall be
guilty of an offence and shall be liable on conviction as follows:
(a) to a fine not exceeding $10,000 or to imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 3 years or to both;
Road Traffic Act 1961
77
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(b) where the person is a repeat offender, to a fine not
exceeding $20,000 or to imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 6 years or to both.
[19/2019]
(3A) For the purposes of subsection (3) and section 35AA, a person
is a repeat offender in relation to an offence under subsection (3) if the
person who is convicted, or found guilty, of an offence under that
subsection
(called
the
current
offence)
for
contravening
subsection (1) or (2) —
(a) has been convicted or found guilty on at least one other
earlier occasion of an offence under subsection (3) for
contravening the same provision as the current offence; or
(b) has (whether before, on or after 1 November 2019) been
convicted or found guilty on at least one other earlier
occasion of an offence under subsection (3) as in force
immediately before that date for contravening the same
provision as the current offence.
[19/2019]
(4) An application for a grant or renewal of a driving licence must
be made in any form that the Deputy Commissioner of Police may
design and utilise.
[28/2014]
(5) On an application for the grant of a driving licence, the applicant
must, in addition to any declaration required under this Act, state
whether —
(a) he or she has held a driver’s certificate or licence in any
part of the world;
(b) any such certificate or licence has been endorsed,
suspended or cancelled;
(c) he or she has been disqualified from holding a licence; and
(d) he or she is under the provisions of this Act disqualified by
reason of age or otherwise from obtaining the licence for
which he or she is applying.
(6) Subject to the provisions of this Part as to tests of competence to
drive and as to the physical fitness of applicants for driving licences,
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
78
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


the Deputy Commissioner of Police must, upon payment of the
prescribed fee (if any), grant a licence to any person who —
(a) applies for it in the prescribed manner; and
(b) declares in writing that the person is not disqualified by
any reason (age or otherwise) from obtaining the licence.
[28/2014]
(6A) The Deputy Commissioner of Police may, upon payment of
the prescribed fee (if any), renew the driving licence of any person
who holds a driving licence authorising him or her to drive a class or
description of a motor vehicle if the Deputy Commissioner of Police
is satisfied that the person has passed the whole or any part of the
prescribed test of competence to drive that class or description of
vehicle that the Deputy Commissioner of Police may require.
[28/2014]
(7) The Deputy Commissioner of Police must grant a licence under
subsection (6) or renew a licence under subsection (6A) except in the
case of an applicant —
(a) who is disqualified as provided under this section; or
(b) to whom, in the opinion of the Deputy Commissioner of
Police, it would not be in the public interest to grant or
renew a licence.
[28/2014]
(8) A driving licence may authorise the holder of the driving licence
to drive all classes of motor vehicles or such class or classes or such
type or types within any class or classes as the Deputy Commissioner
of Police may specify therein.
(9) Where the applicant is subject to any restriction with respect to
the driving of any class of motor vehicle, the extent of the restriction
must be specified in the prescribed manner on the driving licence.
(10) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules, unless
earlier revoked or surrendered —
(a) a driving licence granted to a person who is, or a renewed
driving licence of a person who becomes, a citizen or
permanent resident of Singapore remains in force for the
lifetime of that person; and
Road Traffic Act 1961
79
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(b) a driving licence granted to, or a renewed driving licence
of, a person who is not a citizen or permanent resident of
Singapore remains in force for a period of 5 years
beginning on the date of such grant or renewal (as the
case may be) or any shorter period that the Deputy
Commissioner of Police may specify in any particular case.
[28/2014; 10/2017]
(10A) Despite subsection (10) but subject to the other provisions of
this Act, a driving licence mentioned in subsection (10)(a) or (b)
ceases to be in force when the person who holds the driving licence
attains any of the prescribed ages applicable to the person, unless
before attaining that age —
(a) the person undergoes the prescribed medical examination
and is duly certified by a registered medical practitioner as
being physically fit to drive a motor vehicle of the class or
description in that licence; and
(b) the person passes the whole or any part of the prescribed
test of competence to drive that the Deputy Commissioner
of Police may require for the person to drive a motor
vehicle of the class or description in that licence.
[28/2014]
(11) Subsection (10) does not apply to a provisional licence referred
to in section 36(3).
(12) [Deleted by Act 28 of 2014]
(13) The Deputy Commissioner of Police may refuse to renew any
driving licence if the Deputy Commissioner of Police is satisfied —
(a) that the holder of the driving licence has not complied with
any process of court issued against him or her in respect of
any offence committed by him or her under this Act or the
rules or any written law specified in Part 2 of the
First Schedule; or
(b) that the holder of the driving licence has, pursuant to a
warrant of court, been arrested in connection with an
offence under this Act or the rules or any written law
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
80
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


specified in Part 2 of the First Schedule and the offence has
not been tried and determined by the court.
[28/2014; 10/2017]
(14) Subject to subsection (15), the Minister may, by notification in
the Gazette, amend Part 2 of the First Schedule.
(15) The Minister must, before exercising his or her powers under
subsection (14), consult the Minister responsible for the written law
to which the amendment relates.
(16) Where a person’s driving licence has ceased to be in force for a
period of 3 years or more, the Deputy Commissioner of Police must
not grant another driving licence to the person authorising the person
to drive a class or description of motor vehicle unless —
(a) the person passes the test of competence to drive referred
to in section 36(1); or
(b) the Deputy Commissioner of Police is satisfied that, at any
time within 3 years before the date that the person applies
for the other driving licence, the person held a driver’s
certificate or licence granted by the competent authority in
any country other than Singapore authorising the person to
drive a motor vehicle of that class or description.
[28/2014]
(17) A person is disqualified from obtaining a driving licence —
(a) while another driving licence granted to him or her is in
force whether the licence is suspended or not;
(b) if he or she is, by a conviction under this Act or by an order
of a court in Singapore or Malaysia, disqualified from
holding or obtaining a driving licence.
(18) In any proceedings, the fact that a driving licence has been
granted to a person is evidence that the person for the purpose of
obtaining the licence made a declaration that he or she was not
disqualified from holding or obtaining the licence.
(19) If any person is aggrieved by the refusal of the Deputy
Commissioner of Police to grant or renew a driving licence or by the
revocation of a driving licence under section 37, he or she may, after
giving the Deputy Commissioner of Police notice of his or her
Road Traffic Act 1961
81
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


intention to do so, appeal to the Commissioner of Police and on the
appeal the Commissioner of Police may make any order that the
Commissioner of Police thinks fit and any order so made is binding
on the Deputy Commissioner of Police.
[28/2014]
(20) In this section, “permanent resident of Singapore” means a
person who holds a valid entry permit under section 10 of the
Immigration Act 1959 or a valid re‑entry permit under section 11 of
that Act.
[28/2014]
Court to order forfeiture of vehicle for person driving motor
vehicle without driving licence
35AA.—(1) Where a person convicted of an offence under
section 35(3) (committed on or after 1 November 2019) is a repeat
offender and it is proved to the satisfaction of a court that a motor
vehicle has been used in the commission of the offence, the court is
to, on the application of the Public Prosecutor, make an order for the
forfeiture of the motor vehicle, unless —
(a) the court is satisfied that —
(i) the person convicted is not the owner of the motor
vehicle; and
(ii) the driver of the motor vehicle in relation to which
the offence is committed had driven the motor
vehicle without the consent of the owner; or
(b) the court has other good reasons for ordering otherwise.
[19/2019]
(2) Any motor vehicle in respect of which there has been or there is
reasonable cause to suspect that there has been committed (on or after
1 November 2019) an offence under section 35(3), may be seized by
any police officer or the Registrar or any officer authorised in writing
by the Registrar.
[19/2019]
(3) If there is no prosecution with regard to an offence under
section 35(3), any motor vehicle seized pursuant to subsection (2) in
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
82
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


relation to the offence must be released at the end of one month
starting from the date of seizure if it is not earlier released.
[19/2019]
Power of Deputy Commissioner of Police to revoke driving
licence
35A.—(1) The Deputy Commissioner of Police may revoke a
driving licence if —
(a) within a period of 12 months from the date of the grant of
the licence, the record of the holder of the licence (as kept
by the Deputy Commissioner of Police for the purposes of
this section) as a driver of motor vehicles establishes that it
would not be in the interests of public safety for him or her
to continue to hold the licence, or that he or she is not
competent to drive a motor vehicle;
(b) the holder of the licence —
(i) had, at any time before being granted that licence,
committed an offence while driving a motor vehicle
of a class or description which he or she was
authorised to drive by virtue of another driving
licence held by him or her at the time; and
(ii) after being granted the firstmentioned licence, is
dealt with by the court or the Deputy Commissioner
of
Police
for
the
offence
mentioned
in
sub‑paragraph (i) in any manner that would, by
virtue of any rules relating to the prescribed test of
competence
leading
to
the
grant
of
the
firstmentioned licence, have caused the holder of
the licence to be disallowed from taking that test had
he or she been so dealt with for that offence before he
or she took that test; or
(c) the Deputy Commissioner of Police becomes aware of a
circumstance that would have required or permitted the
Deputy Commissioner of Police to refuse to grant a driving
licence to any person, had he or she been aware of the
Road Traffic Act 1961
83
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


circumstance immediately before granting the driving
licence.
[24/2010]
(2) For the purpose of establishing that it would not be in the
interests of public safety for a person to hold a valid driving licence or
that such person is not competent to drive a motor vehicle, the
Minister may make rules establishing a system of awarding points
against a person for the commission of an offence under this Act or
the rules, and providing for the circumstances where any points so
awarded may be cancelled or disregarded.
[28/2014; 10/2017]
(3) The Deputy Commissioner of Police may, under subsection (1),
regard a person as not competent to drive a motor vehicle, or establish
that it would not be in the interests of public safety for a person to
continue to hold a driving licence, if that person is awarded, within a
prescribed period, points prescribed for the commission of an offence
or offences under this Act that are equal to or in excess of the
maximum number of points prescribed (called the revocation
threshold).
[28/2014]
(4) The rules made under subsection (2) must —
(a) specify the number of points to be awarded for an offence
under this Act, including points that distinguish between
different offences under this Act or the circumstances in
which any offence is committed or both;
(b) specify when points may be awarded in respect of an
offence under this Act, and the circumstances under which
points awarded may be cancelled or disregarded for the
purposes of subsection (1); and
(c) specify the revocation threshold, the period over which the
revocation threshold is calculated, and any other matters
that are required to be prescribed for the purposes of this
section.
[28/2014]
(5) Where the points awarded against a person under the rules made
under subsection (2) reach 50% of the revocation threshold under this
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
84
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


section, the Deputy Commissioner of Police must give written notice
thereof to the person.
[28/2014]
(6) Where a person is disqualified by an order of a court from
holding or obtaining a driving licence for a period of time specified in
the order, every point awarded against the person under the rules
made under subsection (2) must thereupon be cancelled.
(7) Where a holder of a valid driving licence commits on a single
occasion more than one offence under this Act or the rules, points
must be awarded against him or her only for the offence committed
by him or her and in respect of which the largest number of points
may be awarded against a person.
[10/2017]
(7A) If —
(a) a person is a holder of a driving licence authorising the
person to drive a motor vehicle of a particular class or
description; and
(b) the person’s driving licence is revoked under this section
when the person is a new driver in respect of that licence,
then every other driving licence authorising the person to drive a
motor vehicle of any other class or description is deemed to be
revoked as well unless the person is then not a new driver in respect of
that other driving licence.
[19/2019]
(8) [Deleted by Act 12 of 2021]
(9) For the purposes of subsection (7A), a person is a new driver in
relation to any driving licence during the initial period —
(a) starting on the date of the grant of the driving licence to the
person under section 35(6), or under section 36(2) in the
circumstances described in section 36(2)(a)(ii); and
(b) ending on the eve of the first anniversary of the grant of the
driving licence as mentioned in paragraph (a).
[19/2019]
Road Traffic Act 1961
85
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


Licensee may make representations against revocation of
driving licence
35B.—(1) To revoke a person’s driving licence under section 35A,
the Deputy Commissioner of Police must first give a notice to the
person concerned —
(a) stating that the Deputy Commissioner of Police proposes
to revoke the person’s driving licence on such date (called
in this section the proposed revocation date) being at least
4 weeks after the date of giving the notice;
(b) setting out the reasons for revoking the person’s driving
licence; and
(c) specifying the period (being at least 4 weeks after the date
of giving the notice) within which representations or
objections with respect to the proposed revocation may be
made.
[19/2019]
(2) Then,
the
Deputy
Commissioner
of
Police
may,
after
considering any representations or objections which are duly made
within the period mentioned in subsection (1)(c) and not withdrawn
by the person concerned, revoke the person’s driving licence on the
proposed revocation date.
[19/2019]
(3) The Deputy Commissioner of Police must immediately inform
the person concerned of his or her decision under subsection (2).
[19/2019]
(4) However, the Deputy Commissioner of Police may, on his or her
own initiative, rescind the revocation of a person’s driving licence
and reinstate the person’s driving licence, after re‑considering any
representations or objections made by that person within the period
mentioned in subsection (1)(c).
[19/2019]
(5) In relation to reinstating a person’s driving licence under
subsection (4) —
(a) the Deputy Commissioner of Police must regard the person
as still satisfying all the requirements relating to the grant
of the driving licence; and
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
86
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(b) from that reinstatement, the driving licence reinstated must
be regarded as being continuously in force starting on the
date of its grant, disregarding any break because of the
revocation of the driving licence.
[19/2019]
(6) This section applies only in relation to a notice given by the
Deputy Commissioner of Police under subsection (1) on or after
29 June 2021, and section 35B as in force immediately before that
date continues to apply in relation to a notice given by the Deputy
Commissioner of Police under that section before that date.
[19/2019]
Surrender of driving licence
35C.—(1) The Deputy Commissioner of Police must, upon
revoking a licence under section 35A, require the licence (if not
issued in electronic form) to be surrendered to and retained by the
Deputy Commissioner of Police.
[19/2019]
(2) Any person whose driving licence has been revoked under
section 35A must immediately surrender the driving licence (if not
issued in electronic form) to the Deputy Commissioner of Police.
[19/2019]
(3) Any person whose driving licence has been revoked under
section 35A must not drive a motor vehicle of the class or description
which the revoked licence had authorised that person to drive until
that person is granted a new driving licence authorising that person to
drive a motor vehicle of that class or description.
[28/2014]
(4) Any person who drives a motor vehicle on a road when his or
her driving licence is revoked under section 35A shall be guilty of an
offence.
Prescribed test of competence to drive for grant of driving
licence
36.—(1) A driving licence must not be granted to any applicant
unless he or she passes the prescribed test of competence to drive.
[28/2014]
Road Traffic Act 1961
87
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(2) Despite subsection (1), the Deputy Commissioner of Police may
grant a driving licence to an applicant who satisfies the Deputy
Commissioner of Police that —
(a) at any time within 3 years before the date that the applicant
makes the application, the applicant —
(i) has held a driving licence which has ceased to be in
force under section 35(10A); or
(ii) has held a driver’s certificate or licence granted by
the competent authority in any country other than
Singapore authorising the applicant to drive a motor
vehicle of the class or description which the
applicant would be authorised to drive by the
licence applied for; and
(b) the applicant passes the whole or such part of the test of
competence to drive mentioned in subsection (1) or such
other prescribed test of competence to drive, as the Deputy
Commissioner of Police may require.
[28/2014]
(3) For the purpose of enabling the applicant for a driving licence to
learn to drive a motor vehicle with a view to passing a test under this
section, the Deputy Commissioner of Police may, if so requested by
the applicant and on payment of the prescribed fee, grant to the
applicant a provisional licence to be in force for a period prescribed.
[28/2014; 10/2017]
(4) A provisional licence must be in the prescribed form and is
granted subject to the prescribed conditions.
(5) If any person to whom a provisional licence is granted fails to
comply with any of the conditions subject to which it is granted, he or
she shall be guilty of an offence.
(6) Different validity periods for provisional licences may be
prescribed under section 48 for different types of provisional
licences.
[10/2017]
(7) The court before which a person is convicted of an offence
under section 64, 65 or 65A may, whether the person has previously
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
88
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


passed the prescribed test of competence to drive or not and whether
or not the court makes an order under section 42 disqualifying the
person from holding or obtaining a licence to drive a motor vehicle,
order the person to be disqualified from holding or obtaining a licence
to drive a motor vehicle until the person has since the date of the order
passed the test.
(8) The provisions of this Act which have effect where an order
disqualifying a person from holding or obtaining a driving licence is
made have effect in relation to a disqualification by virtue of an order
under this section subject to the following modifications:
(a) despite section 35(17) or 43(3), the person disqualified is
(unless the person is disqualified from holding or obtaining
a driving licence otherwise than by virtue of an order under
this section) entitled to obtain and to hold a provisional
driving licence to be granted under subsection (3) and to
drive a motor vehicle in accordance with the conditions
subject to which the provisional driving licence is granted;
(b) the disqualification is deemed to have expired on
production to the Deputy Commissioner of Police of
evidence that the person has since the order was made
passed the prescribed test;
(c) on the return to the person disqualified of any driving
licence held by the person or on the issue to the person of
such a licence there must be added to the endorsed
particulars of the disqualification a statement that the
person disqualified has since the order was made passed
the prescribed test.
Provisions as to physical fitness of applicants for driving
licences
37.—(1) On an application for the grant of a driving licence, the
applicant must make a declaration in writing as to whether the
applicant is suffering from —
(a) any prescribed disease or physical disability; or
Road Traffic Act 1961
89
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(b) any other disease or physical disability which is likely to
cause the driving by the applicant of a motor vehicle (of the
class or description which the applicant would be
authorised by the licence to drive) to be a source of
danger to the public.
[28/2014]
(2) If from the declaration it appears that the applicant is suffering
from any disease or physical disability specified in subsection (1), the
Deputy Commissioner of Police must refuse to grant the driving
licence.
(3) A driving licence limited to driving an invalid carriage may be
granted to the applicant if the Deputy Commissioner of Police is
satisfied that he or she is fit to drive such a carriage.
(4) The applicant may, except in the case of any prescribed diseases
and disabilities, on payment of the prescribed fee, claim to be
subjected to a test as to his or her fitness or ability to drive a motor
vehicle of any class or description that he or she would be authorised
by the licence to drive.
(5) If the applicant passes the prescribed test and is not otherwise
disqualified, the driving licence must not be refused by reason only of
the provisions of subsection (2), except that if the test proves his or
her fitness to drive motor vehicles of a particular construction or
design only, the driving licence must be limited to the driving of such
vehicles.
(6) If it appears to the Deputy Commissioner of Police that there is
reason to believe that any person who holds a driving licence is
suffering from a disease or physical disability likely to cause the
driving by the person of a motor vehicle, being a motor vehicle of any
class or description the person is authorised by the licence to drive, to
be a source of danger to the public and, after making any inquiry that
he or she considers necessary, the Deputy Commissioner of Police is
satisfied that the licence holder is so suffering then, whether or not the
licence holder so suffering has previously passed a test under this
section, the Deputy Commissioner of Police may, after giving to the
licence holder notice of such intention, revoke the driving licence.
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
90
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(7) The licence holder must on receipt of the notice deliver the
driving
licence
to
the
Deputy
Commissioner
of
Police
for
cancellation.
(8) The licence holder may, except in the case of any prescribed
diseases and disabilities, claim to be subjected to a test as to his or her
fitness or disability to drive a motor vehicle and, if he or she passes
the prescribed test, the driving licence must not be revoked or, if it has
already been revoked, must be returned to the licence holder and the
revocation thereof is rescinded.
Recognition of foreign driving licences and driving permits
38.—(1) Despite not holding a valid driving licence but subject to
the provisions of this Act, it is lawful for a holder of a valid foreign
driving licence to drive in Singapore, for a period of 12 months
starting from the date of his or her last entry into Singapore, a motor
vehicle of the class or description which the foreign driving licence
authorises him or her to drive.
[28/2014]
(2) However, subsection (1) does not apply where the holder of the
foreign driving licence —
(a) is a citizen or permanent resident of Singapore; or
(b) is a work pass driver.
[28/2014]
(3) If at any time a holder of a valid foreign driving licence
becomes —
(a) a citizen or permanent resident of Singapore; or
(b) a work pass driver,
then subsection (1) applies to that holder of a foreign driving licence
for the prescribed period instead of the 12‑month period in
subsection (1).
[28/2014]
(4) Despite not holding a valid driving licence, it is lawful for —
(a) a member of a visiting force; or
(b) a member of a civilian component of the visiting force,
Road Traffic Act 1961
91
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


who holds a driving permit issued to him or her by a competent
authority of the country of the visiting force to drive in Singapore a
motor vehicle belonging to the country of the visiting force which is
of the class or description specified in the driving permit.
[28/2014]
(5) In this section —
“civilian component” and “visiting force” have the respective
meanings given by the Visiting Forces Act 1960;
“permanent resident of Singapore” means a person who holds a
valid entry permit under section 10 of the Immigration
Act 1959 or a valid re‑entry permit under section 11 of that
Act;
“prescribed period” means the period prescribed, starting
from —
(a) for a person referred to in subsection (3)(a), the date
on which the person is granted a certificate of
citizenship under the Constitution of the Republic
of
Singapore
or
an
entry
permit
under
the
Immigration Act, whichever first happens; or
(b) for a person referred to in subsection (3)(b), the date
on which the person is issued with a work pass under
the Employment of Foreign Manpower Act 1990;
“work pass driver” means the holder of a work pass issued under
the Employment of Foreign Manpower Act 1990 who drives
a motor vehicle carrying passengers or goods or both —
(a) for hire or reward; or
(b) because of or under a contract of employment.
[28/2014]
Production of driving licences
39.—(1) Any person driving a motor vehicle on a road must, on
being so required by a police officer, produce his or her driving
licence for examination so as to enable the police officer to ascertain
his or her name and address, the date of issue and the authority by
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
92
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


which it was issued, and if he or she fails to do so he or she shall be
guilty of an offence.
(2) Despite subsection (1), if within 24 hours after the production of
his or her driving licence was so required, the licensee produces the
licence in person at any police office or police station in Singapore
that may be specified by the police officer at the time its production
was required, the licensee shall not be convicted of an offence under
this section.
(3) Subsection (2) does not apply to a paid driver or to the driver of
a motor vehicle used for the carriage of passengers for hire or reward
or for the carriage of goods.
Possession of driving licence belonging to another person
40.—(1) If the Deputy Commissioner of Police has reasonable
cause to believe that a driving licence is in the possession of any
person other than the person to whom it was issued, the Deputy
Commissioner of Police may, by written notice served personally on
the person in whose possession the licence is alleged to be, require the
person immediately to deliver the driving licence to the Deputy
Commissioner of Police who must, in the absence of any reason to the
contrary, deliver the driving licence to the person to whom it was
issued.
(2) Any person who, without reasonable cause, fails to comply with
a notice under subsection (1) shall be guilty of an offence.
41. [Repealed by Act 12 of 2021]
Disqualification for offences
42.—(1) Where a person (called in this section the offender) is
convicted of —
(a) an offence under this Act or any other written law in
connection with the driving of a motor vehicle; or
(b) an offence under this Act or any other written law and —
(i) at the time of the commission of the offence, the
offender was the driver or was in charge of a motor
vehicle on a road or other public place;
Road Traffic Act 1961
93
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(ii) the person against whom the offence was committed
was the driver of another vehicle on the road or
public place, a passenger in that other vehicle or a
pedestrian on the road or public place;
(iii) the court convicting the offender of the offence is
satisfied that the commission of the offence arose
from or was connected with a dispute between the
offender and that other person over the use of the
road or public place; and
(iv) having regard to the circumstances under which the
offence was committed and the behaviour of the
offender, the court is of the opinion that it is
undesirable for the offender to continue to be
allowed to drive a motor vehicle,
the court may, in addition to imposing on the offender the punishment
provided for such offence, make an order disqualifying the offender
from holding or obtaining a driving licence for life or for any period
that the court thinks fit.
[12/2021]
(2) Subsection (1) is subject to any provision in this Act expressly
providing otherwise.
[12/2021]
(3) If the court thinks fit, any disqualification imposed under this
section may be limited to the driving of a motor vehicle of the same
class or description as the motor vehicle in relation to which the
offence was committed.
(4) A person who, by virtue of an order of a court, is disqualified
from holding or obtaining a driving licence may appeal against the
order in the same manner as against a conviction, and the court may if
it thinks fit, pending the appeal, suspend the operation of the order.
Disqualification for failing to attend court
42A.—(1) The Public Prosecutor may apply to the court for an
order disqualifying a person from holding or obtaining a driving
licence if —
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
94
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(a) that person is accused of an offence under this Act or the
rules or any written law specified in Part 2 of the
First Schedule and had failed to appear before a court to
answer the charge against him or her even though he or she
had been served with the appropriate process of court
requiring him or her to so appear before that court;
(b) the court before which that person was to have appeared
had, pursuant to his or her default in appearance, issued a
warrant for his or her arrest;
(c) that person has been arrested pursuant to the warrant and
subsequently released on bail;
(d) that person has been duly informed by —
(i) the Deputy Commissioner of Police;
(ii) the officer who arrested the person; or
(iii) if the person is accused of an offence under any
written law specified in Part 2 of the First Schedule,
an officer responsible for administering such written
law,
(d) that should the person fail to appear in court on the date
next appointed for his or her appearance in connection with
the offence of which the person is accused, the Public
Prosecutor is to make an application under this section for
him or her to be disqualified from holding or obtaining a
driving licence; and
(e) that person has, without lawful excuse, failed to appear in
court on the date next appointed for his or her appearance
in connection with the offence of which he or she is
accused.
[10/2017]
(2) Upon an application made by the Public Prosecutor under
subsection (1), the court, if satisfied of the matters referred to in
subsection (1)(a) to (e) and, having regard to the circumstances of the
case and the behaviour of the accused person, is of the opinion that it
is undesirable for him or her to continue to be allowed to drive a
motor vehicle, may make an order disqualifying the accused person
Road Traffic Act 1961
95
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


from holding or obtaining a driving licence until the offence of which
he or she is accused has been tried and determined by a court or for
any other period that the court thinks fit.
(3) Where the court makes an order under subsection (2)
disqualifying a person from holding or obtaining a driving licence
for any period ending before the trial and determination of the offence
of which that person is accused, the court may, on further application
of the Public Prosecutor, extend the period of the disqualification if it
thinks fit.
Provisions as to disqualifications and suspensions
43.—(1) Where a person who is disqualified by virtue of a
conviction or order under this Act is the holder of a driving
licence, the licence —
(a) is suspended as long as the disqualification continues in
force if he or she is disqualified from holding or obtaining a
driving licence for a period of less than one year; and
(b) is of no effect if he or she is disqualified from holding or
obtaining a driving licence for a period of one year or
longer and he or she must not drive a motor vehicle after
the period of disqualification unless he or she passes the
prescribed test of competence to drive.
(2) A driving licence suspended by virtue of subsection (1) or
section 45, 47B or 47C is, during the time of suspension, of no effect.
(3) If any person who under the provisions of this Act is
disqualified from holding or obtaining a driving licence applies for
or obtains a driving licence while he or she is so disqualified, he or
she shall be guilty of an offence and shall be liable on conviction to a
fine not exceeding $5,000 and the driving licence obtained by him or
her is of no effect.
(4) If any person who is disqualified as mentioned in subsection (3)
drives on a road a motor vehicle or, if the disqualification is limited to
the driving of a motor vehicle of a particular class or description, the
person drives on a road a motor vehicle of that class or description,
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
96
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


the person shall be guilty of an offence and shall be liable on
conviction as follows:
(a) to a fine not exceeding $10,000 or to imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 3 years or to both;
(b) where the person is a repeat offender, to a fine not
exceeding $20,000 or to imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 6 years or to both.
[19/2019]
(4A) For the purposes of subsection (4), a person is a repeat
offender in relation to an offence under that subsection if the person
who is convicted, or found guilty, of an offence under that
subsection —
(a) has been convicted or found guilty on at least one other
earlier occasion of an offence under that subsection; or
(b) has (whether before, on or after 1 November 2019) been
convicted or found guilty on at least one other earlier
occasion of an offence under subsection (4) as in force
immediately before that date.
[19/2019]
(5) Where any person has been convicted of an offence under
subsection (4) and the conviction is a second or subsequent
conviction and it is proved to the satisfaction of a court that a
motor vehicle has been used in the commission of the offence, the
court is to, on the application of the Public Prosecutor, make an order
for the forfeiture of the motor vehicle.
(6) The court is not to make an order for the forfeiture of the vehicle
if the court is satisfied that —
(a) the person who has committed the offence is not the owner
of the vehicle; and
(b) the person who has committed the offence had used the
vehicle without the consent of the owner or where he or she
had used the vehicle with the consent of the owner, that the
owner had no knowledge of his or her disqualification
under this Act from holding or obtaining a driving licence.
Road Traffic Act 1961
97
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(7) Any motor vehicle in respect of which there has been or there is
reasonable cause to suspect that there has been committed an offence
under subsection (4) may be seized by any police officer or the
Registrar or any officer authorised in writing by the Registrar.
(8) If there is no prosecution with regard to an offence under
subsection (4), the motor vehicle seized pursuant to subsection (7)
must be released at the end of one month from the date of seizure
unless it has been earlier released.
(9) Despite any written law prescribing the time within which
proceedings may be instituted, proceedings for an offence under
subsection (3) may be instituted —
(a) within a period of 6 months from the date of the
commission of the alleged offence; or
(b) within a period which exceeds neither 3 months from the
date on which it came to the knowledge of the prosecutor
that the offence had been committed nor one year from the
date of the commission of the offence,
whichever period is the longer.
Recording of particulars of convictions or disqualifications by
Deputy Commissioner of Police
44.—(1) Where a person is convicted of an offence in connection
with the driving of a motor vehicle or is disqualified by any court
from holding or obtaining a driving licence, the court is to send notice
of the conviction or order of disqualification to the Deputy
Commissioner of Police who must thereupon cause particulars of
the conviction or disqualification to be recorded.
[2/2007]
(2) In any proceedings in any court, a certificate, purporting to be
signed by the Deputy Commissioner of Police or any officer
authorised by the Deputy Commissioner of Police, relating to the
particulars of any conviction or disqualification recorded and
maintained under subsection (1) is prima facie evidence of the
conviction or disqualification.
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
98
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(3) Where a person is disqualified by any court from holding a
driving licence, he or she must deliver his or her driving licence (if
any) within 7 days of the order of disqualification to the Deputy
Commissioner of Police who must —
(a) cancel it or keep it during the period of disqualification; or
(b) if the disqualification does not apply to all the classes of
vehicles which that person is permitted to drive, return the
driving licence to him or her after having made the
necessary endorsement thereon.
Power of Deputy Commissioner of Police to suspend driving
licence
45.—(1) Despite anything in this Act, the Deputy Commissioner of
Police may suspend a driving licence of a person for a period not
exceeding 5 years if the person’s record (as kept by the Deputy
Commissioner of Police) as a driver of motor vehicles or his or her
conduct or habits as such driver establishes that it would not be in the
interests of public safety for him or her to hold a valid driving licence
or that the person is not competent to drive a motor vehicle.
[12/2021]
(2) For the purpose of establishing that it would not be in the
interests of public safety for a person to hold a valid driving licence or
that a person is not competent to drive a motor vehicle, the Minister
may make rules establishing a system of awarding points against a
person for the commission of an offence under this Act or the rules,
and providing for the circumstances where any points so awarded
may be cancelled or disregarded.
[28/2014; 10/2017]
(3) The Deputy Commissioner of Police may, under subsection (1),
regard a person as not competent to drive a motor vehicle, or establish
that it would not be in the interests of public safety for a person to
continue to hold a driving licence, if that person is awarded, within a
prescribed period, points prescribed for the commission of an offence
or offences under this Act that are equal to or in excess of the
maximum number of points prescribed (called the suspension
threshold).
[28/2014]
Road Traffic Act 1961
99
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(4) The rules made under subsection (2) must —
(a) specify the number of points to be awarded for an offence
under this Act, including points that distinguish between
different offences under this Act or the circumstances in
which any offence is committed or both;
(b) specify when points may be awarded in respect of an
offence under this Act, and the circumstances under which
points awarded may be cancelled or disregarded for the
purposes of subsection (1); and
(c) specify the suspension threshold, the period over which the
suspension threshold is calculated, and any other matters
that are required to be prescribed for the purposes of this
section.
[28/2014]
(5) Where the points awarded against a person under the rules made
under subsection (2) reach 50% of the suspension threshold under this
section, the Deputy Commissioner of Police must give written notice
thereof to the person.
[28/2014]
(6) Where a person is disqualified by an order of a court from
holding or obtaining a driving licence for a period of time specified in
the order, every point awarded against him or her under the rules
made under subsection (2) must thereupon be cancelled.
(7) Where a holder of a valid driving licence commits on a single
occasion more than one offence under this Act or the rules, points
must be awarded against him or her only for the offence committed
by him or her and in respect of which the largest number of points
may be awarded against a person.
[10/2017]
(8) [Deleted by Act 12 of 2021]
(9) In addition to the power conferred on the Deputy Commissioner
of Police by subsection (1), if a person who holds a driving licence —
(a) fails to comply with any process of court issued against
him or her in respect of any offence committed by him or
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
100
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


her under this Act or the rules or any written law specified
in Part 2 of the First Schedule; or
(b) is arrested under a warrant of court in connection with an
offence under this Act or the rules or any written law
specified in Part 2 of the First Schedule and the offence has
not been tried and determined by the court,
the Deputy Commissioner of Police may, as he or she thinks fit,
suspend the driving licence held by that person until the Deputy
Commissioner of Police is satisfied that that person has complied
with the process of court mentioned in paragraph (a) or until the
offence mentioned in paragraph (b) has been tried and determined by
the court, as the case may be.
[10/2017]
Licensee may make representations against suspension of
driving licence
46.—(1) To suspend a person’s driving licence under section 45,
the Deputy Commissioner of Police must first give a notice to the
person concerned —
(a) stating that the Deputy Commissioner of Police proposes
to suspend the person’s driving licence on such date (called
in this section the proposed suspension date) being at least
4 weeks after the date of giving the notice;
(b) setting out the reasons for suspending the person’s driving
licence; and
(c) specifying the period (being at least 4 weeks after the date
of giving the notice) within which representations or
objections with respect to the proposed suspension may be
made.
[19/2019]
(2) Then,
the
Deputy
Commissioner
of
Police
may,
after
considering any representations or objections which are duly made
within the period mentioned in subsection (1)(c) and not withdrawn
by the person concerned —
(a) suspend the person’s driving licence on the proposed
suspension date; or
Road Traffic Act 1961
101
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(b) postpone the proposed suspension date to a later date if the
person represents to the Deputy Commissioner of Police
that the person will attend a prescribed course on safe
driving, and suspend the person’s driving licence on the
later date on completion of that course.
[19/2019]
(3) The Deputy Commissioner of Police must immediately inform
the person concerned of his or her decision under subsection (2).
[19/2019]
(4) However, the Deputy Commissioner of Police may, on his or her
own initiative, rescind the suspension of a person’s driving licence,
after re‑considering any representations or objections made by that
person within the period mentioned in subsection (1)(c).
[19/2019]
(5) This section applies only in relation to a notice given by the
Deputy Commissioner of Police under subsection (1) on or after
29 June 2021, and section 46 as in force immediately before that date
continues to apply in relation to a notice given by the Deputy
Commissioner of Police under that section before that date.
[19/2019]
Surrender and return of driving licence
47.—(1) The
Deputy
Commissioner
of
Police
must,
upon
suspending a driving licence under section 45, require the licence
(if not issued in electronic form) to be surrendered to and retained by
him or her.
[19/2019]
(2) Any person whose driving licence has been suspended under
section 45 must immediately surrender the driving licence (if not
issued in electronic form) to the Deputy Commissioner of Police.
[19/2019]
(3) At the end of a period of suspension, a driving licence
surrendered
to
the
Deputy
Commissioner
of
Police
under
subsection (2) must be returned to the holder of the driving licence
and, in the case only of a driving licence suspended under
section 45(1), the points awarded against him or her must be
cancelled.
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
102
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(4) Any person whose driving licence has been suspended under
section 45 must not during the period of suspension drive a motor
vehicle on a road under any other driving licence issued by any
authority or otherwise.
(5) Any person who drives a motor vehicle on a road when his or
her driving licence is suspended under section 45 shall be guilty of an
offence.
Effect of suspension of licence by Deputy Commissioner of
Police
47A. A driving licence suspended by the Deputy Commissioner of
Police under section 45 for a period of one year or any other longer
period has no effect and the holder of the licence must not drive a
motor vehicle after the period of suspension unless he or she passes
the prescribed test of competence to drive.
Disqualification or suspension to continue in certain
circumstances
47B. If any person who is disqualified from holding or obtaining a
driving licence, or whose driving licence is suspended under the
provisions of this Act, drives while he or she is so disqualified or his
or her licence is under suspension and causes death or serious injury
to any other person and is charged for an offence under this Act, the
disqualification or suspension continues until that offence has been
tried and determined by a court.
Immediate suspension of driving licence in certain
circumstances
47C.—(1) Where any police investigation into the possible
commission of any offence mentioned in subsection (2) is started
against any person who, while driving a motor vehicle on a road or in
any public place, was involved in any traffic incident resulting in —
(a) serious injury or death to another person; or
(b) serious damage to any building or structure,
Road Traffic Act 1961
103
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


the Deputy Commissioner of Police may, immediately upon or at any
time after the start of the police investigation, suspend the driving
licence of that person.
[24/2010]
(1A) At the start of or during any police investigation into the
possible commission on or after 1 November 2019 by a person of any
offence under section 64, 67 or 116, the Deputy Commissioner of
Police may suspend the driving licence of the person.
[19/2019]
(2) Subsection (1) applies in respect of any of the following
offences:
(a) an offence under section 65 or 65A;
(aa) an offence under section 64, 66 or 67 as in force
immediately before 1 November 2019;
(b) an offence under section 84(7) arising from a failure to
comply with section 84(3);
(c) an offence under section 3 of the Motor Vehicles
(Third‑Party Risks and Compensation) Act 1960;
(d) an offence under section 279, 304A or 338 of the Penal
Code 1871.
[24/2010; 28/2014; 19/2019]
(3) The
suspension
of
a
person’s
driving
licence
under
subsection (1) or (1A), unless it is sooner rescinded by the Deputy
Commissioner of Police under subsection (10), remains in force until
the offence on account of which the person’s driving licence is so
suspended has been tried and determined by a court.
[24/2010; 19/2019]
(4) Where the Deputy Commissioner of Police suspends the driving
licence of a person under subsection (1) or (1A), the Deputy
Commissioner of Police must, as soon as is practicable, give to the
person concerned a written notice —
(a) informing the person concerned of the suspension of his or
her driving licence and the date from which the suspension
is to take effect; and
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
104
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(b) requiring the person concerned to surrender his or her
driving licence to the Deputy Commissioner of Police
within the time specified in the notice.
[24/2010; 19/2019]
(5) A person who refuses or fails, without reasonable cause, or
excuse to surrender his or her driving licence to the Deputy
Commissioner of Police under subsection (4) shall be guilty of an
offence.
(6) Any person whose driving licence has been suspended under
this section must not during the period of suspension drive a motor
vehicle on a road under any other driving licence granted by any
authority or otherwise.
(7) Any person who drives a motor vehicle on a road when his or
her driving licence is suspended under this section shall be guilty of
an offence.
(8) A person aggrieved by the suspension of his or her driving
licence under subsection (1) or (1A) may, within 14 days after the
receipt of the notice mentioned in subsection (4) or any extended
period of time that the Commissioner of Police may allow in any
particular case, appeal in writing against the suspension to the
Commissioner of Police whose decision is final.
[24/2010; 28/2014; 19/2019]
(9) Even though any appeal under subsection (8) is pending, the
suspension of a person’s driving licence under subsection (1) or (1A)
takes effect from the date specified in the notice given to him or her
by the Deputy Commissioner of Police under subsection (4), unless
the Commissioner of Police otherwise orders.
[24/2010; 28/2014; 19/2019]
(10) The Deputy Commissioner of Police may, at any time, rescind
the suspension of a person’s driving licence under subsection (1) or
(1A) on account of any offence mentioned in subsection (2) or (1A),
respectively, but must, as soon as is practicable, rescind the
suspension if —
(a) the investigation reveals that that person was not involved
in the commission of any such offence;
Road Traffic Act 1961
105
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(b) it is decided that that person is not to be charged with any
such offence; or
(c) the charge against that person in respect of any such
offence is withdrawn.
[24/2010; 19/2019]
(11) In this section, “structure” has the meaning given by
section 65A(2).
[24/2010]
Definition of serious injury
47D. In sections 47B and 47C, “serious injury” means any injury
which causes a person to be during a period of 7 days in severe bodily
pain or unable to follow his or her ordinary pursuits.
Penalties for offences under sections 47(5) and 47C(7)
47E. Any person who is guilty of an offence under section 47(5) or
47C(7) shall be liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding $5,000 or
to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 2 years or to both and, in the
case of a second or subsequent conviction, to a fine not exceeding
$10,000 or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 4 years or to
both.
[19/2019]
Prohibition order against holders of foreign driving licences
47F.—(1) Where any provision of this Act empowers —
(a) a court to order that a person be disqualified from holding
or obtaining a driving licence; or
(b) the Deputy Commissioner of Police to suspend or revoke a
driving licence of any person,
the provision is, in relation to the holder of a foreign driving licence,
to be read as empowering the court or the Deputy Commissioner of
Police to make an order (called in this section a prohibition order)
prohibiting the holder of the foreign driving licence from driving any
motor vehicle in Singapore for the same period for which the court or
the Deputy Commissioner of Police may, by virtue of that provision,
disqualify any person from holding or obtaining a driving licence or
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
106
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


suspend or revoke the driving licence of any person, as the case may
be.
[24/2010]
(2) Any other provision of this Act which relates or which makes
reference to the disqualification of persons from holding or obtaining
a driving licence or to the suspension or revocation of driving
licences, including any provision which provides for the punishment
of any offence committed by a person who has been disqualified from
holding or obtaining a driving licence or whose driving licence has
been suspended or revoked, is, in relation to the holder of a foreign
driving licence, to be read as if every reference in that provision to the
disqualification of a person from holding or obtaining a driving
licence or to the suspension or revocation of the driving licence of any
person were a reference to the making of a prohibition order against
the holder of a foreign driving licence.
[24/2010]
(3) The Minister may make rules for modifying, in any manner that
he or she may consider necessary, any of the provisions of this Act
which relates or refers to the disqualification of persons from holding
or obtaining a driving licence or to the suspension or revocation of
driving licences in order that the provision may appropriately apply in
relation to the holder of a foreign driving licence against whom a
prohibition order has been made under this section.
[24/2010]
(4) In this section, “holder of a foreign driving licence” means a
person who holds a foreign driving licence and who is allowed by
section 38(1) or (3) to drive a motor vehicle in Singapore using the
foreign driving licence, but does not include any member of any
visiting force or a civilian component thereof to whom section 38(4)
applies.
[24/2010; 28/2014]
Division 2 — Competency test for riding
test‑needed‑to‑ride‑on‑road vehicle on road
[12/2021]
Road Traffic Act 1961
107
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


Unauthorised riding of test‑needed‑to‑ride‑on‑road vehicle
47G.—(1) An individual commits an offence if the individual —
(a) rides on a road a test‑needed‑to‑ride‑on‑road vehicle;
(b) is not granted a competency test certificate for that class or
description
of
test‑needed‑to‑ride‑on‑road
vehicle
certifying that the individual has passed the prescribed
test of competence for that class or description of
test‑needed‑to‑ride‑on‑road vehicle; and
(c) is not excluded under subsection (2) or not exempted from
this provision under section 142.
[12/2021]
(2) Subsection (1) does not apply to an individual riding a
test‑needed‑to‑ride‑on‑road vehicle in circumstances prescribed in
rules made under section 48.
[12/2021]
(3) An individual who is guilty of an offence under subsection (1)
shall be liable on conviction —
(a) to a fine not exceeding $2,000 or to imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 6 months or to both; but
(b) where the individual is a repeat offender, to a fine not
exceeding $5,000 or to imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 12 months or to both.
[12/2021]
Grant of competency test certificate for road‑only PAB
47H.—(1) Subject to subsection (2), the test authority may, on the
application under subsection (3) by an individual, grant the individual
a competency test certificate in respect of riding any road‑only PAB
certifying that the individual has passed the prescribed test of
competence for the road‑only PAB.
[12/2021]
(2) The test authority may grant under subsection (1) an individual
a competency test certificate certifying that the individual has passed
the prescribed test of competence for riding a road‑only PAB if, and
only if, the test authority is satisfied that the individual —
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
108
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(a) has attended and successfully completed, not earlier than a
prescribed time before that application is made, a
prescribed test of competence relating to the road‑only
PAB; and
(b) is not below the minimum riding age (if prescribed) for the
purposes of section 62 relating to the road‑only PAB.
[12/2021]
(3) An application for a competency test certificate relating to a
road‑only PAB must —
(a) be in the form and manner the test authority requires;
(b) be accompanied by an application fee, if prescribed;
(c) state the description of the road‑only PAB that is the
subject of the application; and
(d) contain an undertaking to take, or a declaration that the
applicant has attended and successfully completed (as the
case may be) a prescribed test of competence to ride the
road‑only PAB that is the subject of the application.
[12/2021]
(4) The test authority may refuse to consider an application under
subsection (3) that is incomplete or not made in accordance with this
section.
[12/2021]
(5) To avoid doubt, a competency test certificate may be granted in
a digital form, consisting of evidence of the grant of the competency
test certificate using information relating to the individual granted the
competency
test
certificate
that
is
displayed
on
a
mobile
communication device or other electronic device.
[12/2021]
Validity of competency test certificate for road‑only PAB
47I.—(1) Subject to this section, every competency test certificate
granted under section 47H(1) to an individual for a road‑only PAB
remains in force —
(a) for the period specified in the competency test certificate;
or
Road Traffic Act 1961
109
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(b) for the natural life of the individual if no period in
paragraph (a) is specified.
[12/2021]
(2) A test authority may cancel a competency test certificate
granted under section 47H(1) to an individual for a road‑only PAB
if —
(a) the test authority is satisfied that the competency test
certificate had been obtained by the individual by fraud or
misrepresentation; or
(b) the prescribed test of competence for the road‑only PAB
has so materially changed after the grant of the competency
test certificate as to affect the assessment of the
individual’s continued competency to ride the road‑only
PAB.
[12/2021]
(3) A competency test certificate granted under section 47H(1) to
an
individual
may
be
cancelled
by
a
test
authority
under
subsection (2) by the test authority giving notice to the individual
concerned of the cancellation.
[12/2021]
(4) A
competency
test
certificate
that
is
cancelled
under
subsection (2) is void from the date of cancellation specified in the
notice under subsection (3).
[12/2021]
Unlawful use of competency test certificate for road‑only PAB
47J.—(1) A person commits an offence if the person —
(a) has in the person’s possession, without lawful authority or
a reasonable excuse, an article so resembling a competency
test certificate granted under section 47H(1) as to be
calculated to deceive;
(b) alters a competency test certificate which is granted under
section 47H(1) in a way that is calculated to deceive;
(c) dishonestly alters or uses a competency test certificate
granted under section 47H(1); or
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
110
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(d) dishonestly lends, or allows another person to use, a
competency test certificate granted under section 47H(1).
[12/2021]
(2) A person who is guilty of an offence under subsection (1) shall
be liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding $5,000 or to
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 12 months or to both.
[12/2021]
Allowing untested rider, etc., on road
47K.—(1) Subject to this Act, a person commits an offence if —
(a) the person employs, or intentionally or negligently allows,
an
individual
to
ride
on
a
road
a
test‑needed‑to‑ride‑on‑road
vehicle
of
a
class
or
description;
(b) the individual in paragraph (a) is not granted a competency
test
certificate
for
that
class
or
description
of
test‑needed‑to‑ride‑on‑road vehicle and is not excluded
under section 47G(2); and
(c) the person knows that, or is negligent as to whether, the
individual is not granted a competency test certificate for
that class or description of test‑needed‑to‑ride‑on‑road
vehicle.
[12/2021]
(2) To avoid doubt, subsection (1) does not apply to a person who
carries
on
at
any
premises
a
business
of
selling
test‑needed‑to‑ride‑on‑road vehicles allowing, in the course of that
business and for the purpose of selling the vehicle, a customer of the
business
concerned
at
the
customer’s
request
to
ride
a
test‑needed‑to‑ride‑on‑road
vehicle
within
any
part
of
those
premises not comprising a road.
[12/2021]
(3) An individual who is guilty of an offence under subsection (1)
shall be liable on conviction —
(a) to a fine not exceeding $2,000 or to imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 6 months or to both; but
Road Traffic Act 1961
111
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(b) where the individual is a repeat offender, to a fine not
exceeding $5,000 or to imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 12 months or to both.
[12/2021]
(4) For the purposes of subsection (3), an individual is a repeat
offender in relation to an offence under subsection (1) if the
individual who is convicted, or found guilty, of an offence under
subsection (1) has been convicted or found guilty on at least one other
earlier occasion of an offence under subsection (1).
[12/2021]
Production of competency test certificate
47L.—(1) A police officer or a duly authorised person may, for the
purpose of ensuring that any test‑needed‑to‑ride‑on‑road vehicle that
is being or may be used on a road complies with this Act, at any time
order the rider of the vehicle to produce the rider’s competency test
certificate for examination or other identity documents so as to enable
the police officer or duly authorised person (as the case may be) to
ascertain —
(a) the identity of the rider; and
(b) the authority by which the competency test certificate was
granted.
[12/2021]
(2) A rider of a vehicle to whom an order under subsection (1) is
given who refuses or neglects to comply with the order commits an
offence and shall be liable on conviction —
(a) to a fine not exceeding $1,000 or to imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 3 months or to both; but
(b) where the individual is a repeat offender, to a fine not
exceeding $2,000 or to imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 6 months or to both.
[12/2021]
(3) However, subsection (2) does not apply if within 48 hours after
an order is given to a rider of a vehicle under subsection (1), the rider
produces the competency test certificate in person at any police
station or other place that is specified by the police officer or duly
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
112
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


authorised person (as the case may be) at the time the order was
given.
[12/2021]
(4) An individual to whom a digital competency test certificate is
granted who holds, or produces or carries a mobile communication
device or other electronic device on which the digital competency test
certificate is displayed for the purpose of complying with an order
under subsection (1) to produce a competency test certificate, is taken
to have produced a competency test certificate for that purpose.
[12/2021]
(5) However, a digital competency test certificate is not displayed
for the purpose of complying with an order under subsection (1) to
produce or carry a competency test certificate if —
(a) the screen of the mobile communication device or other
electronic device on which it is purportedly displayed is
unable to be read by the person to whom it is displayed due
to cracking, dimming, dirt or any other fault, damage or
obstruction;
(b) the individual fails or refuses to comply with a reasonable
request by the person to whom it is purported to be
displayed to facilitate the reading, copying or scanning of
the whole or any part of the digital competency test
certificate; or
(c) the holder of the digital competency test certificate refuses
to comply with a reasonable direction to refresh the display
of the digital competency test certificate.
[12/2021]
(6) To avoid doubt, an individual who displays or purports to
display a digital competency test certificate is not required to give or
hand over, to the person who is requiring the competency test
certificate to be produced or handed over, the mobile communication
device or other electronic device on which the digital competency test
certificate is displayed or purported to be displayed.
[12/2021]
(7) An individual is a repeat offender in relation to an offence under
subsection (2) if the individual who is convicted, or found guilty, of
Road Traffic Act 1961
113
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


an offence under subsection (2) has been convicted or found guilty on
at least one other earlier occasion of an offence under subsection (2).
[12/2021]
(8) A reference to a duly authorised person in this section or
section 47M or 47N is a reference to an individual appointed under
this subsection by the Minister as an authorised person for the
purposes of that section, is authorised by the Minister to exercise any
powers under that section and is acting within that authorisation.
[12/2021]
Production of false, etc., competency test certificate
47M. An individual riding a test‑needed‑to‑ride‑on‑road vehicle on
a road who, in purported compliance with any order given to the
individual under section 47L(1) by a police officer or duly authorised
person —
(a) produces to a police officer or duly authorised person —
(i) a competency test certificate that is altered in a way
that is calculated to deceive (whether or not it was
already a false document before the alteration or it
was altered by the individual), knowing that it is so
altered;
(ii) an article resembling a competency test certificate
and calculated to deceive, knowing that the article is
not a competency test certificate; or
(iii) a competency test certificate that was not granted to
the individual, knowing that it was not so granted to
that individual; and
(b) with the intention of dishonestly inducing the police officer
or duly authorised person to accept it as genuine,
commits an offence and shall be liable on conviction to a fine not
exceeding $5,000 or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding
12 months or to both.
[12/2021]
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
114
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


Power to seize competency test certificate
47N.—(1) A police officer or duly authorised person may, with no
other authority than this section, seize a competency test certificate or
an article resembling a competency test certificate if —
(a) the competency test certificate or article is produced to the
police officer or duly authorised person (as the case may
be) pursuant to an order under section 47L(1) or otherwise,
by an individual who represents it as a competency test
certificate granted to that individual; and
(b) the police officer or duly authorised person (as the case
may be) has reason to believe that —
(i) the competency test certificate is unlawfully in the
possession of that individual who produced it; or
(ii) the competency test certificate or article is evidence
of the commission of an offence under section 47J(1)
or 47M, or section 23H(1) or 47(6) of the Active
Mobility Act 2017.
[12/2021]
(2) Every competency test certificate seized under subsection (1)
must be forwarded to the relevant authority who issued the
competency test certificate, and the relevant authority may —
(a) return the competency test certificate to the individual who
produced it, if the relevant authority is satisfied that the
competency test certificate was lawfully in the possession
of the individual who produced it; or
(b) in any other case, deal with it in such manner as the test
authority thinks fit.
[12/2021]
(3) However, the authority conferred by subsection (1) to seize a
competency test certificate or any article resembling a competency
test certificate does not extend to a mobile communication device or
other electronic device on which a digital competency test certificate
is displayed.
[12/2021]
Road Traffic Act 1961
115
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


Division 3 — Miscellaneous
[12/2021]
Rules for purposes of this Part
48.—(1) The Minister may make rules for any purpose for which
rules may be made under this Part and for prescribing anything which
may be prescribed under this Part and otherwise for the purpose of
carrying this Part into effect and, in particular, may make rules —
(a) to regulate the granting and renewal of driving licences
under section 35 or competency test certificates under
section 47H(1), to prescribe the form of application for and
the contents of driving licences under section 35 or
competency test certificates under section 47H(1), to
prescribe the fees to be charged therefor and the manner
of payment thereof;
(b) with respect to the nature of tests of competence to drive a
motor vehicle or ride a road‑only PAB on roads, the
administration of the tests of competence, and evidence of
the result of attending and successfully completing any
such test;
(c) to require a person submitting himself or herself for a test
to provide a motor vehicle for the purpose thereof and to
prescribe the fee to be charged for a test;
(d) to ensure that a person submitting himself or herself for a
test and failing to pass that test is not eligible to submit
himself or herself for another test by the same or any other
person before the end of a prescribed period except under
an order made by a court under the power conferred by
section 36(7);
(e) to prescribe the record to be kept in respect of driving
licences under section 35 or competency test certificates
under section 47H(1);
(f) to provide special facilities for granting driving licences to
persons not resident in Singapore;
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
116
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(g) for modifying the provisions of this Part relating to the
licensing of drivers of motor vehicles in the case of persons
resident abroad and who enter Singapore intending to
make only a temporary stay in Singapore;
(h) to make any particulars with respect to persons, who are
disqualified from holding or obtaining driving licences or
whose licences are suspended, available for use by the
Deputy Commissioner of Police, to prevent a person
holding more than one driving licence, to facilitate the
identification of holders of driving licences, to provide for
the issue of a new licence in the place of a driving licence
lost or defaced on payment of a prescribed fee (if any) and
in connection with driving licences generally; and
(i) to prescribe the circumstances in which a person may be
required to be certified by a registered medical practitioner
as fit to drive a vehicle, or may be required by the Deputy
Commissioner of Police to pass any prescribed test of
competence to drive, before the granting or renewal of the
person’s driving licence.
[28/2014; 12/2021]
(2) The Minister may by those rules confer on the Deputy
Commissioner of Police a discretion to waive, in any particular
case, the application of any of those rules to or in relation to any
person subject to any conditions that the Deputy Commissioner of
Police may impose.
[28/2014]
Exemption
49. Any person who is a member of the Singapore Armed Forces or
the Singapore Civil Defence Force and is in possession of a certificate
or document issued to him or her by the competent authority of the
Singapore Armed Forces or the Singapore Civil Defence Force to
drive a motor vehicle of a class or description specified in the
certificate or document may drive a vehicle of the class or description
specified in the certificate or document, the vehicle being in the
possession of the Singapore Armed Forces or the Singapore Civil
Road Traffic Act 1961
117
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


Defence Force, even though he or she has not been granted a driving
licence under this Part.
PART 3
LICENSING OF DRIVING INSTRUCTORS AND
DRIVING SCHOOLS
Definition of driving instructor
50. In this Part, “driving instructor” means a person who gives
instruction in the driving of a motor vehicle for a fee or reward.
Licensing of driving instructors
51.—(1) A person must not act as a driving instructor unless the
person is the holder of a licence (called in this Part an instructor’s
licence) granted to the person by the Deputy Commissioner of Police
authorising the person to do so.
(2) A person who contravenes subsection (1) shall be guilty of an
offence and shall be liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding
$2,000 or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 6 months or to
both.
(3) The Minister may exempt any body or organisation from
subsection (1) subject to any conditions that he or she thinks fit to
impose.
Application for instructor’s licence
52.—(1) An application for an instructor’s licence must be made to
the Deputy Commissioner of Police and must be in the form required
by the Deputy Commissioner of Police.
(2) Upon receiving an application under subsection (1), the Deputy
Commissioner of Police must consider the application and may grant
an instructor’s licence, with or without conditions, or refuse to grant
such a licence.
(3) Where an instructor’s licence is subject to conditions, the
driving instructor to whom the licence is granted must comply with
the conditions.
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
118
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(4) The Deputy Commissioner of Police may at any time vary or
revoke any of the existing conditions of an instructor’s licence or
impose conditions or additional conditions thereto.
(5) A driving instructor who fails to comply with any of the
conditions of the instructor’s licence shall be guilty of an offence.
Revocation or suspension of instructor’s licence
53.—(1) The Deputy Commissioner of Police may revoke or
suspend an instructor’s licence —
(a) if the Deputy Commissioner of Police is satisfied that the
driving instructor —
(i) has improperly obtained the instructor’s licence
contrary to the provisions of this Part or any rules
made thereunder;
(ii) is no longer a fit and proper person to continue to
hold an instructor’s licence by reason of the driving
instructor’s conduct or physical disability; or
(iii) is contravening or has contravened any of the
provisions
of
this
Part
or
any
rules
made
thereunder; or
(b) if the Deputy Commissioner of Police considers it in the
public interest to do so.
(2) The Deputy Commissioner of Police must, before revoking or
suspending an instructor’s licence under subsection (1), give the
driving instructor concerned written notice of his or her intention to
do so specifying a date, at least 14 days after the date of the notice,
upon which the revocation or suspension is to be made and calling
upon
the
driving
instructor
to
show
cause
to
the
Deputy
Commissioner of Police why the instructor’s licence should not be
revoked or suspended.
(3) Where the Deputy Commissioner of Police has revoked or
suspended an instructor’s licence under subsection (1), he or she must
immediately inform the driving instructor concerned by written
notice of the revocation or suspension.
Road Traffic Act 1961
119
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(4) A driving instructor may, within 14 days of the receipt of the
notice mentioned in subsection (3), appeal in writing against the
revocation or suspension to the Commissioner of Police whose
decision is final.
[4/2006; 28/2014]
(5) An order of revocation or suspension does not take effect until
the end of a period of 14 days after the Deputy Commissioner of
Police has informed the driving instructor concerned of the order.
(6) If within that period the driving instructor concerned appeals to
the Commissioner of Police, the order does not take effect until it is
confirmed by the Commissioner of Police or the appeal is for any
reason dismissed by the Commissioner of Police.
[28/2014]
(7) Where an order of revocation or suspension becomes effective
under subsection (5), the driving instructor concerned must, as from
the date when the order becomes effective, cease to give instruction to
any person in the driving of a motor vehicle.
(8) A driving instructor whose licence has been revoked under this
section must immediately surrender it to the Deputy Commissioner of
Police.
Licensing of driving school
54.—(1) A person must not carry on the business of a driving
school unless the person is the holder of a licence (called in this Part a
driving school licence) granted to the person by the Deputy
Commissioner of Police authorising the person to do so.
(2) A person carries on the business of a driving school if the person
engages or employs other persons or agents to give instruction to
persons in the driving of a motor vehicle.
(3) Any person who contravenes subsection (1) shall be guilty of an
offence and shall be liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding
$2,000 or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 6 months or to
both.
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
120
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


Application for driving school licence
55.—(1) An application for a driving school licence must be made
to the Deputy Commissioner of Police and must be in the form
required by the Deputy Commissioner of Police.
(2) On receipt of an application, the Deputy Commissioner of
Police may require the applicant to furnish him or her with any
additional documents or information that the Deputy Commissioner
of Police may require.
(3) The Deputy Commissioner of Police may grant a driving school
licence, with or without conditions, or refuse to grant such a licence.
Cash deposit
56. The Deputy Commissioner of Police may, before granting a
driving school licence, require the applicant to give security in the
form of a cash deposit in an amount that may be prescribed to ensure
that the provisions of this Part or any rules made thereunder and the
conditions of the licence are observed.
Revocation of driving school licence and forfeiture of deposit
57. The Deputy Commissioner of Police may revoke a driving
school licence and forfeit the whole or any part of the money
deposited with him or her under section 56 if the Deputy
Commissioner of Police is satisfied that the owner of the driving
school —
(a) has carried on the driving school in an improper or
unsatisfactory manner;
(b) has failed to comply with any of the conditions upon which
the driving school licence was granted; or
(c) has been convicted of an offence under this Act or the
rules.
[10/2017]
Notice to owner of driving school
58.—(1) The Deputy Commissioner of Police must, before
revoking a driving school licence and forfeiting any deposit under
Road Traffic Act 1961
121
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


section 57, give the owner of the driving school concerned written
notice of his or her intention to do so —
(a) specifying a date, at least 14 days after the date of the
notice, upon which the revocation and forfeiture is to be
made; and
(b) calling upon the owner to show cause to the Deputy
Commissioner of Police why the owner’s licence should
not be revoked and why the owner’s deposit should not be
forfeited.
(2) The Deputy Commissioner of Police, on receiving any
representation from the owner of the driving school, may instead
of revoking the owner’s licence and forfeiting any deposit under
section 57 impose on the owner a penalty not exceeding $500 and
may recover the penalty from the cash deposit given by the owner to
the Deputy Commissioner of Police.
(3) Any person aggrieved by the decision made by the Deputy
Commissioner of Police under section 57 may, within 14 days of the
written notification to the person of the decision of the Deputy
Commissioner of Police, appeal in writing to the Minister whose
decision is final.
Refusal to grant or renew licence
59. The Deputy Commissioner of Police may refuse to grant or
renew any licence granted under this Part without assigning any
reason.
Appeal to Minister or Commissioner of Police
60.—(1) Any person aggrieved by the refusal of the Deputy
Commissioner of Police to grant or renew any licence that may be
granted or renewed under this Part may, within 14 days after
receiving the written notification to the person of the refusal, appeal
in writing —
(a) in the case of a driving school licence — to the Minister; or
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
122
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(b) in
the
case
of
an
instructor’s
licence
—
to
the
Commissioner of Police.
[28/2014]
(2) The decision of the Minister or the Commissioner of Police (as
the case may be) in an appeal under subsection (1) is final.
[28/2014]
Rules for purposes of this Part
61. The Minister may make rules for any purpose for which rules
may be made under this Part and for prescribing anything which may
be prescribed under this Part and otherwise for the purpose of
carrying this Part into effect, and, in particular, may make rules —
(a) regulating the granting of any licence under this Part and
prescribing the form of application for and the contents of
such licence;
(b) requiring persons desiring to be driving instructors to
attend and pass courses on driving instruction and any
other tests and examinations that may be prescribed;
(c) prescribing the kind of motor vehicles which may be used
for driving instruction and driving tests and the conditions
that must be complied with before such vehicles may be so
used;
(d) regulating the conduct of driving instructors when giving
driving instruction;
(e) regulating the activities of driving schools and prescribing
the manner in which driving schools must conduct their
business;
(f) prescribing the maximum age of a driving instructor
beyond which his or her instructor’s licence may not be
renewed;
(g) prescribing the form of records to be kept by driving
instructors and driving schools and the particulars to be
entered therein;
(h) prescribing the conditions for a licence and the forms to be
issued under this Part;
Road Traffic Act 1961
123
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(i) prescribing the duration of any licence granted under this
Part;
(j) prescribing the deposits payable by owners of driving
schools;
(k) exempting any person or class of persons from the
provisions of this Part; and
(l) prescribing fees for the purposes of this Part.
PART 4
GENERAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO
ROAD TRAFFIC
Division 1 — Provisions as to driving and
offences in connection therewith
Restriction on driving or riding by young persons
62.—(1) A person must not do the following:
(a) ride on a road a test‑needed‑to‑ride‑on‑road vehicle when
the person is below the prescribed minimum riding age (if
any) for riding such a vehicle on a road;
(b) drive on a road any other motor vehicle when the person is
below 18 years of age.
[12/2021]
(2) A person who has attained 18 years of age but who is below
21 years of age must not drive a heavy locomotive, light locomotive,
motor tractor or heavy motor car on a road.
(3) The burden of establishing his or her age rests on the applicant
for a driving licence or competency test certificate.
[12/2021]
(4) A person who drives or causes or permits any person to drive a
motor vehicle in contravention of this section shall be guilty of an
offence.
(5) A person prohibited by this section by reason of his or her age
from driving a motor vehicle or a motor vehicle of any class is, for the
purposes of Part 2, deemed to be disqualified under the provisions of
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
124
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


that Part from holding or obtaining any licence other than a licence to
drive any motor vehicles that he or she is not by this section forbidden
to drive.
Restriction on driving certain categories of heavy motor
vehicles
62A. A person who has attained the prescribed age must not drive a
vehicle belonging to the following categories or classes of motor
vehicles:
(a) heavy locomotives;
(b) light locomotives;
(c) motor tractors;
(d) heavy motor cars.
[28/2014]
Rate of speed
63.—(1) Except as otherwise provided by this Act or the rules, it is
not lawful for any person to drive a motor vehicle of any class or
description on a road at a speed greater than any speed which may be
prescribed as the maximum speed in relation to a vehicle of that class
or description.
[10/2017]
(2) The Minister may, by notification in the Gazette, prohibit the
driving of motor vehicles generally or of particular classes of motor
vehicles above a specified speed over any specified road or part of a
specified road either generally or for a specified time or times.
(3) So long as any prohibition made under subsection (2) remains in
force, the Minister may cause or permit to be placed or erected and
maintained traffic signs which state the substance of the notification
in the Gazette containing the prohibition and which are placed in
positions that give adequate notice thereof to drivers of motor
vehicles.
(4) A person who drives a motor vehicle on a road at a speed
exceeding any speed limit imposed by or in exercise of powers
conferred by this Act shall be guilty of an offence.
Road Traffic Act 1961
125
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


Reckless or dangerous driving
64.—(1) If any person drives a motor vehicle on a road recklessly,
or at a speed or in a manner which is dangerous to the public, having
regard to all the circumstances of the case, including the nature,
condition and use of the road, and the amount of traffic which is
actually at the time, or which might reasonably be expected to be, on
the road, the person (called the offender) shall be guilty of an offence.
[10/2017; 19/2019]
(2) If death is caused to another person by the driving of a motor
vehicle by the offender, the offender shall be punished with the
following on conviction of an offence under subsection (1):
(a) with imprisonment for a term of not less than 2 years and
not more than 8 years;
(b) where the person is a repeat offender, with imprisonment
for a term of not less than 4 years and not more than
15 years;
(c) where the offender is a serious offender in relation to the
driving, with imprisonment for a term of not less than
one year and not more than 2 years, in addition to any
punishment under paragraph (a) or (b);
(d) where the offender is a serious repeat offender in relation to
the driving, with imprisonment for a term of not less than
2 years and not more than 4 years, in addition to any
punishment under paragraph (a) or (b).
[19/2019]
(2A) If grievous hurt is caused to another person by the driving of a
motor vehicle by the offender, the offender shall be punished with the
following on conviction of an offence under subsection (1):
(a) with imprisonment for a term of not less than one year and
not more than 5 years;
(b) where the person is a repeat offender, with imprisonment
for a term of not less than 2 years and not more than
10 years;
(c) where the offender is a serious offender in relation to the
driving, with a fine of not less than $2,000 and not more
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
126
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


than $10,000 and with imprisonment for a term of not less
than 6 months and not more than one year, in addition to
any punishment under paragraph (a) or (b);
(d) where the offender is a serious repeat offender in relation to
the driving, with a fine of not less than $5,000 and not more
than $20,000 and with imprisonment for a term of not less
than one year and not more than 2 years, in addition to any
punishment under paragraph (a) or (b).
[19/2019]
(2B) If hurt is caused to another person by the driving of a motor
vehicle by the offender, the offender shall on conviction of an offence
under subsection (1) —
(a) be liable
to a fine
not exceeding $10,000 or to
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 2 years or to both;
(b) where the person is a repeat offender, be liable to a fine not
exceeding $20,000 or to imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 4 years or to both;
(c) where the offender is a serious offender in relation to the
driving, be liable to a fine of not less than $2,000 and not
more than $10,000 or to imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 12 months or to both, in addition to any
punishment under paragraph (a) or (b); or
(d) where the offender is a serious repeat offender in relation to
the driving, be punished with a fine of not less than $5,000
and not more than $20,000 and with imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 2 years, in addition to any punishment
under paragraph (a) or (b).
[19/2019]
(2C) In any other case involving the driving of a motor vehicle by
the offender, the offender shall on conviction of an offence under
subsection (1) —
(a) be liable to a fine not exceeding $5,000 or to imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 12 months or to both;
Road Traffic Act 1961
127
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(b) where the person is a repeat offender, be liable to a fine not
exceeding $10,000 or to imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 2 years or to both;
(c) where the offender is a serious offender in relation to the
driving, be liable to a fine of not less than $2,000 and not
more than $10,000 or to imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 12 months or to both, in addition to any
punishment under paragraph (a) or (b); or
(d) where the offender is a serious repeat offender in relation to
the driving, be punished with a fine of not less than $5,000
and not more than $20,000 and with imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 2 years, in addition to any punishment
under paragraph (a) or (b).
[19/2019]
(2D) A court convicting a person of an offence under subsection (1)
in the following cases is to, unless the court for special reasons thinks
fit to not order or to order otherwise, order that the person be
disqualified from holding or obtaining a driving licence for a
disqualification period of not less than the specified period
corresponding to that case:
(a) for an offender or a repeat offender in subsection (2)(a) or
(b) — 10 years;
(b) for a serious offender in subsection (2)(c) — 12 years;
(c) for a serious repeat offender in subsection (2)(d) who has
been convicted (whether before, on or after 1 November
2019) on only one earlier occasion of any specified
offence — 15 years;
(d) for an offender or a repeat offender in subsection (2A)(a)
or (b) — 8 years;
(e) for a serious offender in subsection (2A)(c) — 10 years;
(f) for a serious repeat offender in subsection (2A)(d) who has
been convicted (whether before, on or after 1 November
2019) on only one earlier occasion of any specified
offence — 13 years;
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
128
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(g) for a serious offender in subsection (2B)(c) — 2 years;
(h) for a serious repeat offender in subsection (2B)(d) who has
been convicted (whether before, on or after 1 November
2019) on only one earlier occasion of any specified
offence — 5 years;
(i) for a serious offender in subsection (2C)(c) — 2 years;
(j) for a serious repeat offender in subsection (2C)(d) who has
been convicted (whether before, on or after 1 November
2019) on only one earlier occasion of any specified
offence — 5 years.
[19/2019]
(2E) A
court
convicting
a
person
for
an
offence
under
subsection (1) in the following cases is to, unless the court for
special reasons thinks fit to order a shorter disqualification period,
order that the person be disqualified from holding or obtaining a
driving licence for life starting on the date of the person’s conviction:
(a) a serious repeat offender in subsection (2)(d) who has been
convicted (whether before, on or after 1 November 2019)
on 2 or more earlier occasions of any specified offence;
(b) a serious repeat offender in subsection (2A)(d) who has
been convicted (whether before, on or after 1 November
2019) on 2 or more earlier occasions of any specified
offence;
(c) a serious repeat offender in subsection (2B)(d) who has
been convicted (whether before, on or after 1 November
2019) on 2 or more earlier occasions of any specified
offence;
(d) a serious repeat offender in subsection (2C)(d) who has
been convicted (whether before, on or after 1 November
2019) on 2 or more earlier occasions of any specified
offence.
[19/2019]
(3) A person is a repeat offender in relation to an offence under
subsections (2)(b), (2A)(b), (2B)(b) and (2C)(b), respectively, if the
person in the respective subsection has been convicted (whether
Road Traffic Act 1961
129
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


before, on or after 1 November 2019) on at least one other earlier
occasion of any of the following offences:
(a) an offence under subsection (1);
(b) an offence under section 63, 65 or 116;
(c) an offence under this section, or section 65 or 66, as in
force immediately before 1 November 2019;
(d) an offence under section 279, 304A, 336, 337 or 338 of the
Penal Code 1871 where the act constituting the offence
involves the use of a motor vehicle.
[19/2019]
(4) Where a person is convicted of abetting the commission of an
offence under this section and it is proved that the person was present
in the motor vehicle at the time of the commission of the offence, the
offence of which the person is convicted is, for the purpose of the
provisions of Part 2 relating to disqualification from holding or
obtaining driving licences, deemed to be an offence in connection
with the driving of a motor vehicle.
(5) Any police officer may arrest without warrant any person
committing an offence under this section.
(6) Despite the Criminal Procedure Code 2010, a District Court or a
Magistrate’s Court has jurisdiction to try any offence under this
section and has power to impose the full punishment specified in this
section.
[19/2019]
(7) Where subsections (2) and (2A) prescribe a minimum term of
imprisonment on conviction of an offence under subsection (1), the
court is to impose a sentence of imprisonment that is equal to or
greater than that prescribed minimum term of imprisonment unless
the court, for special reasons, thinks fit to order a shorter term of
imprisonment.
[19/2019]
(8) In this section and section 65 —
“disqualification period”, for an offender convicted of an
offence under subsection (1), means a period starting on
the later of the following dates:
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
130
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(a) the date of the offender’s conviction;
(b) the date of the offender’s release from imprisonment,
if the offender is sentenced to imprisonment;
“grievous hurt” has the meaning given by section 320 (except
paragraph (aa)) of the Penal Code 1871;
“serious offender” means an offender who is convicted of an
offence under section 67 or 70(4) in relation to the offender’s
driving which is an offence under subsection (1);
“serious repeat offender” means an offender who —
(a) is convicted of an offence under section 67 or 70(4) in
relation to the offender’s driving which is an offence
under subsection (1); and
(b) has been convicted on at least one other earlier
occasion of a specified offence;
“specified offence” means —
(a) an offence under section 67, 68 or 70(4); or
(b) an offence under section 67 as in force immediately
before 1 November 2019.
[19/2019]
Driving without due care or reasonable consideration
65.—(1) If any person drives a motor vehicle on a road —
(a) without due care and attention; or
(b) without reasonable consideration for other persons using
the road,
the person (called the offender) shall be guilty of an offence.
[19/2019]
(2) If death is caused to another person by the driving of a motor
vehicle by the offender, the offender shall on conviction of an offence
under subsection (1) —
(a) be liable
to a fine
not exceeding $10,000 or to
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 3 years or to both;
Road Traffic Act 1961
131
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(b) where the person is a repeat offender, be liable to a fine not
exceeding $20,000 or to imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 6 years or to both;
(c) where the person is a serious offender in relation to the
driving, be punished with imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 2 years, in addition to any punishment under
paragraph (a) or (b); or
(d) where the offender is a serious repeat offender in relation to
the driving, be punished with imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 4 years, in addition to any punishment under
paragraph (a) or (b).
[19/2019]
(3) If grievous hurt is caused to another person by the driving of a
motor vehicle by the offender, the offender shall on conviction of an
offence under subsection (1) —
(a) be liable to a fine not exceeding $5,000 or to imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 2 years or to both;
(b) where the person is a repeat offender, be liable to a fine not
exceeding $10,000 or to imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 4 years or to both;
(c) where the person is a serious offender in relation to the
driving, be punished with a fine of not less than $2,000 and
not more than $10,000 and with imprisonment for a term
not exceeding 12 months, in addition to any punishment
under paragraph (a) or (b); or
(d) where the offender is a serious repeat offender in relation to
the driving, be punished with a fine of not less than $5,000
and not more than $20,000 and with imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 2 years, in addition to any punishment
under paragraph (a) or (b).
[19/2019]
(4) If hurt is caused to another person by the driving of a motor
vehicle by the offender, the offender shall on conviction of an offence
under subsection (1) —
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
132
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(a) be liable to a fine not exceeding $2,500 or to imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 12 months or to both;
(b) in the case of a repeat offender, be liable to a fine not
exceeding $5,000 or to imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 2 years or to both;
(c) where the person is a serious offender in relation to the
driving, be liable to a fine of not less than $2,000 and not
more than $10,000 or to imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 12 months or to both, in addition to any
punishment under paragraph (a) or (b); or
(d) where the offender is a serious repeat offender in relation to
the driving, be punished with a fine of not less than $5,000
and not more than $20,000 and with imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 2 years, in addition to any punishment
under paragraph (a) or (b).
[19/2019]
(5) In any other case involving the driving of a motor vehicle by the
offender, the offender shall on conviction of an offence under
subsection (1) —
(a) be liable to a fine not exceeding $1,500 or to imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 6 months or to both;
(b) where the person is a repeat offender, be liable to a fine not
exceeding $3,000 or to imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 12 months or to both;
(c) where the person is a serious offender in relation to the
driving, be liable to a fine of not less than $2,000 and not
more than $10,000 or to imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 12 months or to both, in addition to any
punishment under paragraph (a) or (b); or
(d) where the offender is a serious repeat offender in relation to
the driving, be punished with a fine of not less than $5,000
and not more than $20,000 and with imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 2 years, in addition to any punishment
under paragraph (a) or (b).
[19/2019]
Road Traffic Act 1961
133
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(6) A court convicting a person of an offence under subsection (1)
in the following cases is to, unless the court for special reasons thinks
fit to not order or to order otherwise, order that the person be
disqualified from holding or obtaining a driving licence for a
disqualification period of not less than the specified period
corresponding to that case:
(a) for an offender or a repeat offender in subsection (2)(a) or
(b) — 8 years;
(b) for a serious offender in subsection (2)(c) — 10 years;
(c) for a serious repeat offender in subsection (2)(d) who has
been convicted (whether before, on or after 1 November
2019) on only one earlier occasion of any specified
offence — 13 years;
(d) for an offender or a repeat offender in subsection (3)(a) or
(b) — 5 years;
(e) for a serious offender in subsection (3)(c) — 7 years;
(f) for a serious repeat offender in subsection (3)(d) who has
been convicted (whether before, on or after 1 November
2019) on only one earlier occasion of any specified
offence — 10 years;
(g) for a serious offender in subsection (4)(c) — 2 years;
(h) for a serious repeat offender in subsection (4)(d) who has
been convicted (whether before, on or after 1 November
2019) on only one earlier occasion of any specified
offence — 5 years;
(i) for a serious offender in subsection (5)(c) — 2 years;
(j) for a serious repeat offender in subsection (5)(d) who has
been convicted (whether before, on or after 1 November
2019) on only one earlier occasion of any specified
offence — 5 years.
[19/2019]
(7) A court convicting a person for an offence under subsection (1)
in the following cases is to, unless the court for special reasons thinks
fit to order a shorter disqualification period, order that the person be
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
134
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


disqualified from holding or obtaining a driving licence for life
starting on the date of the person’s conviction:
(a) a serious repeat offender in subsection (2)(d) who has been
convicted (whether before, on or after 1 November 2019)
on 2 or more earlier occasions of any specified offence;
(b) a serious repeat offender in subsection (3)(d) who has been
convicted (whether before, on or after 1 November 2019)
on 2 or more earlier occasions of any specified offence;
(c) a serious repeat offender in subsection (4)(d) who has been
convicted (whether before, on or after 1 November 2019)
on 2 or more earlier occasions of any specified offence;
(d) a serious repeat offender in subsection (5)(d) who has been
convicted (whether before, on or after 1 November 2019)
on 2 or more earlier occasions of any specified offence.
[19/2019]
(8) A person is a repeat offender in relation to an offence punishable
under subsections (2)(b), (3)(b), (4)(b) and (5)(b), respectively, if the
person in the respective subsection has been convicted (whether
before, on or after 1 November 2019) on at least one other earlier
occasion of any of the following offences:
(a) an offence under subsection (1);
(b) an offence under section 63, 64 or 116;
(c) an offence under this section, or section 64 or 66, as in
force immediately before 1 November 2019;
(d) an offence under section 279, 304A, 336, 337 or 338 of the
Penal Code 1871 where the act constituting the offence
involves the use of a motor vehicle.
[19/2019]
(9) Any police officer may arrest without warrant any person
committing an offence under this section.
[19/2019]
(10) Despite the Criminal Procedure Code 2010, a District Court or
a Magistrate’s Court has jurisdiction to try any offence under this
Road Traffic Act 1961
135
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


section and has power to impose the full punishment specified in this
section.
[19/2019]
Court to order forfeiture of motor vehicle for reckless or
dangerous driving, etc.
65AA.—(1) Where any person has been convicted of an offence
under —
(a) section 64(1) as a serious offender in section 64(2)(c)
or
(2A)(c),
or
as
a
serious
repeat
offender
in
section 64(2)(d) or (2A)(d); or
(b) section 65(1) as a serious offender in section 65(2)(c)
or (3)(c), or as a serious repeat offender in section 65(2)(d)
or (3)(d),
and it is proved to the satisfaction of a court that a motor vehicle has
been used in the commission of the offence, the court is to, on the
application of the Public Prosecutor, make an order for the forfeiture
of the motor vehicle, unless the court is satisfied that —
(c) the person who has committed the offence is not the owner
of the motor vehicle; and
(d) the person who has committed the offence had used the
motor vehicle without the consent of the owner.
[19/2019]
(2) Where any person has been convicted of an offence under
section 64(1) as an offender or a repeat offender in section 64(2)(a) or
(b), or section 26(2) of the Police Force Act 2004 (which offence is
committed on or after 1 November 2019), and it is proved to the
satisfaction of a court that a motor vehicle has been used in the
commission of the offence, the court is to, on the application of the
Public Prosecutor, make an order for the forfeiture of the motor
vehicle, unless —
(a) the court is satisfied that —
(i) the person who has committed the offence is not the
owner of the motor vehicle; and
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
136
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(ii) the person who has committed the offence had used
the motor vehicle without the consent of the owner;
or
(b) the court has other good reasons for ordering otherwise.
[19/2019]
(3) Any motor vehicle in respect of which there has been or there is
reasonable cause to suspect that there has been committed an offence
mentioned in subsection (1) or (2), may be seized by any police
officer or the Registrar or any officer authorised in writing by the
Registrar.
[19/2019]
(4) If there is no prosecution with regard to an offence mentioned in
subsection (1) or (2), any motor vehicle seized pursuant to
subsection (3) in relation to the offence must be released at the end
of one month starting from the date of seizure if it is not earlier
released.
[19/2019]
(5) In this section, a repeat offender, a serious offender or a serious
repeat offender, in relation to an offence under section 64 or 65, has
the meaning given by section 64 or 65, respectively.
[19/2019]
Collision of heavy motor vehicles and public service vehicles
with buildings or structures
65A.—(1) Any person who, when driving or attempting to drive —
(a) a heavy motor vehicle as defined in section 79(6); or
(b) any public service vehicle which is classified as a type of
bus under the Second Schedule,
causes the heavy motor vehicle or public service vehicle to collide
with any building or structure shall be guilty of an offence and shall
be liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding $5,000 or to
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 2 years or to both and, in
the case of a second or subsequent conviction, to a fine not exceeding
$10,000 or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 5 years or to
both.
Road Traffic Act 1961
137
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(1A) The Minister may, by notification in the Gazette, prescribe
particulars of any structure including its location and maximum
headroom measurement.
[4/2006]
(2) In this section, “structure” includes any bus shelter, gantry post,
overhead bridge and pillar.
Use of mobile communication device while driving
65B.—(1) A driver of a vehicle who holds in his or her hand a
mobile communication device and operates any of its communicative
or other functions, while the vehicle is in motion on a road or in a
public place is guilty of an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine
not exceeding $1,000 or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding
6 months or to both.
[28/2014; 9/2020]
(1A) To avoid doubt, subsection (1) does not apply to a mobile
communication device that is a wearable device (such as a smart
watch), when it is worn by the driver or rider in the manner intended
by the manufacturer of the wearable device.
[9/2020]
(2) Where a person who is convicted or found guilty of an offence
under subsection (1) is a repeat offender, the person is liable on
conviction to a fine not exceeding $2,000 or to imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 12 months or to both.
[28/2014]
(3) In this section —
“communicative
function”
means
any
of
the
following
functions:
(a) sending or receiving oral or written messages, audio
phone calls or video calls;
(b) sending or receiving electronic documents;
(c) sending or receiving still or moving images;
(d) sending or receiving audio or video files;
(e) providing access to the Internet;
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
138
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


“mobile communication device” means —
(a) a mobile phone; or
(b) any wireless handheld device (such as a tablet
computer) or wearable device (such as a smart
watch) designed or capable of being used for a
communicative function;
“repeat offender”, in relation to an offence under subsection (1),
means a person who is convicted or found guilty of that
offence (called the current offence) and who was previously
convicted or found guilty of —
(a) an offence under subsection (1);
(b) an offence under section 65B as in force immediately
before 1 February 2015; or
(c) an offence under section 65B as in force immediately
before 1 August 2020,
on at least one previous occasion before the date on which the
person is convicted or found guilty of the current offence.
[28/2014; 9/2020]
66. [Repealed by Act 19 of 2019 wef 01/11/2019]
Driving while under influence of drink, etc.
67.—(1) Any person who, when driving or attempting to drive a
motor vehicle on a road or other public place —
(a) is unfit to drive in that he or she is under the influence of
drink, a drug, a psychoactive substance or an intoxicating
substance to such an extent as to be incapable of having
proper control of the vehicle; or
[Act 12 of 2023 wef 01/06/2024]
(b) has so much alcohol in his or her body that the proportion
of it in his or her breath or blood exceeds the prescribed
limit,
shall be guilty of an offence and shall be liable on conviction to a fine
of not less than $2,000 and not more than $10,000 or to imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 12 months or to both and, in the case of a
Road Traffic Act 1961
139
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


second or subsequent conviction, to a fine of not less than $5,000 and
not more than $20,000 and to imprisonment for a term not exceeding
2 years.
[19/2019]
(2) Subject to sections 64(2D) and (2E) and 65(6) and (7), a court
convicting a person for an offence under this section in the following
cases is to, unless the court for special reasons thinks fit to not order
or to order otherwise, order that the person be disqualified from
holding or obtaining a driving licence for a period of not less than the
specified period corresponding to that case, starting on the date of the
person’s
conviction
or,
where
the
person
is
sentenced
to
imprisonment, on the date of the person’s release from prison:
(a) for a first offender — 2 years;
(b) for a repeat offender — 5 years.
[19/2019]
(2A) Subject to sections 64(2D) and (2E) and 65(6) and (7), where a
court convicts a person for an offence under subsection (1) and the
person has been convicted (whether before, on or after 1 November
2019) on 2 or more earlier occasions of an offence under
subsection
(1),
section
68,
or
subsection
(1)
as
in
force
immediately before 1 November 2019, the court is to, unless the
court for special reasons thinks fit to order a shorter period of
disqualification, order that the person be disqualified from holding or
obtaining a driving licence for life starting on the date of the person’s
conviction.
[19/2019]
(3) Any police officer may arrest without warrant any person
committing an offence under this section.
(4) In this section, a repeat offender means a person who is
convicted of an offence under this section and who has been
convicted (whether before, on or after 1 November 2019) on one
other earlier occasion of —
(a) an offence under subsection (1) or section 68; or
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
140
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(b) an offence under subsection (1) as in force immediately
before 1 November 2019.
[19/2019]
[Act 12 of 2023 wef 01/06/2024]
Enhanced penalties for offenders with previous convictions
under certain sections
67A.—(1) Where a person having been convicted of 2 or more
specified offences is again convicted of any one of the specified
offences (whether or not the same specified offence), the court has the
power to impose a punishment in excess of that prescribed for the
conviction as follows:
(a) where the court is satisfied, by reason of the person’s
previous convictions or the person’s antecedents, that it is
expedient for the protection of the public or with the view
to the prevention of further commission of any such
offence that a punishment in excess of that prescribed for
such a conviction should be awarded, then the court may
punish the offender with punishment not exceeding 3 times
the amount of punishment to which he or she would
otherwise have been liable for the conviction except that
where imprisonment is imposed it shall not exceed
10 years;
(b) despite sections 303 and 309 of the Criminal Procedure
Code 2010, if —
(i) the offender causes any serious injury or death to
another person when committing —
(A) whether before, on or after 1 November 2019
the offence under section 43(4), 47(5), 47C(7),
63(4), 64(1) or 67(1);
(B) on or after 1 November 2019, the offence under
section 65(1) or 68(1); or
(C) the offence under section 43(4), 64(1), 66(1) or
67(1)
as
in
force
immediately
before
1 November 2019; or
Road Traffic Act 1961
141
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(ii) in the case of an offender under section 70(4), the
offender had, in driving or attempting to drive a
motor vehicle at the time of any accident leading to
the offender’s arrest under section 69(5), caused any
serious injury or death to another person,
(b) the court may also punish the offender, subject to
sections 325(1) and 330(1) of the Criminal Procedure
Code 2010, with caning with not more than 6 strokes.
[15/2010; 19/2019; 12/2021]
(2) This section does not apply to a person who has been convicted
of an offence under section 63(4) unless the court is satisfied that in
committing the offence and the offence in respect of which he or she
had been previously convicted, he or she had driven a motor vehicle
on a road at a speed which exceeded by 40 kilometres per hour the
speed limit imposed by or in exercise of powers conferred by this Act.
(3) In subsection (1) —
“serious injury” has the meaning given by section 47D;
“specified offence” means an offence under —
(a) section 43(4), 47(5), 47C(7), 63(4), 64(1), 67(1)
or 70(4) that is committed whether before, on or after
1 November 2019;
(b) section 65(1) or 68(1) that is committed on or after
1 November 2019; or
(c) section 43(4), 64(1), 66(1) or 67(1) as in force
immediately before 1 November 2019.
[19/2019]
(4) Despite any provision to the contrary in the Criminal Procedure
Code 2010, a District Court or Magistrate’s Court may award the full
punishment prescribed by this section.
Being in charge of motor vehicle when under influence of
drink, etc.
68.—(1) Any person who when in charge of a motor vehicle which
is on a road or other public place but not driving the vehicle —
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
142
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(a) is unfit to drive in that he or she is under the influence of
drink, a drug, a psychoactive substance or an intoxicating
substance to such an extent as to be incapable of having
proper control of a vehicle; or
[Act 12 of 2023 wef 01/06/2024]
(b) has so much alcohol in his or her body that the proportion
of it in his or her breath or blood exceeds the prescribed
limit,
shall be guilty of an offence and shall be liable on conviction to a fine
of not less than $500 and not more than $2,000 or to imprisonment for
a term not exceeding 3 months and, in the case of a second or
subsequent conviction, to a fine of not less than $1,000 and not more
than $5,000 and to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 6 months.
(2) For the purpose of subsection (1), a person is deemed not to
have been in charge of a motor vehicle if the person proves —
(a) that at the material time the circumstances were such that
there was no likelihood of the person’s driving the vehicle
so long as he or she remained so unfit to drive or so long as
the proportion of alcohol in his or her breath or blood
remained in excess of the prescribed limit; and
(b) that between the person becoming so unfit to drive and the
material time, or between the time when the proportion of
alcohol in his or her breath or blood first exceeded the
prescribed limit and the material time, he or she had not
driven the vehicle on a road or other public place.
(3) On a second or subsequent conviction for an offence under this
section, the offender is, unless the court for special reasons thinks fit
to order otherwise and without prejudice to the power of the court to
order a longer period of disqualification, disqualified from holding or
obtaining a driving licence for a period of 12 months from the date of
his or her release from prison.
(4) Where a person convicted of an offence under this section has
been previously convicted of an offence under section 67, he or she is
treated for the purpose of this section as having been previously
convicted under this section.
Road Traffic Act 1961
143
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(5) Any police officer may arrest without warrant any person
committing an offence under this section.
[Act 12 of 2023 wef 01/06/2024]
Preliminary breath tests
69.—(1) Where a police officer has reasonable cause to suspect
that —
(a) a person driving or attempting to drive or in charge of a
motor vehicle on a road or other public place has alcohol in
his or her body or has committed a traffic offence while the
vehicle was in motion;
(b) a person has been driving or attempting to drive or been in
charge of a motor vehicle on a road or other public place
with alcohol in his or her body and that he or she still has
alcohol in his or her body;
(c) a person has been driving or attempting to drive or been in
charge of a motor vehicle on a road or other public place
and has committed a traffic offence while the vehicle was
in motion; or
(d) a person has been driving or attempting to drive or been in
charge of a motor vehicle on a road or other public place
when an accident occurred —
(i) between that motor vehicle and one or more other
motor vehicles; or
(ii) causing any injury or death to another person,
the police officer may, subject to section 71, require that person to
provide a specimen of his or her breath for a preliminary breath test.
[10/2017]
(2) A person may be required under subsection (1) to provide a
specimen of his or her breath either at or near the place where the
requirement is made or, if the requirement is made under
subsection (1)(d) and the police officer making the requirement
thinks fit, at a police station specified by the police officer.
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
144
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(3) A preliminary breath test required under subsection (1) must be
conducted by a police officer.
[11/96; 10/2017]
(4) A person who, without reasonable excuse, fails to provide a
specimen of his or her breath when required to do so pursuant to this
section shall be guilty of an offence and shall be liable on conviction
to a fine of not less than $1,000 and not more than $5,000 or to
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 6 months and, in the case of a
second or subsequent conviction, to a fine of not less than $3,000 and
not more than $10,000 and to imprisonment for a term not exceeding
12 months.
(5) A police officer may arrest a person without warrant if —
(a) as a result of a preliminary breath test the police officer has
reasonable cause to suspect that the proportion of alcohol
in that person’s breath or blood exceeds the prescribed
limit;
(b) that person has failed to provide a specimen of his or her
breath for a preliminary breath test when required to do so
pursuant to this section and the police officer has
reasonable cause to suspect that that person has alcohol
in his or her body; or
(c) the police officer has reasonable cause to suspect that that
person is under the influence of a drug, a psychoactive
substance or an intoxicating substance.
[Act 12 of 2023 wef 01/06/2024]
[10/2017]
(6) A person must not be arrested by virtue of subsection (5) when
he or she is at a hospital as a patient.
Provision of specimen for analysis
70.—(1) In the course of an investigation whether a person arrested
under section 69(5) has committed an offence under section 67 or 68,
a police officer may, subject to the provisions of this section and
section 71, require the person —
(a) to provide a specimen of his or her breath for a breath test
under this section; or
Road Traffic Act 1961
145
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(b) to provide to a registered medical practitioner, at any place
that may be determined by the police officer, a specimen of
his or her blood for a laboratory test,
even though he or she has been required to provide a specimen of his
or her breath for a preliminary breath test.
[28/2014; 10/2017]
(2) A breath test under this section must be conducted by a police
officer and may be conducted either at or near the place where the
arrest is made, or at a police station.
[24/2010]
(3) A requirement under this section to provide a specimen of
blood —
(a) must not be made unless —
(i) the police officer making the requirement has
reasonable
cause
to
believe
that
for
medical
reasons a specimen of breath cannot be provided or
should not be required;
(ii) when the requirement is made, there is no breath
analysing device of a type approved for a breath test
under this section at the police station or at or near
the place where the arrest was made, or it is for any
other reason not practicable to conduct a breath test
under this section; or
(iii) the police officer making the requirement has
reasonable
cause
to
suspect
that
the
person
required to provide the specimen is under the
influence of a drug, a psychoactive substance or an
intoxicating substance; and
[Act 12 of 2023 wef 01/06/2024]
(b) may be made even though the person required to provide
the specimen has already provided or been required to
provide a specimen of his or her breath.
[10/2017]
(4) A person who, without reasonable excuse, fails to provide a
specimen when required to do so pursuant to this section shall be
guilty of an offence and if it is shown that at the time of any accident
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
146
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


mentioned in section 69(1)(d) or of his or her arrest under
section 69(5) —
(a) he or she was driving or attempting to drive a motor vehicle
on a road or any other public place, he or she shall be liable
on conviction to be punished as if the offence charged were
an offence under section 67; or
(b) he or she was in charge of a motor vehicle on a road or any
other public place, he or she shall be liable on conviction to
be punished as if the offence charged were an offence
under section 68.
(5) A police officer must, on requiring any person under this section
to provide a specimen for a laboratory test, warn the person that
failure to provide a specimen of blood may make the person liable to
imprisonment, a fine and disqualification, and, if the police officer
fails to do so, the court before which that person is charged with an
offence under subsection (4) may dismiss the charge.
Protection of hospital patients
71.—(1) A person who is at a hospital as a patient must not be
required to provide a specimen for a breath test or to provide a
specimen for a laboratory test unless the registered medical
practitioner in immediate charge of his or her case authorises it and
the specimen is to be provided at the hospital.
(2) The registered medical practitioner mentioned in subsection (1)
must not authorise a specimen to be taken where it would be
prejudicial to the proper care and treatment of the patient.
Evidence in proceedings for offences under sections 67 and 68
71A.—(1) In proceedings for an offence under section 67 or 68,
evidence of the proportion of alcohol or of any drug, psychoactive
substance or intoxicating substance in a specimen of breath or blood
(as the case may be) provided by the accused is to be taken into
account and, subject to subsection (2), it is to be assumed that the
proportion of alcohol in the accused’s breath or blood at the time of
the alleged offence was not less than in the specimen.
[Act 12 of 2023 wef 01/06/2024]
Road Traffic Act 1961
147
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(2) Where the proceedings are for an offence under section 67(1)(a)
or 68(1)(a) and it is alleged that, at the time of the offence, the
accused was unfit to drive in that he or she was under the influence of
drink, or for an offence under section 67(1)(b) or 68(1)(b), the
assumption mentioned in subsection (1) must not be made if the
accused proves —
(a) that he or she consumed alcohol after he or she had ceased
to drive, attempt to drive or be in charge of a motor vehicle
on a road or any other public place and before he or she
provided the specimen; and
(b) that had he or she not done so the proportion of alcohol in
his or her breath or blood —
(i) would not have been such as to make him or her unfit
to drive a motor vehicle in the case of proceedings
for an offence under section 67(1)(a) or 68(1)(a); or
(ii) would not have exceeded the prescribed limit in the
case
of
proceedings
for
an
offence
under
section 67(1)(b) or 68(1)(b).
(3) Subject to subsection (5) —
(a) evidence of the proportion of alcohol in a specimen of
breath may be given by the production of a document or
documents
purporting
to
be
either
a
statement
automatically produced by a breath analysing device of a
type approved for a breath test and a certificate signed by a
police officer (which may but need not be contained in the
same document as the statement) to the effect that the
statement relates to a specimen provided by the accused at
the date and time shown in the statement; and
(b) evidence of the proportion of alcohol or of any drug,
psychoactive substance or intoxicating substance in a
specimen of blood may be given by the production of a
document purporting to be a certificate signed by an
authorised analyst as to the proportion of alcohol, drug,
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
148
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


psychoactive substance or intoxicating substance found in
a specimen of blood identified in the certificate.
[10/2017]
[Act 12 of 2023 wef 01/06/2024]
(4) A specimen of blood is to be disregarded unless it was taken
from the accused with his or her consent by a registered medical
practitioner; but evidence that a specimen of blood was so taken may
be given by the production of a document purporting to certify that
fact and to be signed by a registered medical practitioner.
(5) A document purporting to be such a statement or such a
certificate, or both, as is mentioned in subsection (3) is admissible in
evidence on behalf of the prosecution pursuant to this section only if a
copy of it has been handed to the accused when the document was
produced or has been served on him or her not later than 7 days before
the hearing, and any other document is so admissible only if a copy of
it has been served on the accused not later than 7 days before the
hearing.
(6) A document purporting to be a certificate (or so much of a
document as purports to be a certificate) is not so admissible if the
accused, not later than 3 days before the hearing or within any further
time that the court may in special circumstances allow, has served
notice on the prosecution requiring the attendance at the hearing of
the person by whom the document purports to be signed.
(7) A copy of a certificate required by this section to be served on
the accused or a notice required by this section to be served on the
prosecution may be served personally or sent by registered post.
Deputy Commissioner of Police may require registered medical
practitioner to send blood specimen for laboratory test
71B.—(1) Despite anything in section 69 or 71A, where a
person —
(a) was the driver of or attempted to drive or was in charge of a
motor vehicle on a road or other public place when an
accident occurred —
(i) between that motor vehicle and one or more other
motor vehicles; or
Road Traffic Act 1961
149
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(ii) causing any injury or death to another person; and
(b) as a result of any injury sustained by the person in the
accident or any other cause is unable to provide a specimen
of the person’s breath under section 69 or to give the
person’s consent to a specimen of blood being taken from
the person for analysis,
any registered medical practitioner treating the person for the
person’s injury must, if so directed by the Deputy Commissioner of
Police, cause any specimen of blood taken by the registered medical
practitioner from such person in connection with the person’s
treatment to be sent for a laboratory test to determine the
proportion of alcohol or of any drug, psychoactive substance or
intoxicating substance in the specimen.
[28/2014]
[Act 12 of 2023 wef 01/06/2024]
(2) In proceedings for an offence under section 67 or 68, evidence
of the proportion of alcohol or of any drug, psychoactive substance or
intoxicating substance in a specimen of blood analysed pursuant to
this section is to be taken into account.
[Act 12 of 2023 wef 01/06/2024]
(3) Evidence of the proportion of alcohol or of any drug,
psychoactive substance or intoxicating substance in a specimen of
blood analysed under this section may, subject to subsection (4), be
given by the production of a document purporting to be a certificate
signed by an authorised analyst as to the proportion of alcohol, drug,
psychoactive substance or intoxicating substance found in the
specimen of blood identified in the certificate.
[Act 12 of 2023 wef 01/06/2024]
(4) The provisions of section 71A(5), (6) and (7) apply, with the
necessary modifications, to a certificate mentioned in subsection (3)
as
they
apply
to
a
document
or
certificate
mentioned
in
section 71A(3).
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
150
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


Interpretation of sections 67 to 71B, etc.
72.—(1) In sections 67 to 71B —
“authorised analyst” means any registered medical practitioner,
scientific officer or chemist who is employed in a hospital or
laboratory to carry out analyses of blood;
“breath analysing device” means an instrument or apparatus for
ascertainment by analysis of a person’s breath what
concentration of alcohol is present in the person’s breath;
“breath test” means a test of a specimen of a person’s breath to
assess —
(a) whether there is alcohol present in the person’s
breath; and
(b) if alcohol is present, the concentration of alcohol in
the person’s breath,
by means of a breath analysing device of a type approved by
the Deputy Commissioner of Police;
“fail” includes refuse;
“intoxicating substance” has the meaning given by the
Intoxicating Substances Act 1987;
“police station” includes any place or conveyance authorised or
appointed by the Deputy Commissioner of Police to be used
as a police station;
“preliminary breath test” means a breath test under section 69;
“prescribed limit” means —
(a) 35 microgrammes of alcohol in 100 millilitres of
breath; or
(b) 80 milligrammes of alcohol in 100 millilitres of
blood;
[Act 12 of 2023 wef 01/06/2024]
Road Traffic Act 1961
151
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


“psychoactive substance” has the meaning given by section 2 of
the Misuse of Drugs Act 1973.
[Act 12 of 2023 wef 01/06/2024]
[28/2014; 10/2017]
(1A) Once a type of breath analysing device is approved by the
Deputy Commissioner of Police for the purposes of the definition of
“breath test” in subsection (1), the Deputy Commissioner of Police
must, as soon as practicable, cause to be published in the Gazette a
notification specifying each type of breath analysing device so
approved by him or her.
[28/2014; 10/2017]
(1B) However, failure to comply with subsection (1A) in respect of
any type of breath analysing device does not invalidate the approval
for that type of breath analysing device.
[28/2014; 10/2017]
(2) A person is regarded as not providing a specimen of breath for a
breath test unless the specimen —
(a) is sufficient to enable the test to be carried out; and
(b) is provided in a way that enables the objective of the test to
be satisfactorily achieved.
[10/2017]
(3) Subject to section 71B, a person provides a specimen of blood if
and only if the person consents to its being taken by a registered
medical practitioner and it is so taken.
Pillion riding
73.—(1) It is not lawful for more than one person in addition to the
driver to be carried on any two-wheeled motor cycle nor is it lawful
for that one person to be so carried otherwise than sitting astride the
motor cycle and on a proper seat securely fixed to the motor cycle
behind the driver’s seat.
(2) If any person is carried on any such motor cycle in
contravention of this section, the driver of the motor cycle shall be
guilty of an offence.
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
152
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


Drivers and pillion riders of motor cycles to wear protective
helmets
74.—(1) Every person who drives or is carried on a motor cycle
must wear securely on his or her head a protective helmet of a type
approved by the Deputy Commissioner of Police.
[28/2014]
(1A) The driver of a motor cycle (called in this section the motor
cycle rider) must not drive the motor cycle where a person is being
carried on the motor cycle (called in this section the pillion) so driven
by the motor cycle rider unless the pillion is wearing securely on his
or her head a protective helmet of a type approved by the Deputy
Commissioner of Police.
[12/2021]
(2) A person must not import, sell or offer for sale or have in the
person’s possession for sale any protective helmet which is not of a
type approved by the Deputy Commissioner of Police.
[28/2014]
(2A) Once a type of protective helmet is approved by the Deputy
Commissioner of Police for the purposes of subsections (1) and (2),
the Deputy Commissioner of Police must, as soon as practicable,
cause to be published in the Gazette a notification specifying each
type of protective helmet so approved by him or her.
[28/2014]
(2B) However, failure to comply with subsection (2A) in respect of
any type of protective helmet does not invalidate the approval for that
type of protective helmet.
[28/2014]
(3) Any person who contravenes subsection (1) or (1A) shall be
guilty of an offence and shall be liable on conviction —
(a) to a fine not exceeding $1,000 or to imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 3 months or to both; but
(b) where the person is a repeat offender, to a fine not
exceeding $2,000 or to imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 6 months or to both.
[12/2021]
Road Traffic Act 1961
153
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(3A) A person is a repeat offender in relation to an offence under
subsection (3) if the person who is convicted, or found guilty, of an
offence under that subsection (called the current offence) of
contravening subsection (1) or (1A) has (whether before, on or
after 30 June 2021) been convicted or found guilty, on at least one
other earlier occasion before the date on which the person is
convicted or found guilty of the current offence, of the same offence
of contravening subsection (1) or (1A).
[12/2021]
(4) Any person who contravenes subsection (2) shall be guilty of an
offence and shall be liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding
$1,000 or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 3 months or to
both and, in the case of a second or subsequent conviction, to a fine
not exceeding $2,000 or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding
6 months or to both.
[12/2021]
Wearing of seat belts
75.—(1) The Minister may make rules requiring, subject to any
exceptions that may be prescribed, any person driving or riding in a
motor vehicle to wear a seat belt of a type approved by the Deputy
Commissioner of Police under section 76(1).
[28/2014]
(2) Rules under this section —
(a) may make different provisions in relation to different
classes of vehicles, different descriptions of persons and
different circumstances; and
(b) may make any prescribed exceptions subject to any
conditions that may be prescribed.
Sale of seat belts
76.—(1) A person must not sell or offer for sale or have in the
person’s possession for sale any seat belt which is not of a type
approved by the Deputy Commissioner of Police.
[28/2014]
(2) Any person who contravenes subsection (1) shall be guilty of an
offence.
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
154
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(3) Once a type of seat belt is approved by the Deputy
Commissioner of Police for the purposes of subsection (1) and
section 75(1), the Deputy Commissioner of Police must, as soon as
practicable, cause to be published in the Gazette a notification
specifying each type of seat belt so approved by him or her.
[28/2014]
(4) However, failure to comply with subsection (3) in respect of any
type of seat belt does not invalidate the approval for that type of seat
belt.
[28/2014]
Requirements as to employment of drivers and attendants
77.—(1) In the case of a heavy locomotive or a light locomotive,
2 persons must be employed in driving or attending the locomotive
while being driven on any road.
(2) Where any locomotive mentioned in subsection (1) is drawing a
trailer or trailers on a road, one or more persons in addition to the
persons employed as provided under that subsection must be
employed for the purpose of attending to the trailer or trailers at
the rate of one such additional person for each trailer.
(3) Subsection (2) does not apply to a road roller.
(4) Where a motor vehicle, other than a heavy locomotive or a light
locomotive, is drawing a trailer on a road, one person in addition to
the driver of the vehicle must be carried on the trailer for the purpose
of attending to the trailer.
(5) If any person causes or permits a motor vehicle or trailer to be
driven or drawn in contravention of this section, the person shall be
guilty of an offence.
(6) The Authority may by rules prescribe the number of attendants
who must be, and other persons who may be, carried on goods
vehicles and regulate the positions on the vehicle which they may
occupy and the duties of those attendants.
(7) The Authority may by rules vary the requirements of this
section in respect of any class or description of motor vehicles or any
class or description of trailers.
Road Traffic Act 1961
155
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(8) In this section, “trailer” does not include —
(a) any vehicle used solely for carrying water for the purposes
of the drawing vehicle or any agricultural vehicle not
constructed to carry a load;
(b) any road sweeping or road construction vehicles; or
(c) any trailer or class of trailers exempted from the operation
of this section by the Minister.
Restriction on number of trailers drawn
78.—(1) The number of trailers (if any) which may be drawn by a
motor vehicle, other than a heavy locomotive or a light locomotive,
on a road must not exceed one.
(2) For the purposes of this section, “trailer” does not include any
vehicle used solely for carrying water for the purposes of the drawing
vehicle or any agricultural vehicle not constructed to carry a load.
(3) If any person causes or permits a trailer to be drawn in
contravention of this section, the person shall be guilty of an offence.
Offence for driving heavy motor vehicle without police escort
79.—(1) Any person who drives or causes to be driven on any road
a heavy motor vehicle the overall height of which exceeds 4.5 metres
without being escorted by a police officer, or an auxiliary police
officer appointed in accordance with any written law, shall be guilty
of an offence.
[4/2006]
(2) A person guilty of an offence under subsection (1) shall be liable
on conviction —
(a) for a first offence, to imprisonment for a presumptive
minimum term of not less than one year and not more than
3 years and, in addition, to a fine not exceeding $2,000; and
(b) for a second or subsequent offence, to imprisonment for a
term of not less than 2 years and not more than 5 years and,
in addition, to a fine not exceeding $5,000.
[4/2006; 15/2019]
(3) [Deleted by Act 4 of 2006]
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
156
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(4) A person convicted of an offence under subsection (1) is, unless
the court for special reasons thinks fit to order otherwise and without
prejudice to the power of the court to order a longer period of
disqualification —
(a) in the case of a first offence, to be disqualified from
holding or obtaining a driving licence for a period of not
less than one year; and
(b) in the case of a second or subsequent offence, to be
disqualified from holding or obtaining a driving licence for
a period of not less than 2 years.
[4/2006]
(5) Any disqualification imposed against any person under
subsection (4) takes effect from the date the person is released
from prison.
(6) In this section —
“heavy motor vehicle” means —
(a) a goods vehicle the weight of which unladen exceeds
2,500 kilogrammes;
(b) a motor vehicle which is —
(i) an engineering plant or a mobile crane or is
designed
and
constructed
for
engineering
operations; or
(ii) drawing a trailer carrying a container or other
load;
“overall height”, in relation to a heavy motor vehicle, means the
distance between the surface on which the vehicle rests and
the highest point of the vehicle, and where it is carrying a load
the highest point of its load.
[4/2006]
80. [Repealed by Act 4 of 2006]
Duty to give information
81.—(1) Where the driver of a motor vehicle is alleged or is
suspected to be guilty of an offence under this Act or the rules, the
Road Traffic Act 1961
157
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


owner of the motor vehicle, when required by a police officer, an
employee of the Authority or an outsourced enforcement officer to do
so, must give to the police officer, Authority’s employee or
outsourced enforcement officer (as the case may be), within
14 days after being so required, such information as to —
(a) the identity and address of the person who was driving the
motor vehicle at or about the time of the alleged offence;
and
(b) the driving licence held by that person.
[28/2014; 10/2017; 38/2018]
(1A) An owner of a motor vehicle who fails to give the information
required of the owner under subsection (1) is guilty of an offence
unless the owner proves, on a balance of probabilities, that the owner
did not know and could not with reasonable diligence have
ascertained the information required.
[28/2014]
(1B) Where the owner of a motor vehicle who is guilty of an
offence under subsection (1A) holds a driving licence, and the driver
of the motor vehicle is alleged or suspected to be guilty of an offence
specified in Part 1 of the Third Schedule, the owner of the motor
vehicle is presumed, until the contrary is proved, to be driving the
motor vehicle at the time of the occurrence of the second‑mentioned
offence.
[28/2014]
(1C) For the purposes of subsection (1A), where the owner of the
motor vehicle is a company, a partnership or an unincorporated body,
the owner is not deemed to have discharged the burden of proving
that it could not, with reasonable diligence, have ascertained the
information required under subsection (1) unless the owner also
proves, on a balance of probabilities, that —
(a) it had kept a proper and accurate record as required under
subsection (8); but
(b) the record shows no person having been permitted by the
owner to drive the motor vehicle at or about the time of the
alleged offence.
[28/2014]
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
158
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(2) Where the driver of a motor vehicle is alleged or is suspected to
be guilty of an offence under this Act or the rules, any other person
who was or should have been in charge of the motor vehicle, when
required by a police officer, an employee of the Authority or an
outsourced enforcement officer to do so, must give to the police
officer, Authority’s employee or outsourced enforcement officer (as
the case may be), within 14 days after being so required, any
information which the person has power to give, and which may lead
to the identification of the driver, and if that person fails to do so, that
person is guilty of an offence.
[28/2014; 10/2017; 38/2018]
(3) A person required under subsection (1) or (2) by a police officer,
an employee of the Authority or an outsourced enforcement officer to
give information commits an offence if —
(a) the person —
(i) provides, or causes or permits to be provided, any
information in connection with the requirement,
which
is
false
or
misleading
in
a
material
particular; and
(ii) knows or ought reasonably to know that, or is
reckless as to whether, the information is false or
misleading in a material particular; or
(b) the person intentionally alters, suppresses or destroys any
information
which
the
person
is
required
under
subsection (1) or (2) to give, for the purpose of not
leading to the identification of the driver.
[12/2021]
(3A) A person commits an offence if the person pretends, or falsely
represents (by word or conduct) himself or herself, to be a person who
was driving the motor vehicle at or about the time of an alleged
offence that is the subject of a requirement made under subsection (1)
or (2), knowing that he or she was not the driver of the motor vehicle.
[12/2021]
Road Traffic Act 1961
159
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(3B) A person who is guilty of an offence under subsection (3) or
(3A) shall be liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding $10,000 or
to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 12 months or to both.
[12/2021]
(4) A police officer, an employee of the Authority or an outsourced
enforcement officer may require any information to be furnished
under subsection (1) or (2) to be in writing signed by the person
required to furnish the information.
[38/2018]
(5) Despite any other written law to the contrary, any information
given under this section by any person charged with any offence
under this Act or the rules or any offence in connection with the
driving of a motor vehicle may be used as evidence without proof of
signature at the hearing of the charge.
[10/2017]
(6) Despite any other written law to the contrary, any statement
made by any person to any police officer, an employee of the
Authority or an outsourced enforcement officer —
(a) that a motor vehicle was on a particular occasion being
driven by or belonged to that person; or
(b) that it belonged to a firm in which that person also stated
that he or she was a partner or to a corporation of which
that person stated that he or she was a director, officer or
employee,
is admissible in evidence without proof of signature for the purpose of
determining by whom the motor vehicle was on that occasion being
driven or who was in charge of it or to whom it belonged.
[38/2018]
(7) Any person who is guilty of an offence under subsection (1A) or
(2) shall be liable on conviction —
(a) to a fine not exceeding $1,000 or to imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 3 months or to both; and
(b) in the case of a second or subsequent conviction, to a fine
not exceeding $2,000 or to imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 6 months or to both.
[10/2017]
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
160
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(7A) [Deleted by Act 12 of 2021]
(8) Where the owner of a vehicle is a company, a partnership or an
unincorporated body, it is the duty of such owner to keep (and to that
end designate at least one of its responsible officers to ensure
keeping) a proper and accurate record of each occasion on which the
owner permits any person to drive the motor vehicle, whether or not
the person is a director, member, partner, officer, employee or agent
of the owner or otherwise, and whether or not the person is permitted
to drive the motor vehicle in the course of his or her employment with
the owner or otherwise.
[24/2010; 12/2021]
(9) The record required to be kept under subsection (8) —
(a) must contain —
(i) the registration number of the motor vehicle;
(ii) the name, address, driving licence number (whether
local or foreign) and identity card or passport number
of the person permitted by the owner of the motor
vehicle to drive the motor vehicle; and
(iii) the date and time, or the period, during which the
motor vehicle is allocated to the person for him or her
to drive it; and
(b) must be retained by the owner of the motor vehicle for a
period of at least 12 months beginning with the date, or
with the date of the start of the period, mentioned in
paragraph (a)(iii).
[24/2010; 12/2021]
(10) In subsection (8), “responsible officer” means —
(a) for a company, the person for the time being holding the
office of chairperson, managing director or company
secretary of, or any position analogous to any of those
offices in, the company;
(b) for a partnership, any partner of the partnership; or
(c) for an unincorporated body of persons, the person for the
time being holding the office of president, secretary or
Road Traffic Act 1961
161
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


treasurer of the governing body or a committee (or an
equivalent body) of, or any position analogous to any of
those offices in, the body of persons,
and includes any person carrying out the duties of any such office
mentioned in paragraph (a), (b) or (c) if that office is vacant.
[12/2021]
Amendment of Third Schedule
82. The Minister may by order in the Gazette add to, amend or vary
the Third Schedule.
[10/2017]
Liability of owner of vehicle for specified offence
83.—(1) When a specified offence is committed, the person who, at
the time of the occurrence of the specified offence, is the owner of the
motor vehicle in respect of which the specified offence is committed
shall, by virtue of this section, be guilty of the specified offence in all
respects as if the person were the actual offender guilty of the
specified offence, unless —
(a) in any case where that offence is dealt with under
section 133, the owner satisfies the police officer or
employee of the Authority mentioned in section 133(7)
that the vehicle was at the relevant time a stolen vehicle or
a vehicle illegally taken or used; or
(b) in any other case, the court is satisfied that the vehicle was
at the relevant time a stolen vehicle or a vehicle illegally
taken or used.
[37/2012; 12/2021]
(2) Nothing in this section shall affect the liability of the actual
offender but where a penalty has been imposed on or recovered from
a person in relation to a specified offence no further penalty may be
imposed on or recovered from any other person in relation thereto.
[37/2012]
(3) Despite subsection (1), no owner of a motor vehicle shall by
virtue of this section be guilty of a specified offence if —
(a) in any case where the offence is dealt with under
section 133, the owner —
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
162
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(i) within 14 days after service on the owner of a notice
under section 133 alleging that the owner has been
guilty of such offence, furnishes by statutory
declaration to the police officer or employee of the
Authority mentioned in section 133(7) the name and
address of the person who was in charge of the
vehicle at all relevant times relating to the offence
concerned; or
(ii) satisfies the police officer or employee of the
Authority that the owner did not know and could
not with reasonable diligence have ascertained that
name and address; and
(b) in any other case the owner satisfies the court that the
owner did not know and could not with reasonable
diligence have ascertained that name and address.
[37/2012; 28/2014; 12/2021]
(4) A statutory declaration made under subsection (3) if produced
in any proceedings against the person named therein and in respect of
the offence concerned is prima facie evidence that the person was in
charge of the vehicle at all relevant times relating to that offence.
(5) A statutory declaration which relates to more than one specified
offence is not regarded as a statutory declaration under or for the
purposes of subsection (3).
[37/2012]
(6) In this section —
“owner”, in relation to a motor vehicle, includes —
(a) every person who is the owner or joint owner or part
owner of the vehicle and any person who has the use
of the vehicle under a hire-purchase agreement but
not the lessor under that agreement;
(b) the person in whose name the vehicle is registered
except where the person has sold or otherwise
disposed of the vehicle and has complied with the
provisions of the rules applicable to the person in
regard to the sale or disposal; and
Road Traffic Act 1961
163
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(c) in the case of a vehicle in respect of which a general
licence is issued under section 28, the person to
whom the general licence is issued;
“specified offence” means any offence set out in Part 2 of the
Third Schedule.
[37/2012; 28/2014]
Division 2 — Accidents
Duty to stop in case of accident
84.—(1) Where an accident occurs owing to the presence of a
motor vehicle on a road and the accident results in damage or injury to
any person, vehicle or structure, the driver of the motor vehicle must
stop the motor vehicle and the driver must do such of the following as
may be applicable:
(a) the driver if requested to do so by any person at the scene of
the accident having reasonable grounds for so requesting
the
driver’s
particulars,
must
provide
the
driver’s
particulars to that person;
(b) if no person mentioned in paragraph (a) is present at the
scene of the accident, the driver must take reasonable steps
to inform the owner (if any) of the damaged vehicle or
structure of the damage caused to the vehicle or structure,
and provide that owner with the driver’s particulars.
[28/2014; 19/2019]
(2) The driver of the motor vehicle mentioned in subsection (1)
must report the accident at a police station or to a police officer as
soon as reasonably practicable within 24 hours after the accident
unless either of the following has occurred:
(a) the driver has provided the driver’s particulars to a person
mentioned in subsection (1)(a);
(b) the owner mentioned in subsection (1)(b) has contacted the
driver.
[28/2014]
(2A) Where owing to the presence of a motor vehicle on a road an
accident occurs resulting in injury or death to any animal, the driver
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
164
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


of the motor vehicle must stop the vehicle if the driver has reasonable
grounds to believe that —
(a) the animal has an owner; or
(b) the presence of the injured or dead animal on the road is
likely to pose any safety hazard to the other road users.
[19/2019]
(2B) The driver mentioned in subsection (2A) who is involved in
the accident must —
(a) if requested to do so by any person at the scene of the
accident having reasonable grounds for so requesting the
driver’s particulars, provide the driver’s particulars to that
person;
(b) if no person mentioned in paragraph (a) is present at the
scene of the accident, the driver must take reasonable steps
to inform the owner of the injured or dead animal (if any)
of the injury or death caused to the animal and provide that
owner with the driver’s particulars; and
(c) if the presence of the injured or dead animal is likely to
pose any safety hazard to other road users, the driver must
as far as the circumstances permit, take reasonable steps to
alert other road users of the obstruction and immediately
inform a police officer of the obstruction.
[19/2019]
(3) If in any case owing to the presence of a motor vehicle on a road
an accident occurs whereby any person is killed or any damage or
injury is caused to any person, vehicle, structure or animal, the driver
of the motor vehicle must render any assistance that may be
reasonably required by any police officer or in the absence of any
police officer any assistance that may reasonably be in the power of
the driver to render.
(4) When owing to the presence of a motor vehicle on a road an
accident occurs in consequence of which any person is killed or
seriously injured or serious damage is caused to any vehicle or
structure, a person must not, except under the authority of a police
officer, move or otherwise interfere with any vehicle involved in the
Road Traffic Act 1961
165
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


accident or any part of the vehicle or do any other act so as to destroy
or alter any evidence of the accident except that —
(a) a vehicle or any part of the vehicle may be moved so far as
may be necessary to extricate persons or animals involved,
remove
mails,
prevent
fire
or
prevent
damage
or
obstruction to the public; and
(b) goods or passengers baggage may be removed from a
vehicle under the supervision of a police officer.
(5) Subsection (4) does not apply where it is urgently necessary to
remove any seriously injured person to hospital and no suitable
means of conveyance other than a vehicle involved in the accident is
at hand.
(6) In this section, “particulars”, in relation to a driver of a motor
vehicle, means the name and address of the driver of the motor
vehicle, the name and address of the owner of the motor vehicle, and
the identification marks of the motor vehicle.
[28/2014; 19/2019]
(7) If any person fails to comply with any of the provisions of this
section, he or she shall be guilty of an offence.
(8) Any person who is guilty of an offence under subsection (7)
arising from his or her failure to comply with subsection (3) shall, if
he or she had in driving or attempting to drive a motor vehicle at the
time of the accident mentioned in that subsection caused any serious
injury or death to another person, be liable on conviction —
(a) to a fine not exceeding $3,000 or to imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 12 months or to both; and
(b) in the case of a second or subsequent conviction, to a fine
not exceeding $5,000 or to imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 2 years or to both.
[10/2017]
(9) Where a person is convicted of an offence under subsection (7)
arising from his or her failure to comply with subsection (3), the court
convicting him or her shall —
(a) if satisfied that he or she had in driving or attempting to
drive a motor vehicle at the time of the accident mentioned
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
166
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


in subsection (3) caused any serious injury or death to
another person; and
(b) unless the court for special reasons thinks fit to order
otherwise,
make an order disqualifying him or her from holding or obtaining a
driving licence —
(c) for a period of not less than 12 months from the date of his
or her conviction or, where he or she is sentenced to
imprisonment, from the date of his or her release from
prison; or
(d) for any longer period that the court thinks fit.
(10) Where at one trial the driver of a motor vehicle is convicted
and sentenced to imprisonment for —
(a) an offence involving the use of the motor vehicle by him or
her whereby any serious injury or death is caused to
another person; and
(b) an offence under subsection (7) arising from his or her
failure to comply with subsection (3),
the court before which he or she is convicted is to order that the
sentences for those offences run consecutively.
(11) Any police officer may arrest without warrant any person who
is
reasonably
suspected
of
having
failed
to
comply
with
subsection (3).
Inquiry into accident
85.—(1) The Deputy Commissioner of Police may by written
notice require the person alleged to have been driving or in charge of
any vehicle at the time of the occurrence of any accident in which the
vehicle was concerned or the commission of any offence connected
with the driving of the vehicle to attend before him or her at the time
and place stated in the notice for the purpose of inquiry into the
accident.
(2) The person must attend and must answer truly all questions
relating to the occurrence or offence put to the person by the Deputy
Road Traffic Act 1961
167
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


Commissioner of Police except that the person may decline to answer
any question the answer to which would have a tendency to expose
the person to a criminal charge or to a penalty or forfeiture.
(3) No such answer may in any case be used in evidence in any
proceedings, civil or criminal, except proceedings against the person
on a charge of an offence under subsection (5).
(4) The person must, if so required by the Deputy Commissioner of
Police, produce his or her driving licence.
(5) Any person who, without reasonable cause, fails to comply with
any of the requirements of this section shall be guilty of an offence.
Division 3 — Miscellaneous
Power of Authority to authorise carriage of greater weights on
specified roads
86.—(1) The Authority may, subject to any conditions that it thinks
fit, grant a permit in respect of any trailer specified in the permit
drawn by a heavy locomotive or a light locomotive on any road or
bridge to carry weights specified in the permit even though when
conveying those weights the trailer does not comply with any rules as
to the weight laden of trailers or as to the maximum weight which
may be transmitted to the road or any part thereof by trailers.
(2) Where such a permit is given, it shall not, so long as the
conditions (if any) attached to the permit are complied with, be an
offence in the case of any such trailer to carry on that road or bridge
weights authorised by the permit by reason only that the trailer when
conveying them does not comply with those rules.
Power to order production of vehicle and licence
87.—(1) The Deputy Commissioner of Police or the Registrar may
by written notice require the owner of any licensed vehicle to produce
either or both the vehicle or the licence relating thereto (if not issued
in electronic form) for an inspection at such time and place and by
such person as may be specified in the notice.
[10/2017]
(2) [Deleted by Act 38 of 2018]
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
168
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(3) If any owner required under this section to produce any vehicle
or licence fails to do so, the owner shall be guilty of an offence unless
the owner proves that owing to a mechanical breakdown or other
sufficient reason (the proof whereof lies on the owner), the vehicle or
licence cannot be produced as required.
Fee for inspection of vehicle
88.—(1) A fee may be levied for the inspection of a vehicle under
section 87.
(2) An additional fee may be levied for any further inspection of the
vehicle where the vehicle is found, after a previous inspection, not to
comply with any prescribed requirement relating to its construction
or condition, or to any identification mark or sign carried by or fixed
on it or the seal of that mark or sign, or to any marking on it.
[4/2006]
(3) Any fee payable under subsection (1) or (2) must be paid by the
owner of the vehicle in respect of which it is levied.
(4) This section applies to any vehicles that may be prescribed.
Rules prescribing fees
89. The Authority may make rules prescribing the fees that may be
levied under section 88.
Test of satisfactory condition of vehicle
90.—(1) The Authority may make rules for the examination of any
motor vehicle and for the issue, where the vehicle is found on the
examination to comply with the prescribed requirements relating to
its construction and condition, to the identification marks and signs
carried by or fixed on it and the seals of those marks and signs, and to
the markings on it, of a certificate (called in this Act a test certificate)
that at the date of the examination those requirements were complied
with.
[4/2006]
(1A) An examination under this section of a motor vehicle for the
purposes of the issue of a test certificate in respect of the motor
Road Traffic Act 1961
169
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


vehicle may include the examiner accepting, in lieu of an
examination, any certificate that —
(a) is issued by another person or authority as are prescribed;
and
(b) concerns the prescribed requirements relating to the
construction, equipment and condition of the motor
vehicle, to the identification marks and signs carried by
or fixed on the motor vehicle and the seals of those marks
and signs, and to the markings on the motor vehicle.
[10/2017]
(2) An examination for the purposes of this section must be carried
out by a person authorised by the Registrar (called in this section an
authorised examiner).
(3) Where a test certificate is refused, the authorised examiner must
specify the grounds of the refusal, and a person aggrieved by the
refusal may appeal to the Registrar, and on the appeal the Registrar
must cause a further examination to be made and may issue or refuse
to issue a test certificate.
(4) The Authority may make rules for the purpose of giving effect
to this section and, in particular, as to —
(a) the authorisation of an authorised examiner, the conditions
to be complied with by an authorised examiner and the
withdrawal of the authorisation;
(b) the manner in which, the conditions under which and the
apparatus with which an examination of a motor vehicle is
to be carried out, and the maintenance of that apparatus in
an efficient state;
(c) the inspection of premises at which and the apparatus with
which an examination of a motor vehicle is being, or is to
be, carried out;
(d) the fee to be paid for the examination of a motor vehicle;
(e) the additional fee to be paid for any further examination of
a motor vehicle where the vehicle is found, after a previous
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
170
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


examination,
not
to
comply
with
any
prescribed
requirement mentioned in subsection (1);
(f) the manner in which an application may be made for the
examination of a motor vehicle;
(g) the manner in which and time within which an appeal may
be brought under subsection (3);
(h) the fee to be paid on an appeal under subsection (3) and the
repayment of the fee or part thereof where it appears to the
Registrar that there were substantial grounds for the
appeal;
(i) the form of, and particulars to be contained in, a test
certificate;
(j) the issue of a copy of a test certificate that is lost or defaced
and the fee payable therefor;
(k) the keeping by an authorised examiner of a register of test
certificates in the prescribed form and containing the
prescribed particulars, and the inspection of such register
by such person and in such circumstances as may be
prescribed;
(l) the keeping of records by an authorised examiner and the
furnishing of returns and information to the Registrar by
the authorised examiner; and
(m) the submission to the Authority of documents specified by
the Authority in support of any matter examined.
[4/2006]
(5) Rules made under this section may make different provisions in
respect of different vehicles or classes of vehicles.
Vehicle without test certificate cannot be used
91.—(1) A person who uses on a road at any time, or causes or
permits to be so used, a motor vehicle in respect of which there is no
test certificate shall be guilty of an offence and shall be liable on
conviction to a fine not exceeding $200.
Road Traffic Act 1961
171
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(2) This section applies to such motor vehicles with effect from
such dates as may be prescribed.
Power to inspect premises
92.—(1) Any police officer may, for the purpose of examining any
vehicle in respect of which he or she has reason to believe that an
offence under this Act has been committed, enter at any time any
place in which he or she suspects that the vehicle is kept.
(2) Any police officer in conducting an investigation into any
seizable offence in connection with which a vehicle is suspected to be
concerned may enter any place to search for and examine that vehicle.
(3) If any person obstructs any police officer in the exercise of the
police officer’s powers and duty under this section, that person shall
be guilty of an offence.
Power to examine vehicles
93.—(1) Any
police
officer
in
uniform
or
an
outsourced
enforcement officer may, for the purpose of ensuring that any
vehicle or trailer that is being used on a road complies with this Act or
the rules, at any time —
(a) examine the vehicle or trailer or the licence relating
thereto; or
(b) order the owner or driver of the vehicle or trailer to deliver
the same for an inspection by such person and at such time
and place as the police officer or outsourced enforcement
officer (as the case may be) may specify.
[10/2017; 38/2018]
(2) Any person who obstructs a police officer or an outsourced
enforcement officer (as the case may be) in the exercise of his or her
powers under subsection (1)(a) or fails to comply with any order
given by the police officer or outsourced enforcement officer (as the
case may be) under subsection (1)(b) shall be guilty of an offence.
[38/2018]
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
172
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


Weighing of vehicles
94.—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules, it is
lawful for any police officer authorised in writing in that behalf by the
Deputy Commissioner of Police to require the person in charge of any
motor vehicle —
(a) to allow the motor vehicle or any trailer drawn thereby to
be weighed laden or unladen and the weight transmitted to
the road by any part of the motor vehicle or trailer laden or
unladen in contact with the road to be tested; and
(b) for the purpose of paragraph (a) to immediately proceed to
a weighbridge or other machine for weighing vehicles.
[10/2017]
(2) If any person in charge of a motor vehicle refuses or neglects to
comply with any requirement under subsection (1), the person shall
be guilty of an offence.
(3) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules, it is lawful for
any police officer so authorised to require the person in charge of the
motor vehicle to unload the motor vehicle or trailer for the purpose of
being weighed unladen.
[10/2017]
(4) Where a motor vehicle or trailer is weighed under this section, a
certificate of weight must be given to the person in charge of the
motor vehicle by the person who carried out the weighing of the
vehicle.
Power to seize vehicles
95.—(1) Where a police officer, the Registrar or an authorised
officer has reason to believe that a vehicle is a vehicle in connection
with which an offence under this Act and the rules has been or is
being committed or a vehicle that has been or is being used in
contravention of the conditions of any licence issued in respect
thereof under this Act, the police officer, Registrar or authorised
officer, on production of his or her authority, may —
(a) seize the vehicle and take it to a place of safety; or
Road Traffic Act 1961
173
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(b) require the owner, driver or person in charge of the vehicle
to take the vehicle and any trailer attached thereto to a
specified place of safety.
[10/2017]
(2) The power conferred on a police officer, the Registrar or an
authorised officer under subsection (1)(a) may be exercised whether
or not the owner, driver or person in charge of the vehicle is present at
the time of its seizure.
(3) Any vehicle which is taken to a place of safety under
subsection (1) must be detained there until it is released by order
of a Magistrate or the Deputy Commissioner of Police or the
Registrar.
(4) In this section, “authorised officer” means any employee of the
Authority who is authorised in writing by the Registrar to act under
this section.
(5) Any person who refuses or neglects to comply with any
requirement under subsection (1)(b) shall be guilty of an offence.
(6) Any unauthorised person removing or causing to be removed
such vehicle or trailer from the place of safety pending the order of a
Magistrate or the Deputy Commissioner of Police or the Registrar
shall be guilty of an offence.
(7) If the owner of the vehicle or trailer is convicted of or has been
permitted to compound an offence under this Act or the rules, the
expenses incurred by the Deputy Commissioner of Police or the
Registrar in removing, seizing, detaining, storing and disposing the
vehicle under this section are recoverable by or on behalf of the
Deputy Commissioner of Police or the Registrar and are, in case of
dispute or neglect to pay, to be summarily ascertained by a
Magistrate’s Court and may be recovered in the same manner as if
they were fines imposed by that Court.
[10/2017; 38/2018]
(8) Where any vehicle or trailer is detained under this section, the
Deputy Commissioner of Police or the Registrar must with all
reasonable despatch give notice to the owner (if known) of the seizure
in a manner allowed under section 131A.
[38/2018]
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
174
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(9) If the vehicle or trailer is not claimed by its owner within
one month of the date of its detention, the Deputy Commissioner of
Police or the Registrar thereafter and after giving one month’s notice
in the Gazette of his or her intention to do so may sell by public
auction or otherwise dispose of the vehicle or trailer.
(10) The proceeds (if any) from the sale or disposal of the vehicle or
trailer must be applied in payment of —
(a) firstly, any licence fees which may be due in respect of the
vehicle and of any charges incurred in removing, seizing,
detaining, storing and disposing the vehicle under this
section; and
(b) secondly,
any
damage
caused
to
property
of
the
Government by the unlawful use of the vehicle or trailer,
and the surplus (if any) must be paid to the owner of the vehicle or
trailer, or if not claimed by the owner of the vehicle or trailer within
12 months after the date of the sale or disposal, is forfeited to the
Government.
[38/2018]
Power to immobilise or seize and detain vehicle belonging to
person against whom warrant of arrest is in force
95A.—(1) Where a vehicle which is being used or parked on a road
or in a parking place is registered in the name of a person against
whom a warrant of arrest is in force, a police officer or an employee
of the Authority may —
(a) immobilise the vehicle or cause the vehicle to be
immobilised, if it is stationary; or
(b) seize the vehicle and detain it at a place of safety or cause
the vehicle to be seized and detained at a place of safety,
and the vehicle must remain so immobilised or detained at the risk of
the owner thereof until it is released by order of a Magistrate, the
Deputy Commissioner of Police or the Registrar.
(2) The powers conferred by subsection (1) on a police officer may
also be exercised by the police officer in respect of any vehicle which
Road Traffic Act 1961
175
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


is registered in the name of a person against whom a warrant of arrest
is in force and which is being used or parked in a public place.
(3) Without affecting subsections (1) and (2) but subject to
subsection (4), where a police officer, in attempting to execute a
warrant of arrest at any private premises, finds at those private
premises any vehicle which is registered in the name of the person
against whom the warrant of arrest has been issued, the police officer
may —
(a) immobilise the vehicle or cause the vehicle to be
immobilised, if it is stationary; or
(b) seize the vehicle and detain it at a place of safety or cause
the vehicle to be seized and detained at a place of safety,
and the vehicle must remain so immobilised or detained at the risk of
the owner thereof until it is released by order of a Magistrate, the
Deputy Commissioner of Police or the Registrar.
(4) Nothing in subsection (3) authorises a police officer to
immobilise or seize and detain any vehicle which the police officer
finds at any private premises unless, despite all reasonable effort, the
police officer is unable at the private premises to effect the arrest of
the person against whom the warrant of arrest has been issued.
(5) For the purposes of subsections (1), (2) and (3) —
(a) a police officer or an employee of the Authority may
require any person who is driving or who is in charge of the
vehicle —
(i) to stop the vehicle;
(ii) to take the vehicle to any place of safety specified by
the police officer or employee of the Authority; or
(iii) to render such other cooperation as the police officer
or employee of the Authority may reasonably
require; and
(b) a Magistrate, the Deputy Commissioner of Police or the
Registrar may —
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
176
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(i) refuse to order the release of any vehicle that has
been immobilised or seized and detained under either
of those subsections until the person in whose name
the vehicle is registered has been arrested in
connection with the warrant of arrest in force
against him or her or has surrendered himself or
herself to a police officer or the warrant of arrest in
force against him or her has been cancelled by a
court; and
(ii) require the person to whom the vehicle is released to
pay any charges prescribed for the release of the
vehicle.
(6) Where a police officer or an employee of the Authority has
immobilised or seized and detained a vehicle under this section, he or
she must with all reasonable despatch notify the person in whose
name the vehicle is registered of the immobilisation or seizure —
(a) of the procedure by which the person may secure the
release of the vehicle; and
(b) that unless within 3 months of the date specified in the
notification the person surrenders himself or herself to a
police officer in connection with the warrant of arrest in
force against him or her, the Deputy Commissioner of
Police or the Authority may proceed to sell or dispose of
the vehicle.
[24/2010]
(7) The notification under subsection (6) may be given —
(a) where the vehicle has been immobilised, by affixing a
notice onto the windscreen or any other conspicuous part
of the vehicle; or
(b) where the vehicle has been seized and detained, in a
manner allowed under section 131A.
[24/2010; 38/2018]
Road Traffic Act 1961
177
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(8) Any person who —
(a) without the authority of a police officer or an employee of
the Authority removes or tampers with any notice affixed
onto a vehicle under subsection (7)(a); or
(b) without the authority of a Magistrate, the Deputy
Commissioner of Police or the Registrar —
(i) removes or tampers with any device or appliance
which has been fixed to a vehicle by a police officer
or an employee of the Authority for the purpose of
immobilising it pursuant to this section; or
(ii) removes any vehicle from the place at which it has
been immobilised or from the place of safety where it
is being detained or causes the vehicle to be so
removed,
shall be guilty of an offence.
[45/99]
(9) If upon the expiry of 3 months from the date specified in the
notification given under subsection (6) the person in whose name the
vehicle is registered has not surrendered himself or herself to a police
officer or has not been arrested in connection with the warrant of
arrest in force against him or her, the Deputy Commissioner of Police
or the Authority, after giving one month’s notice in the Gazette of the
Deputy Commissioner of Police’s or the Authority’s intention to do
so, may sell the vehicle by public auction or otherwise dispose of the
vehicle in any manner that the Deputy Commissioner of Police or the
Authority thinks fit.
[24/2010]
(10) The proceeds (if any) from the sale or disposal of the vehicle
must be applied in payment of —
(a) any taxes, fees or charges under this Act or the rules which
may be due from the person in whose name the vehicle is
registered; and
(b) any charges incurred in carrying out the provisions of this
section,
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
178
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


and the surplus (if any) must be paid to the person in whose name the
vehicle is registered, or if not claimed by the person within 12 months
after the date of the sale or disposal, is forfeited to the Government.
[10/2017]
(11) Any person who obstructs or hinders the Authority or any
employee of the Authority, the Deputy Commissioner of Police or
any police officer acting in the discharge of his or her duty under this
section shall be guilty of an offence.
(12) The Authority or any employee of the Authority, the Deputy
Commissioner of Police and any police officer shall not be liable for
any damage to or loss of any vehicle or the contents thereof which is
not wilfully or negligently caused by them in the exercise of their
powers under this section.
(13) In this section —
“immobilise”, in relation to a vehicle, means to prevent the
removal of the vehicle by fixing to the vehicle a device or
appliance which is —
(a) designed or adapted for the purpose of preventing the
removal of the vehicle; and
(b) approved
by
the
Authority
or
the
Deputy
Commissioner of Police for use for the purpose of
this section;
“warrant of arrest” means a warrant of arrest issued by a court
against a person in connection with any offence committed
by the person under —
(a) this Act or the rules; or
(b) the Parking Places Act 1974 or any rules made under
that Act.
[24/2010; 10/2017]
Forfeiture by Authority of seized non‑compliant
power‑assisted bicycles, etc.
95B.—(1) Without affecting section 95 or 95A, an order for the
forfeiture of a vehicle seized or taken to a place of safety under
Road Traffic Act 1961
179
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


section 95 or 95A may be made by the Authority if it is satisfied
that —
(a) the vehicle is a non‑compliant power‑assisted bicycle, a
non‑compliant
personal
mobility
device
or
a
non‑compliant mobility vehicle;
(b) an offence under section 5, 5A, 5B or 10 or any rules made
under section 6 has been committed and that the
non‑compliant
power‑assisted
bicycle,
non‑compliant
personal mobility device or non‑compliant mobility
vehicle (as the case may be) was the subject matter, or
was used in the commission, of the offence;
(ba) at the end of 30 days after the date of the seizure or taking
to a place of safety, no claim to the vehicle is earlier made
in the prescribed manner to the Authority by a person who
is not the person from whom the vehicle was seized or
required to take the vehicle to a place of safety (or the latter
person’s agent); and
(c) a person is convicted of the offence, or a person reasonably
suspected of having committed the offence has that offence
compounded under section 135.
[10/2017; 26/2020]
(2) Despite subsection (1), the Authority may at once order the
forfeiture of a vehicle seized or taken to a place of safety under
section 95 or 95A —
(a) that
is
a
non‑compliant
power‑assisted
bicycle,
non‑compliant
personal
mobility
device
or
non‑compliant mobility vehicle; and
(b) that the Authority considers is of such a nature or in such
condition that it would be dangerous for the Authority to
retain custody, or its detention in a place of safety
materially increases the likelihood of an outbreak of fire
at the place of safety.
[26/2020]
(3) Upon receipt of a claim mentioned in subsection (1)(ba), the
Authority may direct that the non‑compliant power‑assisted bicycle,
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
180
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


non‑compliant personal mobility device or non‑compliant mobility
vehicle be released or may refer the matter by information to a
Magistrate.
[10/2017; 26/2020]
(4) The Magistrate is to, on receipt of an information under
subsection (3), or on the written application of the Public Prosecutor,
hold an inquiry and proceed to determine the matter, and —
(a) must order the non‑compliant power‑assisted bicycle, the
non‑compliant
personal
mobility
device
or
the
non‑compliant mobility vehicle (as the case may be) to
be
forfeited
on
proof
that
the
non‑compliant
power‑assisted
bicycle,
the
non‑compliant
personal
mobility device or the non‑compliant mobility vehicle
was used in the commission of an offence under section 5,
5A, 5B or 10 or any rules made under section 6; or
(b) may, in the absence of that proof, order the release of the
non‑compliant power‑assisted bicycle, the non‑compliant
personal mobility device or the non‑compliant mobility
vehicle, as the case may be.
[10/2017; 26/2020]
(5) In any proceedings under subsection (4), the burden of proof
lies on the person asserting that the person is the owner of the
non‑compliant power‑assisted bicycle, the non‑compliant personal
mobility device or the non‑compliant mobility vehicle concerned,
and on the person from whom the non‑compliant power‑assisted
bicycle,
the
non‑compliant
personal
mobility
device
or
the
non‑compliant mobility vehicle was seized, as the case may be.
[10/2017; 26/2020]
(6) In any proceedings in any court under subsection (4) in respect
of the forfeiture of any vehicle seized in the exercise or the purported
exercise of any power conferred under section 95 or 95A, no person is
entitled to the costs of the proceedings or to any damages or other
relief except an order for the return of the vehicle, unless the seizure
was made without reasonable or probable cause.
[10/2017]
(7) Where
any
non‑compliant
power‑assisted
bicycle,
non‑compliant personal mobility device or non‑compliant mobility
Road Traffic Act 1961
181
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


vehicle is forfeited by the Authority under this section, the Authority
may, after giving one month’s notice in the Gazette of the Authority’s
intention to do so —
(a) sell by public auction or tender the non‑compliant
power‑assisted bicycle, non-compliant personal mobility
device
or
non-compliant
mobility
vehicle
and
any
uncollected item left in or on it; and a purchaser of any
vehicle, article, item or thing sold in accordance with this
paragraph acquires good title to that vehicle, article, item
or thing; or
(b) destroy or otherwise dispose of the non‑compliant
power‑assisted bicycle, non-compliant personal mobility
device or non-compliant mobility vehicle, article, item or
thing, as the case may be.
[10/2017; 26/2020]
(7A) However, the Authority may direct that a non‑compliant
power‑assisted bicycle, non‑compliant personal mobility device or
non‑compliant mobility vehicle forfeited by the Authority under
subsection (2) and which is the subject of a notice under
subsection (7) be returned to a person if —
(a) before the end of the period of the notice in subsection (7),
the Authority receives from that person a written objection
to the intended sale, destruction or disposal of the vehicle
and showing good cause why possession of the vehicle
should be returned to the person; and
(b) there is no reasonable cause for the Authority to believe
that an offence under this Act has been committed and the
vehicle was the subject matter, or was used in the
commission, of the offence.
[26/2020]
(8) The proceeds of a sale by public auction or tender of any
vehicle, article, item or thing under subsection (7) must be applied as
follows:
(a) firstly, in payment of the expenses occasioned by the sale;
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
182
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(b) secondly, in payment of storage or other expenses incurred
by the Authority in relation to the vehicle, article, item or
thing;
(c) thirdly, by payment of the balance into the Consolidated
Fund.
[10/2017]
(9) In this section —
“non‑compliant mobility vehicle” has the meaning given by the
Active Mobility Act 2017;
“non‑compliant personal mobility device” means a personal
mobility device the construction, weight or accessories of
which
do
not
comply
with
the
requirements
as
to
construction, weight and accessories prescribed under the
Active Mobility Act 2017 either for all personal mobility
devices generally or for the particular type of that personal
mobility device;
“non‑compliant power‑assisted bicycle” means a power‑assisted
bicycle the construction, weight or accessories of which do
not comply with the requirements as to construction, weight
and accessories prescribed under section 6 or the rules made
under that section either for all power‑assisted bicycles
generally or for the particular type of that power‑assisted
bicycle.
[10/2017; 26/2020]
Taking of motor vehicle without owner’s consent
96.—(1) Every person who takes and drives away any motor
vehicle without having either the consent of the owner thereof or
other lawful authority shall be guilty of an offence and shall be liable
on conviction to a fine not exceeding $1,000 or to imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 3 months.
(2) If an accused satisfies the court that the accused acted in the
reasonable belief that the accused had lawful authority or in the
reasonable belief that the owner would, in the circumstances of the
case, have given the owner’s consent if the owner had been asked
Road Traffic Act 1961
183
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


therefor, the accused shall not be convicted of the offence under
subsection (1).
(3) If on the trial of any person for the theft of a motor vehicle the
court is of opinion that the accused was not guilty of theft but was
guilty of an offence under this section, the court may convict the
accused under this section.
(4) Any police officer may arrest without warrant any person
reasonably suspected by the police officer of having committed or of
attempting to commit an offence under this section.
Restriction on persons taking hold of motor vehicle in motion
97.—(1) If any person, otherwise than with lawful authority or
reasonable cause, takes or retains hold of or gets on to a motor vehicle
or trailer while it is in motion on any road for the purpose of his or her
being drawn or carried, the person shall be guilty of an offence.
(2) If, while a motor vehicle is on a road or on a parking place where
the public may park motor vehicles, any person otherwise than with
lawful authority or with reasonable cause gets on to or moves or
tampers with the vehicle, the person shall be guilty of an offence.
(3) If any person loiters in or near a road or parking place where the
public may park motor vehicles for the purpose of importuning or
importunes any other person in respect of the watching or cleaning of
any motor vehicle during the absence of its driver, the person so
loitering or importuning shall be guilty of an offence.
(4) Any police officer may arrest without warrant any person
reasonably suspected by the police officer of having committed or of
attempting to commit an offence under this section.
Application to vehicles belonging to Government and armed
forces
98.—(1) This Part subject as otherwise provided applies to
vehicles, trailers and persons in the service of the Government or
of any visiting force lawfully present in Singapore.
(2) For the purpose of proceedings for an offence in connection
with any such vehicle or trailer against any person other than the
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
184
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


driver of the vehicle, the person nominated in that behalf by the
department in whose service the vehicle or trailer is used is deemed to
be the person actually responsible unless it is shown to the
satisfaction of the court that the driver only was responsible.
(3) In the case of motor vehicles owned by the Government or by
any visiting force lawfully present in Singapore and used for naval,
military or air force purposes or in the case of motor vehicles so used
while being driven by persons for the time being subject to the orders
of any member of the armed forces in Singapore, the Authority may
by rules, subject to any conditions that may be specified in the rules,
vary in relation to any of those vehicles while being driven as
aforesaid the provisions of this Act or any rule, order or notification
imposing a speed limit on motor vehicles and the provisions of this
Part which respectively —
(a) impose restrictions on persons below 21 years of age with
respect to the driving of heavy locomotives, light
locomotives, motor tractors or heavy motor cars; or
(b) regulate the number of trailers which may be drawn by
motor vehicles.
PART 5
PUBLIC SERVICE VEHICLES
Application of this Part
99. This Part applies to all public service vehicles.
Classification and descriptions of public service vehicles
100.—(1) The classification and descriptions of public service
vehicles for the purpose of this Act and the rules are set out in the
Second Schedule.
[10/2017]
(2) The Authority may by order in the Gazette, add to, amend or
vary the Second Schedule.
(3) The Authority may, by rules made under section 111, subdivide
any class of public service vehicles as set out in the Second Schedule,
Road Traffic Act 1961
185
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


and any reference in this Act or the rules to a class of public service
vehicles includes a reference to any subdivision of such class.
[10/2017]
(4) Despite the classification and descriptions of public service
vehicles in the Second Schedule, the Authority may permit any class
of public service vehicles to be used for any prescribed purpose.
Prohibition of use of unlicensed public service vehicles
101.—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Part, a person must not
use a motor vehicle which is not a proscribed vehicle, or cause or
permit a motor vehicle which is not a proscribed vehicle to be used, as
a public service vehicle unless there is in force, in respect of the
vehicle, a valid licence issued under this Part authorising such use, or
otherwise than in accordance with the licence and any conditions
attached thereto.
[20/2019]
(1A) For the purposes of subsection (1), use of a motor vehicle as a
private hire car includes a motor car that —
(a) is in use in connection with a hiring to provide an
on‑demand passenger transport service; or
(b) is immediately available to a provider of a ride‑hail service
to take or facilitate the taking of bookings for an
on‑demand passenger transport service provided using
that vehicle (whether immediately or at a later time).
[10/2017; 20/2019]
(2) Any person who contravenes subsection (1) shall be guilty of an
offence and shall be liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding
$3,000 or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 6 months or to
both.
(3) A person shall not be convicted of an offence under this section
if the person proves to the satisfaction of the court that the person
used the motor vehicle, the subject of the charge, as a public service
vehicle in an emergency for the purpose of conveying a sick or
injured person to hospital or to bring medical aid to that person or for
the purpose of making a report to a police station and that the person
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
186
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


had made all reasonable efforts to hire a public service vehicle for the
purpose of the journey.
(4) A public service vehicle licence is in addition to any other
licence issued under this Act and the Point‑to‑Point Passenger
Transport Industry Act 2019.
[20/2019]
(5) Any motor vehicle in respect of which there has been, or there is
reasonable cause to suspect that there has been, committed any
offence under this section may be seized by any police officer or the
Registrar or any officer authorised in writing in that behalf by the
Registrar.
(6) When any motor vehicle has been seized under subsection (5), a
police officer or the Registrar or an officer authorised in writing in
that behalf by the Registrar —
(a) may temporarily return the motor vehicle to its owner on
security being furnished to the satisfaction of the police
officer, the Registrar or officer so authorised (as the case
may be) that the motor vehicle will be surrendered to him
or her on demand; or
(b) must, upon the direction of the Public Prosecutor, and after
making any investigations that are necessary for the
purposes of this Act, return the motor vehicle to its owner.
(7) Where it is proved to the satisfaction of a court before which the
prosecution has been held that a motor vehicle seized under
subsection (5) has been used in the commission of an offence
under this section, the court, on the written application of the Public
Prosecutor, is to make an order for the forfeiture of the motor vehicle,
even though no person may have been convicted of an offence.
(8) If there be no prosecution with regard to any motor vehicle
seized under subsection (5), that vehicle must be released at the end of
one month from the date of seizure unless it has sooner been released.
(9) A police officer may arrest without warrant any person who has
committed or whom the police officer reasonably suspects to have
committed an offence under this section.
Road Traffic Act 1961
187
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(10) For the purposes of this section, a proscribed vehicle means a
vehicle of the construction, type or description or a class of vehicles
declared by the Minister, by order in the Gazette, to be proscribed and
not likewise declared, by subsequent order in the Gazette, to be not
proscribed.
[20/2019]
(11) An order made under subsection (10) by the Minister may
contain any saving, transitional, and other consequential, incidental
and supplemental provisions that the Minister considers necessary or
expedient for the purposes of this Part.
[20/2019]
(12) A person commits an offence if a person uses or causes or
permits a proscribed vehicle to be used as a public service vehicle.
[20/2019]
(13) A person who is guilty of an offence under subsection (12)
shall be liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding $3,000 or to
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 6 months or to both.
[20/2019]
Issue of public service vehicle licences
102.—(1) The Registrar may, on application made to him or her in
the prescribed manner and on payment of the prescribed fee and
subject to any rules that may be prescribed, issue public service
vehicle licences.
(2) The Registrar must not issue a public service vehicle licence to
any person who is a minor or in respect of any vehicle which does not
comply with such conditions as to construction, fitness and
equipment or otherwise as may be prescribed.
Modification of public service vehicle licence conditions
102A.—(1) Subject to this section, the Authority may at any time
modify the conditions of a public service vehicle licence.
[37/2012]
(2) Before modifying any conditions of a public service vehicle
licence under subsection (1), the Authority must give notice to the
holder of the licence —
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
188
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(a) stating
that
the
Authority
proposes
to
make
the
modification in the manner specified in the notice; and
(b) specifying the time (not being less than 28 days after the
date of service of the notice on the holder of a licence)
within which written representations with respect to the
proposed modification may be made.
[37/2012]
(3) Upon receipt of any written representation within the time
specified under subsection (2)(b), the Authority must consider the
representation and may —
(a) reject the representation;
(b) amend the proposed modification in any manner that it
thinks fit having regard to the representation; or
(c) withdraw the proposed modification.
[37/2012]
(4) Subject to subsection (6), if the Authority rejects any written
representation under subsection (3)(a) or amends any proposed
modification to the conditions of a public service vehicle licence
under subsection (3)(b), the Authority must issue a notice to the
holder of the licence stating that the modification as specified in the
notice under this subsection takes effect on a date specified in that
notice by the Authority.
[37/2012]
(5) Subject to subsection (6), if no written representation is received
by the Authority within the time specified under subsection (2)(b) or
if any written representation made under subsection (2)(b) is
subsequently withdrawn before any decision is made under
subsection (3), the Authority must issue a notice to the holder of
the licence stating that the modification as specified in the notice
under this subsection takes effect on a date specified in that notice by
the Authority.
[37/2012]
(6) Any decision to modify the conditions of a public service
vehicle licence does not take effect —
(a) during
the
period
for
appeals
mentioned
in
section 102B(1); and
Road Traffic Act 1961
189
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(b) where the holder of the licence has appealed against the
modification, until the determination of the appeal.
[37/2012]
Appeal to Minister
102B.—(1) A holder of a public service vehicle licence who is
aggrieved by any decision to modify the conditions of the holder’s
licence under section 102A may, within 14 days after receiving the
notice mentioned in section 102A(4), appeal to the Minister.
[37/2012]
(2) The Minister may determine an appeal under this section by
confirming, varying or reversing any decision of the Authority or
amending any licence condition affecting the licensee.
[37/2012]
(3) The decision of the Minister in any appeal is final.
[37/2012]
Maximum number of new public service vehicle licences
103.—(1) Subject to subsection (3), the Authority may, in respect
of any period, by determination fix the maximum number of new
public service vehicle licences which may be issued under
section 102(1) during that period, and the Registrar must comply
with that determination.
[23/2013]
(2) The maximum number of new public service vehicle licences
may be fixed by the Authority in one or more of the following terms:
(a) for public service vehicles of any class;
(b) for a particular person or class of persons;
(c) for any period not exceeding one year.
[23/2013]
(3) In determining under subsection (1) the maximum number of
new taxi licences which may be issued to a street‑hail service licensee
during any period that may be determined by the Authority, the
Authority may take into consideration all relevant matters, including
the contravention before that period by the street‑hail service licensee
of any service standard condition applicable to that licensee.
[23/2013; 20/2019]
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
190
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(4) Before taking into consideration any matter mentioned in
subsection (3), the Authority must give the street‑hail service licensee
concerned written notice of its intention to do so and a reasonable
opportunity to submit reasons, within the period specified in that
notice, as to why the matter should not be taken into consideration.
[23/2013; 20/2019]
(5) The Authority must, as soon as practicable after making a
determination
under
subsection
(1),
provide
a
copy
of
the
determination to the Registrar and —
(a) in the case where the determination applies to a particular
person or class of persons, provide a copy of the
determination to that person or everyone in that class of
persons; or
(b) in any other case, publish in the Gazette, or in one or more
local
daily
newspapers
as
the
Authority
considers
appropriate, a notice of the making of the determination.
[23/2013]
(6) In this section —
“new”, in relation to a public service vehicle licence, does not
include the renewal of an existing public service vehicle
licence;
“service standard condition” means a code of practice about
performance standards relating to the provision of street‑hail
services and the quality of other aspects of the provision of a
street‑hail
service
under
the
Point‑to‑Point
Passenger
Transport Industry Act 2019;
“taxi licence” means a public service vehicle licence which
authorises a motor vehicle to be used as a taxi.
[23/2013; 20/2019]
Transfer of public service vehicle licences
104.—(1) The Registrar may permit the transfer of any public
service vehicle licence in such manner and on payment of such fee as
may be prescribed.
Road Traffic Act 1961
191
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(2) No such transfer may take place without the written permission
of the Registrar.
Markings of public service vehicles
105.—(1) Every public service vehicle licensed under this Part
must have affixed thereto such plate or plates and such other
markings for the purpose of identifying such vehicle as a public
service vehicle as may be prescribed.
[10/2017]
(2) On the expiry, suspension or revocation of any public service
vehicle licence, the licence together with all plates or other markings
issued in connection therewith must be returned to the Registrar
within 10 days after the expiry, suspension or revocation.
(3) Any person who omits to return any such licence, plate or other
marking shall be guilty of an offence and shall be liable on conviction
to a fine not exceeding $500.
(4) Any person displaying any plate or marking mentioned in
subsection (1), or any plate or marking falsely purporting to have
been issued under this Part, on any vehicle in respect of which the
appropriate public service vehicle licence is not in force shall be
guilty of an offence.
Rates of hire
106.—(1) The owner, driver or conductor of a public service
vehicle is entitled to demand and take any rates of hire or fares that
the Minister may prescribe.
(2) Except as otherwise provided, the prescription of any rates of
hire or fares does not prevent an owner, driver or conductor from
entering into a contract to receive a lower rate of hire or fare than that
prescribed.
(3) If any dispute arises as to a rate or fare calculated according to
distance, the dispute may be referred to the Registrar or to the officer
in charge of any police station whose decision is final, and any
certificate issued by the Registrar or the police officer with regard
thereto is admissible in evidence.
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
192
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(4) The owner, driver or conductor of a public service vehicle who
demands or takes or attempts to take any money in excess of those
rates or fares shall be guilty of an offence.
(5) Any person who refuses to pay the owner, driver or conductor
(as the case may be) the prescribed rate of hire or the prescribed fare
when lawfully demanded shall be guilty of an offence.
(6) This section does not apply to omnibuses, taxis and private hire
cars to the extent that fares for the provision of bus services and
ride‑hail services and street‑hail services using those vehicles are
regulated by or under the Public Transport Council Act 1987.
[20/2019]
Responsibility of owner of public service vehicles
107.—(1) The owner of a public service vehicle is, unless the
owner satisfies the court that the owner took every reasonable
precaution to avoid the commission thereof, responsible for every
offence committed under this Act or the rules in connection with the
use of the vehicle and may, in the discretion of the Registrar, be
prosecuted for the offence either in addition to or instead of the driver
or conductor, as the case may be.
[10/2017]
(2) When the driver or conductor of any public service vehicle is
reasonably believed to be guilty of an offence under this Act or the
rules, the owner of the vehicle and any other person who was or
should have been in charge of the vehicle at or about the relevant time
must give to the Registrar or to any police officer any information that
the Registrar or the police officer may require of the owner or other
person concerning the identity and address of the person believed to
be guilty of the offence.
[10/2017]
(3) If any person fails to do so within 7 days of the date on which the
information was required of that person under subsection (2), unless
the person shows to the satisfaction of the court that the person did not
know and could not with reasonable diligence have ascertained the
information required, the person shall be guilty of an offence and
shall be liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding $100.
Road Traffic Act 1961
193
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(4) Despite anything in any other written law, any information
given under subsection (2) by any person charged with any offence
under this Act or the rules may be used as evidence at the hearing of
the charge.
[10/2017]
Revocation and suspension of licences
108. The Registrar may at any time suspend or revoke a public
service vehicle licence if —
(a) owing to any defects in the vehicle in respect of which the
licence is issued, the vehicle is or is likely to become unfit
for service;
(aa) the vehicle in respect of which the licence is issued is
proscribed under section 101(10);
(b) having regard to the conduct of the holder of the licence or
to the manner in which the vehicle is being used, it appears
to the Registrar that the licence should be suspended or
revoked;
(c) in the case of a public service vehicle licence issued in
respect of a taxi, the holder of the licence —
(i) has attained 63 years of age;
(ii) holds more than one public service vehicle licence
issued in respect of a taxi; or
(iii) has ceased to carry on his or her vocation as a
taxi‑driver; or
(d) the licensee has contravened any of the provisions of this
Act or the rules.
[10/2017; 20/2019]
Public stands
109. The Authority may provide, appoint and regulate the use of
any public stands for any class of public service vehicle that it thinks
fit, and on the application of or with the consent of the owner of any
private property may regulate the use of public stands provided on the
private property.
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
194
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


Vocational licences
110.—(1) A person must not —
(a) drive or act as a conductor of a public service vehicle on a
road unless he or she holds a vocational licence granted by
the Registrar under this Part for those purposes; or
(b) employ or permit any person who is not so licensed to drive
or act as a conductor of a public service vehicle.
[37/2012]
(2) The Registrar may, on application made to him or her in the
prescribed manner and on payment of the prescribed fee and subject
to any rules that may be prescribed, grant vocational licences.
(2A) The Registrar must not grant a vocational licence unless he or
she is satisfied that the applicant for the licence is of the minimum age
as prescribed for that class of public service vehicle and fulfils any
other conditions that may be prescribed.
(3) A vocational licence to drive a public service vehicle may limit
the authorisation of the holder of the licence to driving, or acting as a
conductor of, only one or more classes of public service vehicles
specified in the licence.
[10/2017]
(4) The Registrar may suspend or revoke, in whole or in part, a
vocational licence on the ground that the holder of the licence —
(a) is contravening or not complying with, or has contravened
or failed to comply with, any of the conditions of the
licence, or any provision of this Act or rules under this Part
applicable to the holder of the licence as such; or
(b) is not a fit or proper person to hold the licence because of
his or her conduct, after taking into consideration the total
number of demerit points accumulated by the holder of the
licence under those rules in respect of the licence or
another licence, or his or her physical condition.
[10/2017]
(5) Where the Registrar refuses to grant or suspends or revokes a
vocational licence, the applicant or licence holder (as the case may
be) may appeal to the Minister, and on such appeal, the Minister, after
Road Traffic Act 1961
195
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


such inquiry, if any, as the Minister may consider necessary, may
make such order as the Minister thinks fit, and any order so made is
binding on the Registrar and on the appellant.
General suspension of participating bookable drivers
110A.—(1) The
Registrar
may
in
the
circumstances
in
subsection (2), by a general suspension order served on persons
mentioned in subsection (3), direct that every bookable vehicle driver
who is a participating bookable driver of the same designated exempt
ride‑hail service operator stop providing, during a blackout period,
on‑demand passenger transport services the booking of which is
taken or facilitated by that designated exempt ride‑hail service
operator.
[10/2017; 20/2019]
(2) A general suspension order may be made where the Registrar is
satisfied that —
(a) one of the participating bookable drivers of a designated
exempt ride‑hail service operator has been convicted of a
relevant offence in the course of being a participating
bookable driver of the designated exempt ride‑hail service
operator; and
(b) within a period of 12 months before the commission of the
relevant offence in paragraph (a), 2 or more other
participating bookable drivers of the same designated
exempt ride‑hail service operator have also been convicted
of a relevant offence each in the course of being a
participating bookable driver of that designated exempt
ride‑hail service operator,
regardless of any general suspension order earlier served in respect of
that same designated exempt ride‑hail service operator or that a
blackout period for any earlier general suspension order is current.
[10/2017; 20/2019]
(3) A general suspension order relating to a designated exempt
ride‑hail service operator must be given to —
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
196
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(a) the class comprising every participating bookable driver of
the same designated exempt ride‑hail service operator
concerned; and
(b) the designated exempt ride‑hail service operator.
[10/2017; 20/2019]
(4) A general suspension order may be made under subsection (1)
only after giving the designated exempt ride‑hail service operator
concerned a reasonable opportunity to be heard.
[10/2017; 20/2019]
(5) In determining whether a driver has been convicted of a relevant
offence, the Registrar may reckon any offer of composition under
section 135 for a relevant offence that is accepted by the driver in
relation to that offence as if that driver had been convicted of that
relevant offence.
[10/2017]
(6) However, where a driver has been convicted of a relevant
offence, and it is open to the driver to appeal against the conviction
(either with the permission of the court or without such permission),
the Registrar, in determining whether a driver has been convicted of a
relevant offence, must disregard the conviction until —
(a) no further appeal is open to the driver; or
(b) by reason of the end of any period for entering an appeal or
a notice of appeal, or the refusal of permission to appeal or
for any other reason, it ceases to be open for the driver to
appeal.
[10/2017]
[Act 25 of 2021 wef 01/04/2022]
(7) A general suspension order that is addressed to a class of
persons is sufficiently served if it is published both —
(a) in a daily newspaper circulating in Singapore or in any
other news media that, in the opinion of the Authority, will
be most likely to bring the direction to the attention of the
persons who belong to the class; and
(b) on the Authority’s official website.
[10/2017]
Road Traffic Act 1961
197
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(8) A general suspension order that is served in accordance with
subsection (7) takes effect at the beginning of the day after the date on
which both paragraphs (a) and (b) of subsection (7) have been
complied with.
[10/2017]
(9) A participating bookable driver of a designated exempt ride‑hail
service operator who —
(a) is in the class of participating bookable drivers served with
a
general
suspension
order
(in
accordance
with
subsection (7)) directing him or her to stop providing
any on‑demand passenger transport service the booking of
which is taken or facilitated by that designated exempt
ride‑hail service operator; and
(b) provides any on‑demand passenger transport service the
booking of which is taken or facilitated by that designated
exempt ride‑hail service operator during the blackout
period for that general suspension order,
shall be guilty of an offence.
[20/2019]
(10) It is not a defence in any proceeding for an offence under
subsection (9) that the accused holds a vocational licence granted
under section 110 authorising him or her to drive a public service
vehicle.
[10/2017; 20/2019]
Interpretation of sections 110A and 111
110B. In sections 110A and 111 —
“blackout period”, for a general suspension order, means a
period after the general suspension order takes effect, of a
duration that is fixed and specified by the Registrar in the
order, being a period not exceeding one month;
“bookable vehicle” has the meaning given by section 4(1) of the
Point‑to‑Point Passenger Transport Industry Act 2019;
“designated exempt ride‑hail service operator” means a person
who is an exempt ride‑hail service operator and is prescribed
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
198
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


by rules under section 111 to be designated by the Authority
for the purposes of this definition;
“participating bookable driver”, for a designated exempt
ride‑hail service operator, means a driver who has a
participating driver agreement with the operator, and it is
immaterial whether the driver is an employee or agent of the
designated exempt ride‑hail service operator;
“participating driver agreement”, in relation to a designated
exempt ride‑hail service operator providing a ride‑hail
service, means an agreement or arrangement between the
designated exempt ride‑hail service operator and a driver of a
bookable vehicle under which —
(a) the designated exempt ride‑hail service operator
agrees to —
(i) take or facilitate any booking by or on behalf of
a passenger for bookable vehicles to be made
available in providing on‑demand passenger
transport services (whether immediately or at a
later time) to the passenger; and
(ii) communicate the booking to participating
bookable drivers; and
(b) the driver agrees to carry out the on‑demand
passenger transport service in the booking by
transporting the passenger for hire or reward, using
a bookable vehicle,
and it does not matter whether or not the driver is an
employee or agent of the designated exempt ride-hail service
operator providing the ride-hail service or whether the
vehicle is hired from that operator;
“relevant offence” means any of the following offences
committed on or after 1 July 2017:
(a) an offence under section 101(2) involving any private
hire car;
Road Traffic Act 1961
199
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(b) an offence under section 131 for contravening
section 110(1)(a) involving any private hire car;
(c) an offence under section 3 of the Motor Vehicles
(Third‑Party Risks and Compensation) Act 1960
involving any private hire car.
[10/2017; 20/2019]
Rules for purposes of this Part
111.—(1) The Authority may make any rules as it may consider
expedient for the purposes of this Part.
[10/2017]
(2) Any rules made under subsection (1) may provide that any
contravention of any provision of the rules shall be an offence
punishable with a fine not exceeding $10,000.
[20/2019]
PART 6
PROVISIONS AS TO USE OF HIGHWAYS
Issue by Minister of highway code for guidance of users of
roads
112.—(1) The Minister may prepare a code (called in this section
the highway code) comprising directions that appear to the Minister
to be proper for the guidance of persons using roads and may revise
the code by revoking, varying, amending or adding to the provisions
thereof in any manner that he or she thinks fit.
(2) The highway code and any revision thereof must be presented to
Parliament as soon as possible after publication in the Gazette.
(3) Subject to subsections (1) and (2), the Minister may cause the
code and every revised edition of the code to be printed and issued to
the public either without charge or at the price he or she thinks fit.
(4) The Minister may take any other steps that he or she thinks fit
for securing that the provisions of the code are brought to the notice of
the public.
(5) A failure on the part of any person to observe any provision of
the highway code shall not of itself render that person liable to
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
200
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


criminal proceedings of any kind, but the failure may, in any
proceedings whether civil or criminal and including proceedings for
an offence under this Act, be relied upon by any party to the
proceedings as tending to establish or to negative any liability which
is in question in those proceedings.
Power to restrict use of vehicles on specified roads
113.—(1) The
Deputy
Commissioner
of
Police,
with
the
concurrence of the Minister, may by order in the Gazette prohibit
or restrict, subject to any exceptions and conditions as to occasional
user or otherwise that may be specified in the order, the driving of
vehicles or of any specified class or description of vehicles on any
specified road within Singapore in any case in which he or she is
satisfied that —
(a) the vehicles cannot be used or cannot without restriction be
used on that road without endangering the safety of the
vehicles or the persons therein or of other persons using the
road; or
(b) the road is unsuitable for use or for unrestricted use by the
vehicles.
(2) The Deputy Commissioner of Police, with the concurrence of
the Minister, may make an order under this section, not inconsistent
with the rules, for any of the following purposes:
(a) the specification of the routes to be followed by vehicles;
(b) the prohibition or restriction of the use of specified roads
by vehicles of any specified class or description either
generally or during particular hours;
(c) the prohibition of the driving of vehicles on any specified
road otherwise than in a specified direction;
(d) otherwise in relation to the regulation of traffic;
(e) the prohibition or regulation of the use of any road or any
part thereof for the display, hire or sale of any vehicle or
animal.
Road Traffic Act 1961
201
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(3) No order may be made under subsection (2) with respect to any
road which would have the effect of preventing such access as may
reasonably be required for vehicles of any class or description to any
premises situated on or adjacent to the road.
(4) An order made under this section and expressed to be a
temporary order remains in force for any period not exceeding
3 months that may be specified therein.
(5) An order not expressed to be temporary must be presented to
Parliament as soon as possible after publication in the Gazette and
may be annulled or amended by a resolution of Parliament.
(6) Any person who uses a vehicle or causes or permits a vehicle to
be used in contravention of an order made under this section shall be
guilty of an offence.
Traffic regulation on special roads
114.—(1) The Minister may make rules to prohibit or restrict the
use of any special road by any traffic or class of traffic subject to any
conditions or exceptions that may be prescribed.
(2) Rules made under this section may make provision with respect
to special roads generally, or may make different provision with
respect to special roads provided for the use of different classes of
traffic, or may make provision with respect to any particular special
road.
(3) Rules made under this section may, in particular —
(a) regulate the manner in which and the conditions subject to
which special roads may be used by traffic of any class;
(b) authorise, or enable the Deputy Commissioner of Police to
authorise, the use of special roads, on any occasion or in an
emergency or for the purpose of crossing, or for the
purpose of securing access to premises abutting on or
adjacent to the special roads by any traffic; and
(c) relax, or enable the Deputy Commissioner of Police to
relax, any prohibition or restriction imposed by the rules.
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
202
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(4) In this section —
“special road” means any road specified in the rules made under
this section to be a special road, and includes any part of a
special road;
“traffic” includes pedestrians;
“use”, in relation to a road, includes crossing.
Regulation of use of excluded vehicles on expressways
114A.—(1) The Minister may make rules to prohibit, restrict or
regulate the use of any excluded vehicle on an expressway.
[24/2010]
(2) Rules made under subsection (1) may —
(a) require the owner or driver of any excluded vehicle to —
(i) obtain a permit from the Authority before using the
excluded vehicle on an expressway;
(ii) comply with any conditions that may be imposed by
the Authority when granting the permit; and
(iii) comply with any directions that the Authority or an
employee of the Authority may give regarding the
use of the excluded vehicle on an expressway, or the
inspection of the permit granted to the owner or
driver;
(b) authorise, or empower the Authority or an employee of the
Authority to authorise, the use of an excluded vehicle on
any expressway on any occasion or in an emergency or for
the purpose of crossing, or for the purpose of securing
access by that excluded vehicle to any premises abutting on
or adjacent to the expressway;
(c) relax, or empower the Authority or an employee of the
Authority to relax, in a particular case any prohibition or
restriction imposed by those rules; and
(d) prescribe the form and manner in which an application for
a permit mentioned in paragraph (a) is to be made.
[24/2010]
Road Traffic Act 1961
203
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(3) In this section —
“excluded vehicle” means a vehicle which is prescribed by rules
made under subsection (1) to be an excluded vehicle for the
purpose of this section;
“expressway” means any road that is prescribed by rules made
under subsection (1) to be an expressway for the purpose of
this section;
“use”, in relation to an expressway, includes crossing.
[24/2010]
Power of Authority temporarily to prohibit or restrict traffic
on roads
115.—(1) Subject to this section, if the Authority is satisfied that
traffic on any road should, by reason of any construction works or
works of repair being required or being in progress on, over or under
the road, be restricted or prohibited, the Authority may, if it thinks fit,
restrict or prohibit the use of that road or any part thereof by vehicles
or by vehicles of any particular class or description to such extent and
subject to such conditions or exceptions as the Authority may
consider necessary.
[24/2010]
(2) The Authority must cause a notice to be issued to the general
public or to any persons determined by the Authority, informing them
of the prohibition or restriction and of the alternative route or routes
(if any) available for traffic.
[24/2010]
(3) A notice under subsection (2) must be issued in such form and
manner and for such period as the Authority thinks fit.
[24/2010]
(4) So long as any restriction or prohibition made under this section
is in force, a notice stating the effect thereof and describing any
alternative route or routes available for traffic must be kept posted in
a conspicuous manner at each end of the part of the road to which the
restriction or prohibition relates and at the points at which it will be
necessary for vehicles to diverge from the road.
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
204
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(5) The Authority may at any time by notice restrict or prohibit
temporarily the use of any road or part thereof by vehicles or by
vehicles of any particular class or description where, owing to the
likelihood of danger to the public or of serious damage to the road or
part thereof, it appears to the Authority to be necessary that the
restriction or prohibition should come into force without delay.
[24/2010]
(6) The notice must describe the alternative route or routes (if any)
available for traffic and must be issued in such form and manner and
for such period as the Authority thinks fit.
[24/2010]
(7) Where the Authority has issued a notice under subsection (6),
the Authority may, before the end of the period referred to in that
subsection, proceed to make a restriction or prohibition under
subsection (1) with respect to the same road or part thereof.
[24/2010]
(7A) For the purposes of subsection (1), any person who intends to
carry out any construction works or works of repair on, over or under
the road must give notice to the Authority in the prescribed form and
manner, and within the prescribed time before the start of the works,
failing which the person shall be guilty of an offence.
[24/2010]
(8) Any person who uses or causes or permits the use of a vehicle in
contravention of any restriction or prohibition imposed under this
section shall be guilty of an offence.
(9) The Authority may, with the approval of the Minister, make
rules for carrying out or giving effect to this section, and in particular,
for prescribing —
(a) the form and manner in which, and the period within
which, a notice mentioned in subsection (7A) is to be given
to the Authority;
(b) the documents, information and indemnity to be given to
the Authority together with the notice referred to in
subsection (7A);
Road Traffic Act 1961
205
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(c) the duties of —
(i) the person carrying out any construction works or
works of repair on, over or under any road or part
thereof; or
(ii) the person for whom the works are being carried out,
(c) in relation to the restriction or prohibition of the use of that
road or part thereof by vehicles or by vehicles of any
particular class or description; and
(d) the penalties (not exceeding those provided by section 131)
for any breach or failure to comply with the rules.
[24/2010]
(10) Where any construction works or works of repair are being
carried out on, over or under any road or part thereof, an employee of
the Authority, may at any time without notice, enter upon the site of
the works to —
(a) inspect the measures that have been put in place for the
regulation or diversion of traffic in connection with the
restriction or prohibition of the use of that road or part
thereof arising from such works, in order to ensure that the
measures are suitable and adequate; and
(b) give any directions that the employee of the Authority
thinks necessary to the person carrying out the works or for
whom the works are being carried out in relation to the
restriction or prohibition of the use of that road or part
thereof by vehicles or by vehicles of any particular class or
description.
[24/2010]
(11) A person shall be guilty of an offence if the person —
(a) refuses to give access to or obstructs or hinders an
employee of the Authority who is carrying out any
inspection under subsection (10)(a); or
(b) fails to comply with any direction given to the person by an
employee of the Authority under subsection (10)(b).
[24/2010]
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
206
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


Restriction of competitions and speed trials
116.—(1) No competition or trial of speed involving the use of
vehicles may take place on a road except under, and in accordance
with the conditions of, a permit granted by the Deputy Commissioner
of Police.
[24/2010]
(2) An application for a permit mentioned in subsection (1) must —
(a) be made to the Deputy Commissioner of Police in such
form or manner, and not less than such period before the
date of the competition or trial of speed, as the Deputy
Commissioner of Police may require; and
(b) be accompanied by such fee (if any) as the Minister may
prescribe.
[24/2010]
(3) Upon receiving an application under subsection (2), the Deputy
Commissioner of Police may —
(a) grant the permit applied for —
(i) in
such
form
and
manner
as
the
Deputy
Commissioner of Police may determine; and
(ii) subject
to
any
conditions
that
the
Deputy
Commissioner of Police thinks fit to impose; or
(b) refuse to grant the permit.
[24/2010]
(4) [Deleted by Act 24 of 2010]
(5) [Deleted by Act 24 of 2010]
(6) [Deleted by Act 24 of 2010]
(7) Any person who promotes or takes part in any competition or
trial of speed that is in contravention of subsection (1) and any driver
or person in charge of any vehicle used in or taking part in any such
competition or trial of speed shall be guilty of an offence and shall on
conviction be punished with imprisonment for a term not exceeding
12 months and shall also be punished with a fine not exceeding
$5,000 and, in the case of a second or subsequent conviction, with
Road Traffic Act 1961
207
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


imprisonment for a term not exceeding 2 years and with a fine not
exceeding $10,000.
[24/2010; 12/2021]
(8) Any police officer may arrest without warrant any person
committing an offence under subsection (7) and may seize and detain
for the purposes of proceedings under this Act any vehicle used in or
taking part in any competition or trial of speed that is in contravention
of subsection (1).
[24/2010]
(9) A person convicted of an offence under subsection (7) shall,
unless the court for any special reason thinks fit to order otherwise
and without prejudice to the power of the court to order a longer
period of disqualification, be disqualified for a period of not less than
12 months from the date of the conviction from holding or obtaining a
driving licence.
Court to order forfeiture of vehicle
117.—(1) Where it is proved to the satisfaction of a court that a
vehicle has been used in the commission of an offence under
section 116(7), and that the vehicle has been seized by the police, the
court, on the written application of the Public Prosecutor, is to make
an order for the forfeiture of the vehicle even though no person may
have been convicted of that offence.
(2) An order for the forfeiture or for the release of a vehicle liable to
forfeiture under this section may be made by the court before which
the prosecution with regard to an offence under section 116(7) has
been or will be held.
(3) If there be no prosecution with regard to an offence under
section 116(7), the vehicle seized under section 116(8) must be
forfeited at the expiry of one month from the date of the seizure unless
a claim thereto is made before that date. Any person asserting that the
person is the owner of the vehicle may personally, or by the person’s
agent authorised in writing, give written notice to the Commissioner
of Police that the person claims the vehicle.
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
208
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(4) Upon
receipt
of
a
notice
under
subsection
(3),
the
Commissioner of Police may direct that the vehicle be released or
may refer the matter by information to a Magistrate.
(5) The
Magistrate,
on
receipt
of
an
information
under
subsection (4), or on the written application of the Public
Prosecutor, is to hold an inquiry and proceed to determine the
matter and is to, on proof that the vehicle was used in the commission
of an offence under section 116(7), order the vehicle to be forfeited,
or may in the absence of such proof order its release.
(6) No person is, in any proceedings in any court in respect of the
seizure of any vehicle seized in exercise or the purported exercise of
any power conferred under this section, entitled to the costs of the
proceedings or to any damages or other relief, other than an order for
the return of the vehicle, unless the seizure was made without
reasonable or probable cause.
(7) Despite subsections (1) and (3), a court need not make an order
for the forfeiture of a vehicle that has been seized by the police if it is
proved to the satisfaction of the court that the person who committed
the offence under section 116(7) involving the vehicle —
(a) is not the owner of the vehicle; and
(b) had used the vehicle without the consent of the owner.
[12/2021]
Power to prohibit or restrict use of vehicles on certain bridges
118.—(1) When the Authority is satisfied that any bridge over
which a road passes is insufficient to carry vehicles of which the
weights or axle weights as hereinafter defined exceed certain limits,
the Authority may by a conspicuous notice placed in a proper position
at each end of the bridge prohibit the use of the bridge either —
(a) by any vehicle of which the weight exceeds a maximum
weight specified in the notice; or
(b) by any vehicle of which —
(i) the weight exceeds a maximum weight so specified;
or
Road Traffic Act 1961
209
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(ii) any axle weight exceeds a maximum axle weight so
specified.
(2) The notice may as regards both weight of vehicle and axle
weight specify different maximum weights in relation to a vehicle
travelling at a speed less than a speed specified in the notice and in
relation to a vehicle travelling at that speed or any greater speed.
(3) In this section —
(a) “placed in a proper position” means placed in such a
position either on or near the bridge or on or near the road
leading to the bridge as to be visible at a reasonable
distance from the bridge to the drivers of vehicles
approaching it;
(b) “weight” means the actual weight of the vehicle at the time
including the weight of every person and thing carried by
it; and
(c) the weight transmitted by a vehicle to any transverse strip
of the road surface 152.4 centimetres in breadth is taken as
being an “axle weight” of that vehicle and for the purposes
of this paragraph a vehicle and any trailer drawn thereby is
deemed to be a single vehicle.
(4) The fact that a prohibition mentioned in subsection (1) has been
made by the Authority and has been notified in the manner prescribed
in that subsection must be published in the Gazette.
(5) Any omission to so publish the prohibition and notification does
not affect the validity of the prohibition or notification.
(6) If without the consent of the Authority, a vehicle is driven across
a bridge in contravention of this section, any person who so drives it
or causes or permits it to be so driven shall, without prejudice to any
civil liability incurred by the person in the case of damage being
caused to the bridge or otherwise, be guilty of an offence and shall be
liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding $400 and, in the case of a
second or subsequent conviction, to a fine not exceeding $1,000.
(7) If, in any proceedings under this section, the prosecutor satisfies
the court that there are reasonable grounds for believing that the
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
210
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


weight of the vehicle exceeded the maximum weight specified in the
notice or that any axle weight of the vehicle exceeded the maximum
axle weight so specified, the burden lies on the defendant to prove
that the weight of the vehicle or every axle weight of the vehicle (as
the case may be) did not exceed the maximum weight or maximum
axle weight.
Power to place traffic signs
119.—(1) The Authority may cause or permit traffic signs to be
drawn, placed or erected and maintained on or near any road, and any
signs so drawn, placed or erected are subject to and must be in
conformity with any general or special directions that the Minister
may give.
(2) Traffic signs must be of the prescribed size, colour and type
except where the Authority, with the approval of the Minister,
authorises the placing or retention of a sign of another character.
(3) No traffic signs may be drawn or placed on or near any road
except under and in accordance with subsections (1) and (2).
(4) The Authority must, by written notice, require the owner or
occupier of any land on which there is any traffic sign or any object
which so closely resembles a traffic sign that it might reasonably be
taken to be such a sign to remove it and if any person fails to comply
with the notice, the Authority may cause the removal to be effected
with as little damage as may be and the expense incurred in doing so
may be recovered as a civil debt from the person so in default.
(5) Subsection (4) does not apply in the case of any sign or object
which complies with subsection (2) and the retention of which is
expressly authorised by the Authority.
(6) The Authority may authorise the entry upon any land and the
exercise of any other powers that may be necessary for the purpose of
the exercise and performance of its powers and duties under this
section.
(7) In this Part, “traffic sign” includes all signals, warning sign
posts, direction posts, signs, lines or other devices for the guidance or
direction of persons using roads, but does not include warning signs
Road Traffic Act 1961
211
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


or other devices temporarily set up by any Government department to
indicate that road work is in progress.
(8) Any person wilfully and unlawfully damaging, moving,
defacing, altering or otherwise interfering with, any traffic sign
shall be guilty of an offence, and any police officer or the Registrar or
any officer authorised in writing in that behalf by the Registrar on
production of his or her authority may without warrant arrest any
person found committing the offence.
(9) The Authority, with the approval of the Minister, may make
rules to prescribe the size, colour and type of traffic signs to be drawn
or placed on or near roads.
Duty to comply with traffic directions and traffic signs
120.—(1) Where a police officer, an employee of the Authority or a
security officer, who is in uniform, is for the time being engaged in
the regulation of traffic on a road —
(a) any person driving or propelling any vehicle must stop the
vehicle or make it proceed in or keep to a particular line of
traffic when directed to do so by the police officer,
employee of the Authority or security officer (as the case
may be) in the execution of his or her duty; and
(b) any pedestrian must comply with any direction given by
the police officer, employee of the Authority or security
officer (as the case may be) in the execution of his or her
duty, either to pedestrians or to pedestrians and other
traffic.
[24/2010]
(2) Where a police officer or a security officer, who is in uniform, is
for the time being engaged in the regulation of traffic on a road at any
place where there are traffic light signals regulating the movement of
traffic, any person driving a vehicle must comply with the directions
given by the police officer or security officer even though the traffic
light signals indicate otherwise.
[24/2010]
(3) Where any traffic sign, being a sign for regulating the
movement of traffic or indicating the route to be followed by
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
212
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


traffic, has been lawfully placed on or near any road pursuant to
section 119, any person driving or propelling any vehicle must
comply with the indication given by the sign.
[24/2010]
(4) Any person who fails to comply with subsection (1), (2) or (3)
shall be guilty of an offence.
[24/2010]
(5) In any proceedings for an offence under subsection (3), insofar
as it is necessary to establish the offence charged, it is presumed until
the contrary is proved that the sign was of the prescribed size, colour
and type and that it was lawfully placed under section 119.
[24/2010]
Pedestrian crossings
121.—(1) Crossings
for
pedestrians
(called
in
this
section
crossings) may be established on roads, or on subways constructed
under roads, or on bridges constructed over roads, in accordance with
this section.
(2) The Minister may make rules with respect to the precedence of
vehicles and pedestrians respectively and generally with respect to
the movement of traffic (including pedestrians) at and in the vicinity
of crossings.
(3) Without limiting subsection (2), rules made thereunder may be
made prohibiting pedestrian traffic on the carriageway within
100 metres of a crossing, and with respect to the indication of the
limits of a crossing, or of any other matter whatsoever relating to the
crossing, by marks or devices on or near the roadway or otherwise,
and generally with respect to the erection of traffic signs in
connection with a crossing.
(4) Different rules may be made under this section in relation to
different conditions and, in particular, different rules may be made in
relation to crossings in the vicinity of, and at a distance from, a
junction of roads, and to traffic which is controlled by the police, and
by traffic signals, and by different kinds of traffic signals, and which
is not controlled.
Road Traffic Act 1961
213
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(5) Rules may be made under this section applying only to a
particular crossing or particular crossings specified in the rules.
(6) Any person who contravenes any of the rules made under this
section shall be guilty of an offence and shall be liable on
conviction —
(a) if the offence was committed by the person in his or her
capacity as the driver of a vehicle, to a fine not exceeding
$1,000 or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding
3 months and, in the case of a second or subsequent
conviction, to a fine not
exceeding $2,000 or to
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 6 months; and
(b) in any other case, to a fine not exceeding $100.
Leaving vehicles in positions likely to cause danger, obstruction
or undue inconvenience
122. Except as otherwise provided in section 84(4), if any person in
charge of a vehicle causes or permits the vehicle or any trailer drawn
thereby to remain at rest on any road in such a position or in such
condition or in such circumstances as to be likely to cause danger,
obstruction or undue inconvenience to other users of the road or to
traffic, the person shall be guilty of an offence and shall be liable on
conviction to a fine not exceeding $2,000 or to imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 3 months or to both and, in the case of a second or
subsequent conviction, to a fine not exceeding $5,000 or to
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 6 months or to both.
[10/2017]
Removal or immobilisation of abandoned or illegally parked
vehicles, etc.
123.—(1) Where a vehicle —
(a) is
parked
or
permitted
to
stand
on
any
road
in
contravention of any provision of this Act or the rules or
in such a manner as to constitute a danger or unreasonable
obstruction to traffic or persons using the road; or
(b) appears to have been abandoned on a road,
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
214
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


an enforcement officer who is in uniform may —
(c) require the owner, driver or other person in control or in
charge of the vehicle to remove the vehicle;
(d) remove the vehicle (including any trailer drawn or any load
carried thereby) to any place that the enforcement officer
thinks fit and detain it at that place; or
(e) immobilise the vehicle.
[24/2010; 10/2017]
(2) Where an enforcement officer has removed and detained, or has
immobilised, any vehicle under subsection (1), the enforcement
officer must, with all reasonable despatch, notify the owner of the
vehicle (if known) as to the procedure by which the owner may secure
the release of the vehicle.
[24/2010; 38/2018]
(3) The notification under subsection (2) may be given —
(a) where the vehicle has been removed and detained, in any
manner the enforcement officer thinks expedient; or
(b) where the vehicle has been immobilised, by affixing a
notice onto the windscreen or any other conspicuous part
of the vehicle.
[24/2010; 38/2018]
(4) No vehicle which has been removed and detained, or
immobilised, under this section may be released to the owner of
the vehicle except —
(a) by or under the direction of a Magistrate or the Deputy
Commissioner of Police or the Registrar; and
(b) upon the owner of the vehicle having paid the costs of the
removal and detention, or the immobilisation, of the
vehicle, and any other charges that may be prescribed,
and the vehicle remains at the risk of the owner of the vehicle until all
the costs and charges have been paid.
[24/2010]
Road Traffic Act 1961
215
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(5) A person shall be guilty of an offence if the person —
(a) without reasonable excuse, fails to remove the person’s
vehicle when required to do so by an enforcement officer
under subsection (1)(c); or
(b) without being authorised to do so by a Magistrate or the
Deputy Commissioner of Police or the Registrar, removes,
attempts to remove or tampers with —
(i) any notice that has been affixed to a vehicle under
subsection (3)(b);
(ii) any vehicle from the place at which it is being
detained under this section; or
(iii) the immobilisation device that has been fixed to a
vehicle under this section.
[24/2010]
(6) Where the owner or driver of a vehicle which has been
immobilised under this section does not appear to secure the release
of the vehicle within the time stipulated in the notice mentioned in
subsection (3)(b), an enforcement officer may remove the vehicle
(including any trailer drawn or any load carried thereby) to any place
that he or she thinks fit and detain it at that place, and must give notice
to the owner of the vehicle (if known) in accordance with
subsection (3)(a) as to the procedure by which the owner may
secure the release of the vehicle.
[24/2010; 38/2018]
(7) Where any vehicle which has been removed and detained, or
immobilised, under this section is not claimed by its owner within
3 months from the date on which it was so removed and detained or
immobilised (as the case may be), the Deputy Commissioner of
Police or the Registrar may, after giving due notice in the Gazette and
after giving at least one month’s written notice to the owner (if the
name and address of the owner are known to the Deputy
Commissioner of Police or the Registrar), sell the vehicle by public
auction or otherwise dispose of the vehicle.
[24/2010]
(8) The proceeds from the sale or disposal of the vehicle must be
applied in the payment of the costs incurred in carrying out the
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
216
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


provisions of this section and any other charges that may be
prescribed, and the surplus (if any) must be paid to the owner of
the vehicle or, if not claimed by the owner within 12 months, is
forfeited to the Government.
[24/2010]
(9) The enforcement officer who removes and detains, or who
immobilises, a vehicle under this section, the Deputy Commissioner
of Police, the Registrar, the Authority or any person who assists the
enforcement officer to remove and detain, or to immobilise, the
vehicle shall not be liable for any damage to or loss of the vehicle or
the contents thereof not caused wilfully or negligently by the
enforcement officer, the Deputy Commissioner of Police, the
Registrar, the Authority or the person assisting the enforcement
officer in the exercise of the powers under this section.
[24/2010]
(10) In this section —
“enforcement officer” means a police officer or an employee of
the Authority;
“immobilise”, in relation to a vehicle, means to prevent the
removal of the vehicle by fixing to the vehicle a device or
appliance which is designed or adapted for the purpose of
preventing the removal of the vehicle.
[24/2010]
Removal of stationary vehicles from expressways
123A.—(1) Without affecting section 123, an employee of the
Authority or an agent authorised by the Authority may remove any
stationary vehicle from an expressway.
[28/2001]
(1A) Any person who refuses to allow the employee or agent to
exercise his or her power under subsection (1) or who obstructs the
exercise of the power by the employee or agent shall be guilty of an
offence.
[4/2006]
(2) An employee or authorised agent of the Authority who has
removed any vehicle from an expressway under subsection (1) must
Road Traffic Act 1961
217
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


take the vehicle to a parking place that is near to that part of the
expressway from which the vehicle was removed.
(3) A vehicle which has been removed from an expressway and
taken to a parking place under this section must remain at the parking
place at the risk of the owner of the vehicle, and the owner is
responsible for any parking charges incurred in respect of that vehicle
while it remains at that parking place.
(4) An employee or authorised agent of the Authority who has
removed a vehicle from an expressway and taken it to a parking place
under this section must with all reasonable despatch give to the owner
of the vehicle (if the owner’s name and address are known) written
notice of the removal and the location of the parking place to which
the vehicle has been taken, and must in the notice inform the owner of
the procedure by which the owner may claim the vehicle.
(5) Any person who without the authority of an employee of the
Authority removes any vehicle from a parking place to which it has
been taken under subsection (2) or otherwise tampers with the vehicle
shall be guilty of an offence.
(6) Where a vehicle has been removed from an expressway and
taken to a parking place under this section, neither the Authority nor
any of its employees or authorised agents who effected the removal
shall be liable for any damage to or loss of the vehicle or the contents
thereof not caused wilfully or negligently by the Authority or by any
of its employees or authorised agents in the exercise of their powers
under this section or by any person acting under the direction of any
employee or authorised agent of the Authority.
(7) The costs and expenses (as determined by the Authority) of
removing any vehicle and of taking the vehicle to a parking place
under this section must be borne by the owner of the vehicle and if the
costs and expenses are not paid upon demand therefor, they may be
recovered from the owner of the vehicle as a debt due to the
Authority.
(8) If a vehicle is not claimed by its owner within one month of the
date on which it was taken to a parking place under subsection (2), the
Authority, after giving one month’s notice in the Gazette of its
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
218
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


intention to do so, may sell the vehicle by public auction or otherwise
dispose of the vehicle.
(9) The proceeds (if any) from the sale or disposal of any vehicle
under subsection (8) must be applied in payment of —
(a) firstly, any charges incurred in carrying out the provisions
of this section; and
(b) secondly, any damage that may have been caused to any
property of the Government by any unlawful use of the
vehicle,
and the surplus (if any) must be paid to the owner of the vehicle or, if
not claimed by the owner of the vehicle within 12 months after the
date of the sale or disposal, is forfeited to the Government.
(10) The Authority may waive, in whole or in part, the costs and
expenses of the removal of a vehicle mentioned in subsection (7).
(11) Except as provided in subsection (1), any person who, without
the prior authorisation of the Authority, tows any stationary vehicle
from a tunnel forming part of an expressway shall be guilty of an
offence.
(12) In this section —
“expressway” means any road which is prescribed by the
Minister by order in the Gazette to be an expressway for the
purposes of this section;
“parking charges” means the charges which are fixed or deemed
fixed under section 9 of the Parking Places Act 1974 as being
payable by the owner of a vehicle for the use of any parking
place.
[38/2018]
Provisions with respect to stretching of ropes, etc., across roads
124. Any person who for any purpose places or causes to be placed
any rope, wire, chain, tackle or similar apparatus across a road or any
part thereof in such a manner as to be likely to cause danger to
persons using the road shall, unless the person proves that the person
had a lawful right or excuse to do so and that the person had taken all
Road Traffic Act 1961
219
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


necessary means to give adequate warning of the danger, be guilty of
an offence.
Application to vehicles and drivers in the service of
Government
125.—(1) This Part, except as otherwise provided, applies to
vehicles and persons in the service of the Government.
(2) For the purpose of proceedings for an offence in connection
with any such vehicle against any person other than the driver of the
vehicle, the person nominated in that behalf by the department in
whose service the vehicle is used is deemed to be the person actually
responsible, unless it is shown to the satisfaction of the court that the
driver only was responsible.
Goods vehicles not to be used for passengers
126.—(1) Any person driving or using any goods vehicle who
carries any person therein or thereon or causes or permits any person
to ride therein or thereon shall be guilty of an offence unless he or she
proves that —
(a) the person so carried is in the employment of the owner or
hirer of the vehicle and is proceeding on his or her
employer’s business and is carried in accordance with rules
prescribed under section 77(6); or
(b) the person so carried is a sick or injured person carried in a
case of emergency.
[4/2006]
(2) The owner of the goods vehicle shall in all cases also be liable
for the act equally with and independently of the person actually
driving or using the goods vehicle unless the owner proves that the
owner had taken every reasonable precaution to prevent the
commission of any offence under this section.
(3) [Deleted by Act 4 of 2006]
(4) [Deleted by Act 4 of 2006]
(5) Any person who while being carried on or being permitted to
ride on a goods vehicle —
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
220
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(a) fails to sit on a seat in or at any place on the vehicle as
directed by the driver or other person in charge of the
vehicle; or
(b) fails to comply with any directions that are given by the
driver or other person in charge of the vehicle regarding his
or her personal safety,
shall be guilty of an offence and shall be liable on conviction to a fine
not exceeding $500.
Power of arrest, stopping and detention
127.—(1) A police officer in uniform may stop and arrest any
person, not being the driver of a motor vehicle, who within the police
officer’s view commits an offence under this Act or the rules.
[10/2017]
(2) The person must not be arrested if he or she satisfies the police
officer as to his or her name and residence in Singapore and that he or
she does not intend to abscond.
(3) A police officer may detain any bicycle or tricycle in respect of
which an offence has been committed within the police officer’s
view.
(4) A police officer in uniform may stop any motor vehicle the
driver of which has committed or is suspected of having committed
an offence under this Act or the rules.
[10/2017]
(5) Any person driving a motor vehicle must stop the motor vehicle
on being so required by a police officer in uniform, and if the person
fails to do so he or she shall be guilty of an offence.
(6) A police officer in uniform may, except as hereinafter provided,
arrest without warrant any person in charge of or driving a motor
vehicle who has committed or is suspected of having committed an
offence under this Act or the rules.
[10/2017]
(7) The power of arrest under subsection (6) must not be exercised
if either —
Road Traffic Act 1961
221
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(a) the person on the demand of the police officer produces his
or her driving licence so as to enable the police officer to
ascertain his or her name and address, the date of issue and
the authority by which it was issued; or
(b) the person, not being a paid driver or the driver of a motor
vehicle used for the carriage of passengers for hire or
reward or for the carriage of goods, gives the police officer
his or her name and his or her address within Singapore.
(8) If the police officer has reason to suspect that a name or address
so ascertained or given is false, the police officer may, despite
anything to the contrary in subsection (7), exercise the power of arrest
under subsection (6).
(9) The Registrar or any officer authorised in writing by the
Registrar in that behalf on production of that authority or any police
officer may stop any vehicle other than a motor vehicle, and any
police officer in uniform may stop any motor vehicle, for the purpose
of examining the licence of the vehicle.
(10) Any person driving a vehicle must stop the vehicle on being so
required by the Registrar or the officer under subsection (9), and if the
person fails to do so the person shall be guilty of an offence.
(11) Any police officer in uniform may, when exercising any of the
powers conferred by subsection (4), (6) or (9), require any person,
who appears to the police officer to be or to have been a passenger in
the motor vehicle in relation to which the police officer is exercising
those powers, to furnish to the police officer the person’s name and
address.
(12) When any person who is mentioned in subsection (11) refuses
on the demand of the police officer in uniform to give his or her name
and address, he or she may be arrested by the police officer in order
that his or her name and address may be ascertained, and he or she
must, within 24 hours from the arrest, be taken before a Magistrate’s
Court, unless before that time his or her name and address are
ascertained, in which case the person must be immediately released
on his or her executing a bond with or without sureties for his or her
appearance before a Magistrate’s Court, if so required.
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
222
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(13) When any person is taken before a Magistrate’s Court under
subsection (12), the Court is to require him or her to execute a bond
with or without a surety for his or her appearance before a
Magistrate’s Court, if so required.
Power to require evidence of identity in certain cases
127A.—(1) If any person commits a prescribed offence in the view
of the Registrar or an authorised officer, the Registrar or authorised
officer may require the person to furnish evidence of his or her
identity and the person must thereupon furnish any evidence of his or
her identity that may be required by the Registrar or authorised
officer.
(2) Any person who —
(a) refuses to furnish any evidence of identity required of him
or her by the Registrar or an authorised officer under
subsection (1); or
(b) wilfully furnishes to the Registrar or authorised officer any
information that is false,
shall be guilty of an offence and shall be liable on conviction to a fine
not exceeding $500.
(3) If any person refuses to furnish any evidence of his or her
identity when required to do so under this section or if the Registrar or
an authorised officer has reason to believe that any information
furnished by the person is false, the Registrar or authorised officer
may without warrant arrest the person.
(4) No person arrested under subsection (3) may be detained longer
than is necessary for bringing the person before a court unless the
order of a court for his or her detention is obtained.
(5) In this section —
“authorised officer” means any employee of the Authority or
any other person who is duly authorised by the Registrar in
writing to exercise the powers conferred on an authorised
officer under this section;
Road Traffic Act 1961
223
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


“prescribed offence” means any offence under this Act or the
rules that is prescribed by the Minister as an offence to which
this section applies.
(6) For the purpose of this section, the Registrar may, with the
written approval of the Minister, authorise any employee of any
omnibus operator to exercise the powers of an authorised officer
under this section in respect of any prescribed offence that is
committed within a bus interchange or on an omnibus.
Screening, etc., bus passengers and entrants to bus
interchanges
127B.—(1) It is a condition of entry to any bus or bus interchange
that a bus passenger of the bus or an entrant to the bus interchange
must, if asked by a police officer or an approved person anywhere in
or in the immediate vicinity of the bus or bus interchange, do one or
more of the following for the purpose of ensuring the security or
safety of persons who are or may be on board the bus or at the bus
interchange:
(a) undergo any form of security screening mentioned in
subsection (2);
(b) undergo a frisk search;
(c) permit an inspection to be made of the personal property of
the bus passenger or entrant;
(d) permit a search through any bag, container or other
receptacle or any garments removed in accordance with
subsection (2).
[12/2021]
(2) To ensure the security or safety of persons who are or may be on
board a bus or at any bus interchange, a police officer or an approved
person may ask a bus passenger of the bus or an entrant to the bus
interchange to do one or more of the following:
(a) walk through a screening detector;
(b) pass the personal property of the bus passenger or entrant
through an X‑ray machine;
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
224
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(c) allow the police officer or approved person to pass a
hand‑held scanner in close proximity to the personal
property of the bus passenger or entrant;
(d) allow the police officer or approved person to inspect the
personal property of the bus passenger or entrant;
(e) produce or empty the contents of any bag, container or
other receptacle in the possession or apparently in the
immediate control of the bus passenger or entrant;
(f) turn out the bus passenger’s or entrant’s pockets or remove
all articles from the bus passenger’s or entrant’s clothing,
and allow the police officer or approved person to inspect
them;
(g) remove any coat, jacket, gloves, shoes or hat or any other
thing worn or carried by the bus passenger or entrant,
which may be conveniently removed and that is specified
by the police officer or approved person, and allow the
police officer or approved person to inspect the coat,
jacket, gloves, shoes or hat or other thing;
(h) open an article for inspection and allow the police officer
or approved person to inspect it.
[12/2021]
(3) To ensure the security or safety of persons who are or may be on
board a bus or at any bus interchange, a police officer or a senior
approved person may also ask a bus passenger of the bus or an entrant
to the bus interchange to do one or more of the following:
(a) undergo a frisk search;
(b) allow the police officer or senior approved person to pass a
hand‑held scanner in close proximity to the bus passenger
or entrant.
[12/2021]
(4) To avoid doubt, a police officer or an approved person may
make a request to a bus passenger of a bus or an entrant to a bus
interchange to do anything under subsection (2)(d), (e), (f), (g) or (h)
if the police officer or approved person (as the case may be)
reasonably considers it necessary to make such a request under that
Road Traffic Act 1961
225
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


provision, whether or not the bus passenger or entrant or the personal
property of the bus passenger or entrant has been subjected to
screening or a frisk search under subsection (2)(a), (b) or (c) or (3).
[12/2021]
(5) Without limiting subsection (6), where a bus passenger of a bus
or an entrant to a bus interchange refuses —
(a) to permit to be screened or inspected under subsection (2)
or (3) by a police officer or an approved person —
(i) the personal property of the bus passenger or entrant;
or
(ii) any bag, container or other receptacle in the
possession or apparently in the immediate control
of the bus passenger or entrant;
(b) to allow a police officer or an approved person under
subsection (2) or (3) to pass a hand‑held scanner in close
proximity to the bus passenger or entrant or personal
property of the bus passenger or entrant; or
(c) to undergo a frisk search under subsection (3) by a police
officer or a senior approved person,
the police officer or approved person (as the case may be) may order
the bus passenger or entrant to immediately leave the bus or bus
interchange (as the case may be) and with that personal property, bag,
container or receptacle, as the case may be.
[12/2021]
(6) An individual commits an offence if the individual, without
reasonable excuse, refuses or fails to comply with any request or
order of a police officer or an approved person under subsection (2),
(3) or (5).
[12/2021]
(7) An individual who is guilty of an offence under subsection (6)
shall be liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding $1,000.
[12/2021]
(8) However, it is not an offence under subsection (6) for any
individual to refuse to comply with any request or order made or
given by —
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
226
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(a) a police officer who is not in uniform and who fails to
declare his or her office; or
(b) an approved person who fails to declare his or her office
and, in the case of an outsourced enforcement officer, who
also refuses to produce his or her identification card on
demand being made by that individual.
[12/2021]
(9) In this section and section 127C —
“approved person”, in relation to any bus or bus interchange,
means any of the following individuals who is authorised by
the Authority in writing to exercise any power under this
section at or in relation to the bus or bus interchange
concerned:
(a) an officer or employee of the Authority;
(b) a member of an auxiliary police force in uniform;
(c) an employee of —
(i) a bus operator holding a Class 1 bus service
licence (within the meaning of the Bus Services
Industry Act 2015) to provide a bus service
using the bus; or
(ii) a bus interchange operator holding a bus
interchange licence (within the meaning of
the Bus Services Industry Act 2015) to operate
the bus interchange;
(d) a security officer (within the meaning of the Private
Security Industry Act 2007) engaged by the bus
operator or bus interchange operator mentioned in
paragraph (c);
(e) an outsourced enforcement officer;
“bus interchange” means a terminal or station with purpose‑built
facilities for the commencement or termination of one or
more bus services and for the boarding or alighting of bus
passengers;
Road Traffic Act 1961
227
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


“bus passenger”, in relation to any bus, means an individual
carried on board the bus, and includes —
(a) an individual boarding or intending to board the bus
for the purpose of travelling on board the bus as a
passenger; and
(b) a driver, fare collector or an inspector while carrying
out work or on duty on board the bus in that capacity,
or intending to board the bus for the purpose of
carrying out that work or duty;
“entrant”, in relation to any bus interchange, means an
individual who is about to enter the bus interchange, and
includes an individual who is within the bus interchange,
whether or not a bus passenger;
“frisk search” means a search of an individual conducted by
quickly running the hands over the individual’s outer
clothing;
“hand‑held scanner” means a device that may be passed over or
around an individual or an individual’s personal property to
detect metal, dangerous objects or explosive or other
hazardous substances;
“identification card”, in relation to an outsourced enforcement
officer,
means
an
identification
card
issued
under
section 11(3) of the Land Transport Authority of Singapore
Act 1995 to the officer;
“inspecting an article” includes handling the article, opening it
and examining or moving its contents;
“personal property”, in relation to an individual, means things
carried by the individual or things apparently in the
immediate control of the individual, but does not include
clothing being worn by the individual;
“senior approved person”, in relation to any bus or bus
interchange, means an approved person who is authorised
by the Authority in writing to exercise any power under this
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
228
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


section at or in relation to the bus or bus interchange
concerned, as follows:
(a) a member of an auxiliary police force in uniform;
(b) a security officer (within the meaning of the Private
Security Industry Act 2007) engaged by —
(i) a bus operator holding a Class 1 bus service
licence (within the meaning of the Bus Services
Industry Act 2015) to provide a bus service
using the bus; or
(ii) a bus interchange operator holding a bus
interchange licence (within the meaning of
the Bus Services Industry Act 2015) to operate
the bus interchange;
(c) an outsourced enforcement officer.
[12/2021]
Bringing dangerous items into bus or bus interchange
127C.—(1) It is also a condition of entry to any bus or bus
interchange that a bus passenger of the bus or an entrant to the bus
interchange must not take into or possess when on board the bus or in
the bus interchange a dangerous item.
[12/2021]
(2) A bus passenger of a bus or an entrant to a bus interchange must
not take a dangerous item on board the bus or into the bus interchange
unless the bus passenger or entrant (as the case may be) has the
express permission of a police officer or an approved person to do so.
[12/2021]
(3) An individual who contravenes subsection (2) shall be guilty of
an offence and shall be liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding
$5,000.
[12/2021]
(4) However, it is not an offence under subsection (3) if the
individual disposes of the dangerous item before boarding the bus or
entering the bus interchange.
[12/2021]
Road Traffic Act 1961
229
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(5) In this section, “dangerous item” means any of the following:
(a) any pistol, gun, stun gun, taser, firearm or other object or a
thing that, if used in the way for which it is or was designed
or adapted, is or was capable of being aimed at a target and
causing hurt or injury —
(i) by propelling a bullet, shot or other projectile; or
(ii) by discharging any corrosive substance or poison,
(a) by means of a burning propellant, compressed air or other
compressed gas, or an explosive force (however caused);
(b) a marine flare and signal, landing flare, highway fuse,
smoke generator, distress signal or other pyrotechnic
device intended for signalling, warning, rescue or similar
purposes;
(c) a firework, grenade, ammunition or any explosive device
or explosive substance;
(d) an axe, or a sword, dagger, spear or spearhead;
(e) any petroleum or any substance prescribed to be a
flammable material for the purposes of the Fire Safety
Act 1993;
(f) a hazardous substance or corrosive substance;
(g) any other article or substance which is capable of posing a
risk to health, safety, property or the environment and is
prescribed under section 140 by the Minister as a
dangerous item.
[12/2021]
Police officer not in uniform to produce identification card
128.—(1) Every police officer when acting against any person
under this Act must, if not in uniform, on demand declare his or her
office and produce to the person against whom he or she is acting any
identification card that the Commissioner of Police may direct to be
carried by police officers.
(2) It shall not be an offence for any person to refuse to comply with
any request, demand or order made by any police officer not in
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
230
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


uniform who fails to declare his or her office and produce his or her
identification card on demand being made by the person.
PART 7
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
False statements, forging of licences, etc.
129.—(1) If any person —
(a) in relation to an application made under this Act or the
rules for registration or the cancellation of the registration
of a vehicle, the grant of any approval, permit or licence to
the person or any other person, or for the purpose of
preventing the grant or variation of any approval, permit or
licence or of procuring the imposition of any condition or
limitation in relation to any approval, permit or licence,
makes or causes to be made any statement or declaration
which is false or in any material respect misleading;
(b) furnishes or causes to be furnished any particulars in
connection with a change of the registration of any vehicle
which to the person’s knowledge are false or in any
material respect misleading; or
(c) makes or causes to be made any entry in a record, register
or other document required to be kept under this Act and
the rules which to the person’s knowledge is false or in any
material respect misleading,
the person shall be guilty of an offence and shall be liable on
conviction to a fine not exceeding $5,000 or to imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 12 months or to both.
[4/2006; 10/2017]
(2) If any person —
(a) forges or alters or defaces or mutilates or uses or lends to,
or allows to be used by, any other person, any mark, plate
or document which is required under this Act to be carried
on a vehicle or trailer, or any licence issued under this Act;
Road Traffic Act 1961
231
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(b) makes or has in the person’s possession any mark, plate or
document so closely resembling a licence or any mark,
plate or document as aforesaid as to be calculated to
deceive;
(c) alters any entry made in a record, register or other
document kept under this Act or the rules;
(d) exhibits upon any vehicle or trailer any licence or
identification mark, plate or document which has been
forged, altered, defaced, mutilated or added to or any
colourable imitation of a licence, mark, plate or document
which is required under this Act to be carried on a vehicle
or trailer;
(e) transfers or affixes to any vehicle or trailer for which it was
not issued any licence, identification mark, plate or
document which is required under this Act to be carried
on a vehicle or trailer; or
(f) uses any forged, altered, defaced or mutilated driving
licence or any driving licence to which any addition not
authorised by this Act has been made,
the person shall, unless the person establishes to the satisfaction of the
court that the person acted without intent to deceive, be guilty of an
offence and shall be liable on conviction to be punished as follows:
(g) in the case of a person who is convicted for the first time of
an offence under subsection (2)(a) or (d) in connection
with the alteration of a supplementary licence issued under
section 11A — with a fine not exceeding $10,000;
(h) in the case of a person who is convicted of a second or
subsequent offence under subsection (2)(a) or (d) in
connection with the alteration of a supplementary licence
issued under section 11A — with a fine not exceeding
$20,000 or with imprisonment for a term not exceeding
12 months or with both;
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
232
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(i) in any other case — with a fine not exceeding $5,000 or
with imprisonment for a term not exceeding 12 months or
with both.
[4/2006; 10/2017]
(3) Despite the provisions of any written law to the contrary, a
District Court or Magistrate’s Court has jurisdiction to try any offence
under this section and to impose the maximum penalty prescribed
therefor.
(4) Subsection (2), with the necessary modifications, applies in
relation to a document evidencing the appointment of an officer for
the purposes of this Act as it applies in relation to a licence.
(5) If any police officer or the Registrar or officer authorised by the
Registrar in writing has reasonable cause to believe that a document
carried on a motor vehicle or any licence or record or other document
produced to him or her pursuant to the provisions of this Act is a
document in relation to which an offence under this section has been
committed, he or she may seize the document.
(6) When any document is seized under this section, the driver or
the owner of the vehicle must, if the document is still detained and
neither of them has previously been charged with an offence under
this section, be summoned before a District Court or Magistrate’s
Court to account for the driver’s or owner’s possession of or the
presence on the vehicle of the document.
(7) The District Court or Magistrate’s Court is to make such order
respecting the disposal of the document and award such costs as the
justice of the case may require.
(8) In subsections (5), (6) and (7), “document” includes a plate and
the power to seize includes power to detach from the vehicle.
Presumptions
130. In any proceedings for an offence under Part 5, insofar as it
may be necessary to establish the offence charged, it is presumed
until the contrary is proved —
(a) that any conveyance of persons or goods in a motor vehicle
was for hire or reward;
Road Traffic Act 1961
233
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(b) that the passengers carried in a motor vehicle were being
carried in consideration of separate payments made by
them;
(c) that a vehicle is not a vehicle in relation to which any
licence under Part 5 has been granted;
(d) that any person is not the holder of a licence granted under
the provisions of Part 5 in respect of a motor vehicle;
(e) that any person is the owner of a motor vehicle; and
(f) that any person is the holder of a licence granted under
Part 5.
Offences and penalties
131.—(1) A person who without lawful excuse —
(a) refuses or neglects to do anything the person is by this Act
or the rules required to do;
(b) fails to comply with the requirements of any notice served
on the person under this Act or the rules; or
(c) acts in contravention of any provision of this Act or the
rules,
shall be guilty of an offence.
[10/2017]
(2) Any person who, under this section or any other provision of
this Act or the rules, is guilty of an offence shall be liable on
conviction, where no special penalty is provided —
(a) in the case of a first offence — to a fine not exceeding
$1,000 or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding
3 months or to both; and
(b) in the case of a second or subsequent offence — to a fine
not exceeding $2,000 or to imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 6 months or to both.
[10/2017]
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
234
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


Service of summonses and other documents
131A.—(1) Every summons issued for an offence under this Act or
the rules, and every notice, order or other document required or
authorised to be given or served under this Act or the rules may be
served on any person —
(a) by delivering it to the person or to some adult member or
employee of his or her family at his or her usual or last
known place of residence or any address furnished by the
person;
(b) by leaving it at the usual or last known place of residence
or place of business of the person in a cover addressed to
the person or any address furnished by the person;
(c) by sending it by normal post or registered post in a prepaid
letter addressed to the person at the person’s usual or last
known place of residence or business or any address
furnished by the person; or
(d) in the case of a notice to be served on a person whose usual
or last known place of residence or business cannot, with
reasonable diligence, be ascertained, by publication of the
notice in the Gazette.
[37/2012; 10/2017]
(1A) In addition, a notice, order or document (other than a
summons) required or authorised to be given or served under this
Act or any subsidiary legislation made under this Act on an
individual, a partnership, a body corporate or an unincorporated
association may be given or served —
(a) by sending it by email to the email address of the
individual, partnership, body corporate or unincorporated
association, as the case may be;
(b) by sending it by fax to whichever of the following is
applicable:
(i) the fax number last known to the Authority as the fax
number for the service of notices, orders or
documents on the individual;
Road Traffic Act 1961
235
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(ii) the fax number used at the partnership’s business
address;
(iii) the fax number used at the body corporate’s or
unincorporated association’s registered office or
principal office in Singapore;
(c) by
giving
an
electronic
notice
to
the
individual,
partnership,
body
corporate
or
unincorporated
association (called in this section an addressee) by the
addressee’s chosen means of notification, stating that the
notice, order or document is available and how the
addressee may use the addressee’s chosen means of
access to access the contents of that notice, order or
document; or
(d) by any other method authorised by the rules for the service
of notices, orders or documents of that kind if the recipient
consents (expressly or impliedly) to service of a notice,
order or document of that kind in that way.
[38/2018]
(2) Where any summons, notice, order or document is served on
any person by registered post, it is deemed to have been served within
the time as it would take to arrive in the ordinary course of
transmission and in proving service of the same it is sufficient to
prove that the envelope containing the summons, notice, order or
document was properly addressed, stamped and posted by registered
post.
(2A) Service
of
a
notice,
order
or
document
under
subsection (1A)(a) or (b) takes effect —
(a) if the notice, order or document is sent by email, at the time
that the email becomes capable of being retrieved by the
person; or
(b) if the notice, order or document is sent by fax and a
notification of successful transmission is received, on the
day of transmission.
[38/2018]
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
236
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(2B) However, service of any notice, order or document under this
Act or any subsidiary legislation made under this Act on a person by
email or by an electronic notice at the person’s chosen means of
notification may be effected only with the person’s prior consent
(express or implied) to service in that way.
[38/2018]
(3) All notices, orders and other documents which the Registrar is
empowered to give by this Act or the rules may be given by any
officer duly authorised by the Registrar.
[10/2017]
(4) Subsection (1) does not apply to any summons in connection
with any offence punishable with imprisonment and the summons
must be served in the manner prescribed by the Criminal Procedure
Code 2010 for the service of summonses under that Code.
[37/2012]
(5) In this section —
“business address” or “place of business” means —
(a) in the case of an individual, the individual’s usual or
last known place of business in Singapore; or
(b) in the case of a partnership (other than a limited
liability partnership), the partnership’s principal or
last known place of business in Singapore;
“chosen means of access”, for an addressee on whom is or is to
be served a notice, order or document required or authorised
to be given or served under this Act or any subsidiary
legislation made under this Act, means an electronic means
the addressee agrees with the person giving or serving the
notice, order or document as the means by which the
addressee may access the contents of that notice, order or
document;
“chosen means of notification”, for an addressee on whom is or
is to be given or served a notice, order or document required
or authorised to be given or served under this Act or any
subsidiary legislation made under this Act, means an
electronic means that the addressee nominates to the
person giving or serving the notice, order or document as
Road Traffic Act 1961
237
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


the means by which the addressee may be notified that such a
notice, order or document has been given or served on the
addressee;
“email address” means the last email address given by the
addressee concerned to the person giving or serving a notice,
order or document as the email address for the service of
notices, orders or documents under this Act or any subsidiary
legislation made under this Act.
[38/2018]
Offences by bodies corporate, etc.
131B.—(1) Where an offence under this Act committed by a body
corporate is proved —
(a) to have been committed with the consent or connivance of
an officer; or
(b) to be attributable to any act or default on the officer’s part,
the officer as well as the body corporate shall be guilty of the offence
and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
[24/2010]
(2) Where the affairs of a body corporate are managed by its
members, subsection (1) applies in relation to the acts and defaults of
a member in connection with the member’s functions of management
as if the member were a director of the body corporate.
[24/2010]
(3) Where an offence under this Act committed by a partnership is
proved —
(a) to have been committed with the consent or connivance of
a partner; or
(b) to be attributable to any act or default on the partner’s part,
the partner as well as the partnership shall be guilty of the offence and
shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
[24/2010]
(4) Where an offence under this Act committed by a limited
liability partnership is proved to have been committed with the
consent or connivance of, or to be attributable to any neglect on the
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
238
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


part of, a partner or manager of the limited liability partnership, the
partner or manager (as the case may be) as well as the partnership
shall be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded
against and punished accordingly.
[24/2010]
(5) Where
an
offence
under
this
Act
committed
by
an
unincorporated association (other than a partnership) is proved —
(a) to have been committed with the consent or connivance of
an officer of the unincorporated association or a member of
its governing body; or
(b) to be attributable to any act or default on the part of such an
officer or a member,
the officer or member as well as the unincorporated association shall
be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and
punished accordingly.
[24/2010]
(6) In this section —
“body corporate” and “partnership” exclude a limited liability
partnership within the meaning of the Limited Liability
Partnerships Act 2005;
“officer” —
(a) in relation to a body corporate, means any director,
member of the committee of management, chief
executive officer, manager, secretary or other similar
officer of the body corporate and includes any person
purporting to act in any such capacity; and
(b) in relation to an unincorporated association (other
than
a
partnership),
means
the
president,
the
secretary, or any member of the committee of the
unincorporated association, or any person holding a
position analogous to that of the president, secretary
or member of the committee and includes any person
purporting to act in any such capacity;
“partner” includes a person purporting to act as a partner.
[24/2010]
Road Traffic Act 1961
239
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(7) The appropriate Minister may make rules to provide for the
application of any provision of this section, with any modifications
that the appropriate Minister considers appropriate, to any body
corporate, limited liability partnership or unincorporated association
formed or recognised under the law of a territory outside Singapore.
[24/2010]
132. [Repealed by Act 12 of 2021]
Traffic ticket notice
133.—(1) Where a police officer or an employee of the Authority
authorised in that behalf has reasonable grounds for believing that a
person has committed an offence under this Act or the rules, he or she
may, in lieu of applying to a court for a summons, immediately serve
upon that person a notice, requiring that person to attend at the court
described, at the hour and on the date specified in the notice.
[28/2014; 10/2017]
(2) A duplicate of the notice must be prepared by the police officer
and, if so required by a court, produced to the court.
(3) The notice may be served on the person alleged to have
committed the offence in the manner provided by section 131A.
(4) On an accused person appearing before a court pursuant to the
notice, the court is to take cognizance of the offence alleged and is to
proceed as though the accused person were produced before it
pursuant to section 153 of the Criminal Procedure Code 2010.
[15/2010]
(5) If a person, upon whom the notice has been served in the manner
provided by section 131A, fails to appear before a court in person or
by counsel in accordance therewith, the court may, if satisfied that the
notice was duly served, issue a warrant for the arrest of the person
unless in the case of an offence which may be compounded that
person has before that date been permitted to compound the offence.
(6) Upon a person arrested pursuant to a warrant issued under
subsection (5) being produced before it, a court is to proceed as
though he or she were produced before it under section 153 of the
Criminal Procedure Code 2010.
[Act 31 of 2022 wef 01/11/2022]
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
240
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(7) A notice served under subsection (1) may, at any time before the
date specified in the notice, be cancelled by —
(a) a police officer not below the rank of sergeant specially
authorised by a Deputy Commissioner of Police; or
(b) an employee of the Authority specially authorised in
person by the Registrar of Vehicles appointed under
section 9(1).
[23/2013; 28/2014; 12/2021]
Forms of notices for purposes of section 133
134. Each of the following may design and utilise forms of notices
for the purposes of section 133:
(a) the Deputy Commissioner of Police;
(b) the Registrar of Vehicles.
[28/2014; 12/2021]
Composition of offences
135.—(1) A relevant authorised officer may compound any offence
under this Act or the rules that is prescribed as a compoundable
offence, by collecting from a person reasonably suspected of having
committed the offence a sum not exceeding the lower of the
following:
(a) one half of the amount of the maximum fine that is
prescribed for the offence;
(b) $5,000.
[10/2017]
(1A) On payment of the composition sum under subsection (1), no
further proceedings are to be taken against that person in respect of
the offence.
[10/2017]
(1B) In this section, “relevant authorised officer” means any of the
following:
(a) the Deputy Commissioner of Police designated by the
Commissioner of Police for the purposes of this section;
Road Traffic Act 1961
241
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(b) a police officer not below the rank of sergeant specially
authorised by name for the purposes of this section by the
Deputy
Commissioner
of
Police
mentioned
in
paragraph (a);
(c) the Registrar of Vehicles appointed under section 9(1);
(d) an employee of the Authority specially authorised by name
for the purposes of this section in an instrument personally
executed by the Registrar of Vehicles mentioned in
paragraph (c).
[10/2017]
(2) The appropriate Minister may make rules to prescribe the
offences that may be compounded under this section and the
conditions subject to which, and the method and procedure by
which, the offences may be compounded.
(3) All sums collected under this section must be paid into the
Consolidated Fund.
[25/2020]
Payment for licences by cheque
136.—(1) The Registrar may, if he or she thinks fit and subject to
the provisions of this Act, grant any licence upon receipt of a cheque
for the amount of the fee payable thereon.
(2) Where a person pays by cheque the whole or any part of any tax
or fee for a licence under this Act or any subsidiary legislation made
under the Act, and the cheque is not accepted on presentation or is
dishonoured —
(a) the licence is void as from the date when it was granted or
renewed, as the case may be; and
(b) the Registrar must give the person a dishonour notice in a
manner allowed under section 131A.
[38/2018]
(2A) A dishonour notice must —
(a) contain a statement to the effect that the cheque was
dishonoured or not accepted, as the case may be;
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
242
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(b) contain a statement to the effect that the relevant licence is
void as from the date when it was granted or renewed, as
the case may be; and
(c) if the licence was not issued in electronic form, require the
person to deliver up the licence to the Registrar within a
period of 7 days after the date that the dishonour notice is
given.
[38/2018]
(3) If the person fails to comply with the request within the period
under subsection (2A)(c), the person shall be guilty of an offence and
shall be liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding $1,000.
[10/2017; 38/2018]
(4) If the licence granted under subsection (1) is in respect of a
motor vehicle, the Registrar may on the expiry of the 7 days after the
dishonour notice is given, proceed under section 15.
[10/2017; 38/2018]
Moneys received under this Act
137. Except as otherwise provided in the Land Transport Authority
of Singapore Act 1995, all moneys received by the Deputy
Commissioner of Police and by the Registrar under this Act must
be paid into the Consolidated Fund.
Registrar and Deputy Commissioner of Police to be informed
of convictions
138. When during any proceedings leading to the conviction of any
person for any criminal offence it comes to the knowledge of the
court recording the conviction that the person (whether or not that
person is in possession of any licence issued under this Act) is or has
been or has acted as the owner, driver or conductor of a public service
vehicle, the court is to, if in its opinion the fact of the conviction
affects the suitability or otherwise of the person convicted to hold or
receive a licence under this Act, immediately send particulars of the
conviction and of any sentence passed thereon to the Registrar and the
Deputy Commissioner of Police.
Road Traffic Act 1961
243
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


Provisions as to evidence
139.—(1) An extract of the records maintained under rules made
under section 34(1) certified under the hand of the Registrar, or a
licence issued by the Registrar in respect of any vehicle is prima facie
evidence of the registration of the vehicle or of the fact that the
vehicle was licensed for the period specified in the licence, as the case
may be.
[4/2006]
(2) When in any proceedings for an offence under this Act and the
rules it is necessary to prove —
(a) that a vehicle was, or was not, registered in the name of any
person;
(b) that any person was, or was not, the registered owner of a
vehicle; or
(c) that any person was, or was not, the holder of a licence
granted under this Act,
a certificate purporting to be signed by the Registrar or the Deputy
Commissioner of Police (as the case may be) and certifying the
matters aforesaid is admissible as evidence, and constitutes prima
facie proof of the facts certified in the certificate, without proof of the
signature of the Registrar or the Deputy Commissioner of Police (as
the case may be), to the certificate.
[10/2017]
(3) When in any proceedings for an offence under this Act or the
rules any question arises as to whether a vehicle does, or does not,
comply with any of the provisions of this Act or the rules relating to
the construction, equipment or conditions of use of the vehicle, or to
any identification mark or sign carried by or fixed on it or the seal of
that mark or sign, or to any marking on it, a certificate from an officer
of the Registrar’s office that he or she has examined the vehicle and
the result of the examination is admissible in evidence, and is
sufficient prima facie evidence of any fact or opinion stated therein
relating to the construction, equipment or conditions of use of the
vehicle, or to any identification mark or sign carried by or fixed on it
or the seal of that mark or sign, or to any marking on it.
[4/2006; 10/2017]
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
244
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(4) The officer may not be called for cross-examination on the
certificate unless contrary evidence is given which appears to the
court to be credible, or unless for any reason the court considers
cross-examination to be necessary or desirable in the interests of
justice.
(5) In any case in which the prosecution intends to give in evidence
any such certificate, there must be delivered to the defendant a copy
thereof at least 10 clear days before the start of the trial.
(6) When in any proceedings it is necessary to prove the weight
unladen or laden of any vehicle, or the weight of any load carried on
any vehicle, a certificate purporting to be signed by any public officer
in charge of the weighbridge or weighing machine on which such
vehicle or load was weighed, and certifying the weight of the vehicle
or load and that the weighbridge or weighing machine had been
examined within the previous 12 months and found to be accurate, is
to be accepted by any court as prima facie proof of the facts certified
in the certificate.
(7) When in any proceedings before any court it is necessary to
prove that any police officer, public officer or the Registrar or the
Deputy Commissioner of Police (as the case may be) has sent or
served, or has received or has not received, any badge, document,
licence, notice, plate or other thing, a certificate purporting to be
signed by the police officer, public officer or the Registrar or the
Deputy Commissioner of Police (as the case may be) and certifying
the sending, service, reception or non-reception (as the case may be)
of the badge, document, licence, notice, plate or thing, is admissible
as evidence, and constitutes prima facie proof of the facts certified in
the certificate, without proof of the signature of that certificate.
(8) Where in any proceedings for an offence under this Act or the
rules relating to the maximum speed at which motor vehicles may be
driven it is necessary to prove the speed at which the vehicle has been
driven, a certificate, purporting to be signed by a police officer not
below the rank of inspector who was in charge of the apparatus,
instrument or appliance used to measure, at a distance from such
vehicle, the speed at which the vehicle was driven and certifying that
the apparatus, instrument or appliance had been examined within the
Road Traffic Act 1961
245
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


previous 3 months and found to be accurate, is to be accepted by any
court as prima facie proof of the facts certified in the certificate.
[10/2017]
Court may take into account compounded offences for
purposes of sentencing
139AA. For the purpose of determining the appropriate sentence
for an offence committed by a person under this Act, a court may take
into account, as an aggravating factor, any offence that has been
compounded (on or after 1 November 2019) under this Act before the
date of the sentencing.
[19/2019; 12/2021]
Authentication of documents
139A. Where any notice, order or other document required or
authorised by this Act or the rules to be served on any person requires
authentication, the signature of the Deputy Commissioner of Police,
the Registrar, a police officer or an employee of the Authority or an
official facsimile of such signature appended to the notice, order or
document is sufficient authentication.
[10/2017]
General provisions as to rules
140.—(1) The appropriate Minister may make rules —
(a) for prescribing the language and script in which any traffic
sign, notice, record, application, return or other documents
must be written;
(b) for any purpose for which rules may be made under this
Act;
(c) for prescribing anything that may be prescribed under this
Act;
(d) generally for the purpose of carrying this Act into effect;
and
(e) for prescribing penalties (not exceeding those provided by
section 131) for any breach or failure to comply with any
such rules.
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
246
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(2) Without limiting subsection (1), the appropriate Minister may
make rules with respect to any of the following matters or for any of
the following purposes:
(a) regulating the relative position in the roadway of traffic of
differing speeds or types;
(b) prescribing the conditions subject to which and the times at
which,
articles
of
exceptionally
heavy
weight
or
exceptionally large dimensions may be carried along
roads;
(c) regulating the loads which may be carried on vehicles and
prescribing the manner in which vehicles on or passing
along a road must be loaded and the precautions to be taken
for ensuring the safety of the public in connection
therewith;
(d) prescribing the conditions subject to which, and the times
at which, articles may be loaded on to or unloaded from
vehicles or vehicles of any particular class or description,
while on a road;
(e) prescribing the precedence to be observed as between
traffic proceeding in the same direction, or in opposite
directions, or when crossing;
(f) prescribing the conditions subject to which, and the times
at which, horses, cattle, sheep and other animals may be led
or driven on or along a road;
(g) prescribing the conditions subject to which vehicles, or
vehicles of any particular class or description, may be left
unattended on a road;
(h) prohibiting animals from being left unattended or not
under due control on a road;
(i) restricting
the
use
of
vehicles
and
animals,
of
sandwichmen
and
other
persons
on
roads
for
the
purposes of advertisement of such a nature or in such a
manner as to be likely to be a source of danger or to cause
obstruction to traffic;
Road Traffic Act 1961
247
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(j) restricting and regulating the use on roads of vehicles
engaged in the erection, placing, removal, alteration or
repair of lamps, overhead cables or road or street works;
(k) restricting or prohibiting the washing of vehicles and
animals on any road;
(l) prescribing the lights to be carried on vehicles other than
motor vehicles, or on any particular class or description of
such vehicles, including the nature of the lights, the
position in which they must be fixed and the period during
which they must be lighted;
(m) prescribing and restricting the number and kind of brakes,
bells, horns or other warning instruments to be fitted to
vehicles of any particular kind or description;
(n) prescribing the number of persons who may be carried
upon pedal bicycles or pedal tricycles while on any road;
(o) prescribing the general behaviour of traffic on roads;
(p) prescribing the fees, costs and charges that may be
imposed for the purposes of this Act, where no provision
has already been made therefor in any of the foregoing
provisions.
[24/2010]
Rules to be presented to Parliament
141.—(1) All rules made under this Act must be presented to
Parliament as soon as possible after publication in the Gazette.
(2) If a resolution is passed pursuant to a motion notice of which has
been given for a sitting day not later than the first available sitting day
of Parliament next after the expiry of one month from the date when
the rules are so presented annulling the rules or any part of the rules as
from a specified date, the rules or any part of the rules (as the case
may be) thereupon become void as from that date but without
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done thereunder or to
the making of new rules.
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
248
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


Power to exempt
142. The appropriate Minister may, by order and either generally or
for any period delimited in the order and subject to any conditions
that may in the order be stated, exempt from any provision of this Act
or the rules any person or class or description of persons or any
vehicle or class or description of vehicles.
[10/2017]
Designation of Minister of State and Parliamentary Secretary
to hear appeals
142A.—(1) Where pursuant to any provision of this Act an appeal
may be made to the Minister, the appropriate Minister may designate
the following persons to hear and determine the appeal in the
Minister’s place:
(a) any Minister of State for his or her Ministry;
(b) any Parliamentary Secretary to his or her Ministry.
[24/2010]
(2) In this section, the references to a Minister of State and a
Parliamentary Secretary include, respectively, references to a Senior
Minister of State and a Senior Parliamentary Secretary.
[24/2010]
Authorisation of security officers to regulate traffic
142B.—(1) The Deputy Commissioner of Police or the Authority
may, for the purpose of assisting the Deputy Commissioner of Police
or the Authority in the regulation of traffic under any provision of this
Act,
authorise,
subject
to
any
restrictions
that
the
Deputy
Commissioner of Police or the Authority may impose, any number
of security officers that the Deputy Commissioner of Police or the
Authority thinks necessary to regulate traffic under that provision.
[24/2010]
(2) Every security officer who is authorised to regulate traffic
pursuant to subsection (1) must, when in uniform and while carrying
out his or her duties in regulating traffic under any provision of this
Act, comply with any directions that the Deputy Commissioner of
Police or the Authority (as the case may be) may give.
[24/2010]
Road Traffic Act 1961
249
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


Regulation of traffic in connection with events, etc.
143.—(1) Except as otherwise provided by rules made under
subsection (11), a person must not conduct any event on any road or
part thereof unless the person has obtained a permit from the Deputy
Commissioner of Police under this section authorising the person to
use that road or part thereof for the conduct of the event.
[24/2010]
(2) The Deputy Commissioner of Police may, on his or her own
motion, or upon granting a permit mentioned in subsection (1), issue
police orders to —
(a) close any road or part thereof to traffic to such extent, for
such period and subject to such conditions as may be
specified in the order; and
(b) prescribe —
(i) the routes, entrances and exits by which vehicles or
pedestrians are to approach or leave the venue of an
event or any place of assembly or public resort;
(ii) where and the order in which vehicles are to park at
or around the venue of an event or any place of
assembly or public resort;
(iii) one or more parking places upon any land at or
around any venue, place of assembly or public resort
that is in private ownership, if the owner or occupier
of the land consents; and
(iv) any other matters that may be necessary or incidental
to the closure of any road or part thereof under
paragraph (a).
[24/2010]
(3) An application for a permit mentioned in subsection (1) must —
(a) be made to the Deputy Commissioner of Police in such
form or manner, and not less than such period before the
date of the event, as the Deputy Commissioner of Police
may require; and
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
250
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(b) be accompanied by such fee (if any) as the Minister may
prescribe.
[24/2010]
(4) Upon receiving an application under subsection (3), the Deputy
Commissioner of Police may, after consulting the Authority —
(a) grant the permit applied for —
(i) in
the
form
and
manner
that
the
Deputy
Commissioner of Police may determine; and
(ii) subject
to
any
conditions
that
the
Deputy
Commissioner of Police and the Authority may
each think fit to impose; or
(b) refuse to grant the permit.
[24/2010]
(5) The
conditions
which
may
be
imposed
under
subsection (4)(a)(ii) include conditions requiring the person to
whom the permit is granted, at the person’s own expense —
(a) to publish, in such form and manner and for such period as
the Deputy Commissioner of Police may require, a notice
informing the general public or such persons as the Deputy
Commissioner of Police thinks fit of —
(i) the closure of any road or part thereof under
subsection (2); and
(ii) the alternative route or routes (if any) that are
available for vehicles or pedestrians;
(b) to post conspicuously at any part of any road, and for such
period as the Deputy Commissioner of Police may require,
such notices and signs as the Deputy Commissioner of
Police may specify to inform motorists and pedestrians
of —
(i) the closure of any road or part thereof under
subsection (2); and
(ii) the alternative route or routes (if any) that are
available for vehicles or pedestrians;
Road Traffic Act 1961
251
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(c) to place such signs, barriers and barricades at such places
and for such period as the Deputy Commissioner of Police
may require; and
(d) to engage a sufficient number of auxiliary police officers or
security officers to regulate traffic on any road or at or
around the venue of the event to which the permit relates in
accordance
with
any
directions
that
the
Deputy
Commissioner of Police may give.
[24/2010]
(6) Without affecting subsection (5), the Deputy Commissioner of
Police may take any measures that he or she thinks fit to implement
any police order issued under subsection (2) and may deploy police
officers, auxiliary police officers and security officers to regulate
traffic on any road or at or around any venue affected by the police
order.
[24/2010]
(7) Any person who contravenes subsection (1) shall be guilty of an
offence.
[24/2010]
(8) If the person to whom a permit is granted under this section fails
to comply with any condition imposed by the Deputy Commissioner
of
Police
or
the
Authority
(as
the
case
may
be)
under
subsection (4)(a)(ii), that person shall be guilty of an offence, and
the Deputy Commissioner of Police may revoke the permit granted to
that person.
[24/2010]
(9) If any person neglects or refuses to stop a vehicle or to make it
proceed in or keep to a particular line of traffic or neglects or refuses
himself or herself to proceed in or keep to a particular line of traffic
when directed to do so by a police officer, an auxiliary police officer
or a security officer, who is in uniform and who is engaged or
deployed to regulate traffic for the purpose of this section, that person
shall be guilty of an offence.
[24/2010]
(10) Police orders issued under this section must be published in the
Gazette and may be published in any other manner that the Deputy
Commissioner of Police thinks fit.
[24/2010]
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
252
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


(11) The Minister may make rules to prescribe the types of event to
which subsection (1) does not apply and to make provisions subject to
which any road or part thereof may be used for the conduct of any
such event.
[24/2010]
(12) In this section, “event” means —
(a) any sporting event (such as a marathon, a walkathon, a
triathlon or a cycling rally); or
(b) any procession, parade, celebration, ceremony, gathering,
activity or event,
that is to be conducted mainly or partly on a road or any part thereof,
and includes a competition or trial of speed involving the use of
vehicles mentioned in section 116.
[24/2010]
Property left in public service vehicles
144.—(1) Every driver or conductor of a public service vehicle
must immediately deposit at a place prescribed by the Authority all
money or other property left in any public service vehicle of which he
or she is in charge and not claimed by the owner thereof.
[4/2006]
(2) Any driver or conductor who neglects or omits to so deposit all
money or other property shall be guilty of an offence.
(3) The Authority may make rules —
(a) to prescribe one or more places for the purposes of
subsection (1); and
(b) for the disposal of money or other property deposited under
subsection (1).
[4/2006]
Protection from personal liability
145. No liability shall lie against any member, officer or employee
of the Authority or any other person acting under the direction of the
Authority for anything done or intended to be done with reasonable
Road Traffic Act 1961
253
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


care and in good faith in the execution or purported execution of this
Act.
[38/2018]
FIRST SCHEDULE
SPECIFIED ACTS
PART 1
Section 19(3), (4) and (7)
The Parking Places Act 1974.
PART 2
Section 35(13) and (14), 42A(1) and
45(9)
The Parking Places Act 1974.
SECOND SCHEDULE
Sections 65A(1), 100 and 111A(3)
CLASSIFICATION AND DESCRIPTIONS OF
PUBLIC SERVICE VEHICLES
1. The classification and descriptions of public service vehicles for the purpose
of this Act and the rules are as follows:
First column
Second column
Class of Public Service Vehicles
Description
(a) Excursion buses
Buses which are used on non-scheduled
transport services and in which passengers
are charged separate and distinct fares.
(b) Omnibuses
Buses which are used on scheduled transport
services and in which passengers are charged
separate and distinct fares.
(c) Private buses
Buses owned by any person and used
exclusively
for
the
conveyance
of
the
employees of the owner of the buses or for
the conveyance of persons in connection with
the owner’s business, any charges made for
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
254
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


SECOND SCHEDULE — continued
the conveyance of those persons being such
that no profit results therefrom.
(d) Private hire buses
Buses which do not ply for hire on any road
but are hired under a contract, express or
implied, for the use of each such vehicle as a
whole.
(e) Private hire cars
Motor cars that do not ply for hire on any
road but are hired, or made available for hire,
under a contract (express or implied) for use
as a whole —
(i) with a driver for the purpose of
conveying one or more passengers
in that car; or
(ii) by a hirer, or any other person
authorised by the hirer in the
contract, to drive the motor car
personally.
(f) School buses
Buses used for carrying children to and from
schools and hired under a contract, express or
implied, at a fixed or agreed rate or sum.
(g) Taxis
Motor cars having a seating capacity for not
more than 8 persons (including the driver),
which ply for hire on any road and are hired
under a contract, express or implied, for the
use of each such vehicle as a whole or for the
use of 2 or more persons who pay separate
fares.
(h) Trishaws
Three-wheeled pedal cycles constructed or
adapted for the carriage of passengers.
[S 678/2023 wef 30/10/2023]
2. In this Schedule —
“bus” means a public service vehicle of a design approved by the Registrar
and having a seating capacity for not less than 9 persons (excluding the
driver);
“non-scheduled
transport
services”
means,
in
respect
of
a
single
“non‑scheduled transport service”, a transport service that is provided
by transport operators to carry passengers with a passenger list for hire,
Road Traffic Act 1961
255
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


SECOND SCHEDULE — continued
reward or any other form of consideration according to a vehicle itinerary,
and which does not qualify as a scheduled transport service;
“scheduled transport services” means, in respect of a single “scheduled
transport service”, a transport service over a specified route, according to
a fixed route table with predetermined stopping places and for which set
fares are charged, which is accessible to everyone either on a first‑come,
first‑served basis, or with prior booking.
[S 678/2023 wef 30/10/2023]
THIRD SCHEDULE
Sections 81(1B), 82 and 83(6)
SPECIFIED OFFENCES
PART 1
1. Sections 63(4), 65, 73(2), 74(3), 113(6), 120(4), 122 and 127(5).
2. Section 121(6) for contravening any of the following provisions of the Road
Traffic (Pedestrian Crossings) Rules:
Rules 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10(1) and 11(1).
3. Section 131 for acting in contravention of any of the following provisions of
the Road Traffic Rules:
Rules 2(1), 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 11, 12(2), 13(1) and (2)(a) and (b), 14, 17, 18,
19, 23, 28(1), 29, 30, 33(1) and (2) and 35(1).
4. Section 131 for acting in contravention of any of the following provisions of
the Road Traffic (Expressway Traffic) Rules:
Rules 4, 5, 6(1), 7, 8, 9, 12(1), 13(d) to (h) and 14(1)(a) and (b).
5. Rule 7 of the Road Traffic (Motor Vehicles, Speed Limiters) Rules.
6. Rule 10 of the Road Traffic (Motor Vehicles, Wearing of Seat Belts)
Rules 2011 for contravening rule 4 or 5 of those Rules.
PART 2
1. Sections 11A(3) and (4), 34E(4) and 122.
2. Section 120(4) (for failing to comply with section 120(3)) read with rule 8 of
the Road Traffic (Traffic Signs) Rules.
3. Section 131 for acting in contravention of rule 26A of the Road Traffic
Rules.
Road Traffic Act 1961
2020 Ed.
256
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


THIRD SCHEDULE — continued
4. Rules 5(1) and 6(1) of the Road Traffic (Collection of Toll at Woodlands and
Tuas Checkpoints) Rules.
5. Rules 4(2), 7(1) and (5), 8(1) and (2) and 13(1) of the Road Traffic
(Electronic Road Pricing System) Rules 2015.
6. Any offence of parking a motor vehicle or of causing or permitting a motor
vehicle to stand, wait or be parked in contravention of any rules made under
this Act.
[28/2014; 10/2017]
Road Traffic Act 1961
257
2020 Ed.
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


LEGISLATIVE HISTORY
ROAD TRAFFIC ACT 1961
This Legislative History is a service provided by the Law Revision Commission
on a best-efforts basis. It is not part of the Act.
PICTORIAL OVERVIEW OF PREDECESSOR ACTS
LEGISLATIVE HISTORY DETAILS
PART 1
ROAD TRAFFIC (THIRD-PARTY INSURANCE)
ORDINANCE, 1938
(ORDINANCE 8 OF 1938)
1. Ordinance 8 of 1938 — Road Traffic (Third-party Insurance) Ordinance,
1938
Bill
:
G.N. No. 1096/1938
First Reading
:
25 April 1938
Second Reading
:
13 June 1938
Notice of Amendments
:
13 June 1938
Third Reading
:
13 June 1938
Commencement
:
1 July 1938
2. Ordinance 28 of 1939 — Road Traffic (Third-party Insurance)
(Amendment) Ordinance, 1939
Bill
:
G.N. No. 1357/1939
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


First Reading
:
12 June 1939
Second Reading
:
28 August 1939
Notice of Amendments
:
28 August 1939
Third Reading
:
28 August 1939
Commencement
:
16 September 1939
PART 2
TRACTION ENGINES AND MOTOR CARS ORDINANCE
(CHAPTER 214, 1936 REVISED EDITION)
3. Ordinance VIII of 1871 — Locomotives Ordinance, 1871
Bill
:
S.S.G.G. No. 29/1871
First Reading
:
6 July 1871
Second Reading
:
10 July 1871
Third Reading
:
3 November 1871
Commencement
:
6 November 1871
4. Ordinance XIII of 1905 — Locomotives Ordinance 1871 Amendment
Ordinance 1905
Bill
:
G.N. No. 486/1905
First Reading
:
14 April 1905
Second Reading
:
5 May 1905
Notice of Amendments
:
9 June 1905
Third Reading
:
16 June 1905
Commencement
:
16 June 1905
5. Ordinance XIX of 1911 — The Traction Engines and Motor Cars
Ordinance 1911
Bill
:
G.N. No. 1182/1911
First Reading
:
29 September 1911
Second Reading
:
13 October 1911
Notice of Amendments
:
10 November 1911
Third Reading
:
10 November 1911
Commencement
:
1 June 1913
ii
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


6. Ordinance II of 1913 — The Traction Engines and Motor Cars
Ordinance 1911 Amendment Ordinance 1913
Bill
:
G.N. No. 208/1913
First Reading
:
28 February 1913
Second Reading
:
7 March 1913
Third Reading
:
4 April 1913
Commencement
:
1 June 1913
7. Ordinance VI of 1914 — The Traction Engines and Motor Cars
(Amendment) Ordinance 1914
Bill
:
G.N. No. 1523/1913
First Reading
:
30 January 1914
Second Reading
:
13 February 1914
Notice of Amendments
:
27 February 1914
Third Reading
:
13 March 1914
Commencement
:
25 March 1914
8. Ordinance 18 of 1916 — Traction Engines and Motor Cars (Amendment)
Ordinance 1916
Bill
:
G.N. No. 728/1916
First Reading
:
16 June 1916
Second Reading
:
29 September 1916
Third Reading
:
3 November 1916
Commencement
:
7 November 1916
9. 1920 Revised Edition — Ordinance No. 129 (Traction Engines and Motor
Cars)
Operation
:
28 November 1921
10. Ordinance 26 of 1921 — Statute Laws (Revised Edition) Operation
Ordinance, 1921
(Amendments made by section 3(a) read with Schedule B to the above
Ordinance)
Bill
:
G.N. No. 1854/1921
First and Second Readings
:
22 November 1921
Notice of Amendments
:
22 November 1921
iii
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


Third Reading
:
22 November 1921
Commencement
:
28 November 1921 (section 3(a) read
with Schedule B)
11. Ordinance 3 of 1924 — Traction Engines and Motor Cars Amendment
Ordinance, 1924
Bill
:
G.N. No. 1866/1923
First Reading
:
17 December 1923
Second Reading
:
18 February 1924
Notice of Amendments
:
18 February 1924
Third Reading
:
14 April 1924
Commencement
:
8 May 1924
12. 1926 Revised Edition — Ordinance No. 129 (Traction Engines and Motor
Cars)
Operation
:
1 August 1926
13. Ordinance 21 of 1928 — Traction Engines and Motor Cars (Amendment)
Ordinance, 1928
Bill
:
G.N. No. 1581/1928
First Reading
:
27 August 1928
Second Reading
:
8 October 1928
Notice of Amendments
:
8 October 1928
Third Reading
:
29 October 1928
Commencement
:
1 January 1929
14. 1936 Revised Edition — Traction Engines and Motor Cars Ordinance
(Chapter 214)
Operation
:
1 September 1936
PART 3
TRAFFIC REGULATION ORDINANCE
(CHAPTER 213, 1936 REVISED EDITION)
15. Ordinance 19 of 1933 — Traffic Regulation Ordinance, 1933
Bill
:
G.N. No. 105/1933
First Reading
:
16 January 1933
Second Reading
:
6 March 1933
iv
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


Select Committee Report
:
Council Paper No. 25 of 1933
Notice of Amendments
:
31 July 1933
Third Reading
:
31 July 1933
Commencement
:
27 September 1933
16. 1936 Revised Edition — Traffic Regulation Ordinance (Chapter 213)
Operation
:
1 September 1936
PART 4
ROAD TRAFFIC ORDINANCE
(CHAPTER 227, 1955 REVISED EDITION)
17. Ordinance 17 of 1941 — Road Traffic Ordinance, 1941
Bill
:
G.N. No. 3464/1939
First Reading
:
22 April 1940
Second Reading
:
14 October 1940
Select Committee Report
:
Council Paper No. 91 of 1940
Notice of Amendments
:
20 January 1941
Third Reading
:
28 April 1941
Commencement
:
1 August 1941 (Part II)
2 August 1941 (sections 31 and 81(1)
and (2))
15 August 1941 (section 88)
1 October 1946 (Part II)
18 October 1946 (section 80(1)(b) and
(d), (2)(a), (b), (c) and (d), (4) and (5))
1 January 1949 (Parts I, III and IV)
1 February 1949 (section 2)
18. Ordinance 36 of 1948 — Road Traffic (Amendment) Ordinance, 1948
Bill
:
G.N. No. S 388/1948
First Reading
:
9 November 1948
Second and Third Readings
:
21 December 1948
Commencement
:
1 January 1949
v
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


19. Ordinance 10 of 1950 — Departmental Titles (Alteration) Ordinance,
1950
(Amendments made by section 2 read with the Schedule to the above
Ordinance)
Bill
:
G.N. No. S 48/1950
First Reading
:
22 February 1950
Second Reading
:
21 March 1950
Notice of Amendments
:
21 March 1950
Third Reading
:
21 March 1950
Commencement
:
28 March 1950 (section 2 read with
the Schedule)
20. Ordinance 30 of 1951 — Road Traffic (Amendment) Ordinance, 1951
Bill
:
G.N. No. S 258/1951
First Reading
:
17 July 1951
Second and Third Readings
:
21 August 1951
Commencement
:
6 September 1951
21. Ordinance 39 of 1953 — Road Traffic (Amendment) Ordinance, 1953
Bill
:
27/1953
First Reading
:
24 November 1953
Second Reading
:
15 December 1953
Notice of Amendments
:
15 December 1953
Third Reading
:
15 December 1953
Commencement
:
23 December 1953
22. Ordinance 8 of 1955 — Revised Edition of the Laws (Miscellaneous
Amendments) Ordinance, 1955
(Amendments made by section 2 read with item 36 of the Schedule to the
above Ordinance)
Bill
:
45/1954
First Reading
:
14 December 1954
Second and Third Readings
:
28 January 1955
Commencement
:
4 February 1955 (section 2 read with
item 36 of the Schedule)
vi
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


23. Ordinance 37 of 1952 — Law Revision (Penalties Amendment)
Ordinance, 1952
(Amendments made by section 2 read with item 105 of the Schedule to the
above Ordinance)
Bill
:
32/1952
First Reading
:
16 September 1952
Second and Third Readings
:
14 October 1952
Commencement
:
30 April 1955 (section 2 read with
item 105 of the Schedule)
24. G.N. No. S 265/1955 — Singapore Colony Order in Council, 1955
(Consequential Provisions) (Miscellaneous)
Order, 1955
Commencement
:
17 September 1955
25. Ordinance 35 of 1955 — Road Traffic (Amendment) Ordinance, 1955
Bill
:
23/1955
First Reading
:
12 October 1955
Second and Third Readings
:
7 November 1955
Commencement
:
25 November 1955
26. 1955 Revised Edition — Road Traffic Ordinance (Chapter 227)
Operation
:
1 July 1956
27. Ordinance 17 of 1957 — Road Traffic (Amendment) Ordinance, 1957
Bill
:
100/1957
First Reading
:
24 April 1957
Second and Third Readings
:
22 May 1957
Commencement
:
12 September 1957
28. Ordinance 31 of 1958 — Legislative Assembly (Presentation of
Subsidiary Legislation) Ordinance, 1958
(Amendments made by section 2 read with the Schedule to the above
Ordinance)
Bill
:
158/1958
First Reading
:
16 July 1958
Second Reading
:
13 August 1958
Notice of Amendments
:
10 September 1958
vii
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


Third Reading
:
10 September 1958
Commencement
:
25 September 1958 (section 2 read
with the Schedule)
29. Ordinance 38 of 1959 — Laws of Singapore (Miscellaneous
Amendments) Ordinance, 1959
(Amendments made by section 15 of the above Ordinance)
Bill
:
215/1959
First Reading
:
3 March 1959
Second Reading
:
18 March 1959
Notice of Amendments
:
18 March 1959
Third Reading
:
18 March 1959
Commencement
:
3 June 1959 (section 15)
30. G.N. No. S (N.S.) 179/1959 — Singapore Constitution (Modification of
Laws) (No. 5) Order, 1959
Commencement
:
20 November 1959
31. Ordinance 1 of 1960 — Motor Vehicles (Third-party Risks and
Compensation) Ordinance, 1960
(Amendments made by section 22 of the above Ordinance)
Bill
:
35/1959
First Reading
:
11 November 1959
Second Reading
:
13 January 1960
Notice of Amendments
:
13 January 1960
Third Reading
:
13 January 1960
Commencement
:
5 February 1960 (section 22)
PART 5
ROAD TRAFFIC ACT 1961
(2020 REVISED EDITION)
32. Ordinance 26 of 1961 — Road Traffic Ordinance, 1961
Bill
:
143/1961
First Reading
:
24 May 1961
Second Reading
:
14 June 1961
Notice of Amendments
:
14 June 1961
viii
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


Third Reading
:
14 June 1961
Commencement
:
1 January 1963 (sections 13 to 21)
23 November 1963 (sections 1 to 12,
22 to 78 and 80 to 90)
8 August 1985 (section 91,
renumbered as section 147 in the 1985
Reprint of the Road Traffic Act)
33. Ordinance 17 of 1963 — Parking Places Ordinance, 1963
(Amendments made by section 11 of the above Ordinance)
Bill
:
207/1963
First Reading
:
11 June 1963
Second and Third Readings
:
24 July 1963
Commencement
:
1 September 1963 (section 11)
34. Act 22 of 1966 — Road Traffic (Amendment) Act, 1966
Bill
:
11/1966
First Reading
:
23 February 1966
Second Reading
:
22 June 1966
Notice of Amendments
:
22 June 1966
Third Reading
:
22 June 1966
Commencement
:
8 July 1966
35. Act 36 of 1966 — Road Traffic (Amendment No. 2) Act, 1966
Bill
:
35/1966
First Reading
:
17 August 1966
Second and Third Readings
:
26 August 1966
Commencement
:
9 September 1966
36. Act 42 of 1967 — Companies Act, 1967
(Amendments made by section 3 read with Part B of the First Schedule to the
above Act)
Bill
:
58/1966
First Reading
:
5 December 1966
Second Reading
:
21 December 1966
Select Committee Report
:
Parl. 11 of 1967
Third Reading
:
21 December 1967
ix
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


Commencement
:
29 December 1967 (section 3 read
with Part B of the First Schedule)
37. Act 28 of 1968 — Road Traffic (Amendment) Act, 1968
Bill
:
35/1968
First Reading
:
31 July 1968
Second and Third Readings
:
3 December 1968
Commencement
:
1 February 1969 (except section 5)
1 January 1970 (section 5)
38. Act 27 of 1970 — Road Traffic (Amendment) Act, 1970
Bill
:
21/1970
First Reading
:
21 May 1970
Second and Third Readings
:
26 June 1970
Commencement
:
1 August 1970 (except section 4)
39. Act 6 of 1971 — Road Traffic (Amendment) Act, 1971
Bill
:
58/1970
First Reading
:
30 December 1970
Second and Third Readings
:
11 January 1971
Commencement
:
1 March 1971
40. 1970 Revised Edition — Road Traffic Act (Chapter 92)
Operation
:
1 April 1971
41. Act 21 of 1973 — Statutes of the Republic of Singapore (Miscellaneous
Amendments) Act, 1973
(Amendments made by section 2 read with the Schedule to the above Act)
Bill
:
16/1973
First Reading
:
7 March 1973
Second and Third Readings
:
20 March 1973
Commencement
:
6 April 1973 (section 2 read with the
Schedule)
42. Act 4 of 1973 — Road Traffic (Amendment) Act, 1973
Bill
:
44/1972
First Reading
:
22 November 1972
Second and Third Readings
:
16 February 1973
x
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


Commencement
:
1 May 1973
43. 1973 Reprint — Road Traffic Act (Chapter 92)
Reprint
:
5 May 1973
44. Act 19 of 1974 — Road Traffic (Amendment) Act, 1974
Bill
:
15/1974
First Reading
:
28 August 1974
Second Reading
:
23 October 1974
Notice of Amendments
:
23 October 1974
Third Reading
:
23 October 1974
Commencement
:
1 March 1975
45. Act 5 of 1976 — Road Traffic (Amendment) Act, 1976
Bill
:
1/1976
First Reading
:
1 March 1976
Second and Third Readings
:
25 March 1976
Commencement
:
1 August 1976
46. Act 10 of 1977 — Road Traffic (Amendment) Act, 1977
Bill
:
12/1977
First Reading
:
2 September 1977
Second and Third Readings
:
9 November 1977
Commencement
:
23 December 1977
47. Act 29 of 1979 — Road Traffic (Amendment) Act, 1979
Bill
:
30/1979
First Reading
:
7 September 1979
Second and Third Readings
:
21 September 1979
Commencement
:
4 January 1980
48. Act 19 of 1980 — Road Traffic (Amendment) Act, 1980
Bill
:
8/1980
First Reading
:
26 February 1980
Second and Third Readings
:
17 March 1980
Commencement
:
1 June 1980
xi
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


49. Act 21 of 1981 — Road Traffic (Amendment) Act, 1981
Bill
:
20/1981
First Reading
:
21 July 1981
Second and Third Readings
:
14 August 1981
Commencement
:
4 September 1981
50. Act 26 of 1981 — Road Traffic (Amendment No. 2) Act, 1981
Bill
:
26/1981
First Reading
:
23 October 1981
Second and Third Readings
:
22 December 1981
Commencement
:
29 January 1982
51. Act 7 of 1982 — Road Traffic (Amendment) Act, 1982
Bill
:
33/1981
First Reading
:
22 December 1981
Second and Third Readings
:
3 March 1982
Commencement
:
16 April 1982
52. Act 10 of 1984 — Road Traffic (Amendment) Act 1984
Bill
:
3/1984
First Reading
:
17 January 1984
Second and Third Readings
:
2 March 1984
Commencement
:
27 April 1984
53. Act 28 of 1984 — Road Traffic (Amendment No. 2) Act 1984
Bill
:
14/1984
First Reading
:
29 June 1984
Second and Third Readings
:
24 August 1984
Commencement
:
1 October 1984
54. 1985 Reprint — Road Traffic Act (Chapter 92)
Reprint
:
25 April 1985
55. Act 9 of 1985 — Road Traffic (Amendment) Act 1985
Bill
:
8/1985
First Reading
:
23 July 1985
xii
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


Second Reading
:
30 August 1985
Notice of Amendments
:
30 August 1985
Third Reading
:
30 August 1985
Commencement
:
1 October 1985
56. 1985 Revised Edition — Road Traffic Act (Chapter 276)
Operation
:
30 March 1987
57. Act 18 of 1987 — Public Transport Council Act 1987
(Amendments made by section 24 of the above Act)
Bill
:
9/1987
First Reading
:
20 May 1987
Second and Third Readings
:
28 July 1987
Commencement
:
14 August 1987 (section 24)
58. Act 20 of 1989 — Road Traffic (Amendment) Act 1989
Bill
:
21/1989
First Reading
:
13 March 1989
Second and Third Readings
:
7 April 1989
Commencement
:
17 April 1989
59. Act 7 of 1990 — Road Traffic (Amendment) Act 1990
Bill
:
5/1990
First Reading
:
26 February 1990
Second and Third Readings
:
28 March 1990
Commencement
:
2 April 1990
60. Act 16 of 1991 — Road Traffic (Amendment) Act 1991
Bill
:
7/1991
First Reading
:
26 February 1991
Second and Third Readings
:
22 March 1991
Commencement
:
1 April 1991
61. Act 3 of 1993 — Road Traffic (Amendment) Act 1993
Bill
:
37/1992
First Reading
:
16 November 1992
xiii
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


Second and Third Readings
:
18 January 1993
Commencement
:
15 April 1993
62. Act 33 of 1993 — Road Traffic (Amendment No. 2) Act 1993
Bill
:
29/1993
First Reading
:
30 August 1993
Second and Third Readings
:
12 October 1993
Commencement
:
1 July 1994
63. 1994 Revised Edition — Road Traffic Act (Chapter 276)
Operation
:
15 July 1994
64. Act 8 of 1994 — Road Traffic (Amendment) Act 1994
Bill
:
8/1994
First Reading
:
23 May 1994
Second and Third Readings
:
25 July 1994
Commencement
:
28 October 1994
65. Act 28 of 1995 — Land Transport Authority of Singapore Act 1995
(Amendments made by section 45 read with item 3 of the Sixth Schedule to
the above Act)
Bill
:
24/1995
First Reading
:
7 July 1995
Second and Third Readings
:
7 August 1995
Commencement
:
1 September 1995 (section 45 read
with item 3 of the Sixth Schedule)
66. Act 11 of 1996 — Road Traffic (Amendment) Act 1996
Bill
:
3/1996
First Reading
:
18 January 1996
Second and Third Readings
:
27 February 1996
Commencement
:
10 May 1996
67. Act 7 of 1997 — Statutes (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1997
(Amendments made by section 8 read with item (3) of the Third Schedule to
the above Act)
Bill
:
6/1997
First Reading
:
11 July 1997
xiv
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


Second and Third Readings
:
25 August 1997
Commencement
:
1 October 1997 (section 8 read with
item (3) of the Third Schedule)
68. 1997 Revised Edition — Road Traffic Act (Chapter 276)
Operation
:
20 December 1997
69. Act 5 of 1998 — Road Traffic (Amendment) Act 1998
Bill
:
8/1998
First Reading
:
14 January 1998
Second and Third Readings
:
19 February 1998
Commencement
:
1 April 1998
70. Act 1 of 1999 — Road Traffic (Amendment) Act 1999
Bill
:
50/1998
First Reading
:
23 November 1998
Second and Third Readings
:
20 January 1999
Commencement
:
1 March 1999
71. Act 45 of 1999 — Road Traffic (Amendment) Act 1999
Bill
:
35/1999
First Reading
:
11 October 1999
Second and Third Readings
:
24 November 1999
Commencement
:
21 December 1999
72. Act 28 of 2001 — Road Traffic (Amendment) Act 2001
Bill
:
27/2001
First Reading
:
11 July 2001
Second and Third Readings
:
25 July 2001
Commencement
:
10 September 2001
73. Act 21 of 2002 — Road Traffic (Amendment) Act 2002
Bill
:
24/2002
First Reading
:
8 July 2002
Second and Third Readings
:
23 July 2002
Commencement
:
1 September 2002 (except sections 2,
3 and 9)
xv
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


16 December 2002 (sections 2, 3
and 9)
74. Act 1 of 2003 — Road Traffic (Amendment) Act 2003
Bill
:
45/2002
First Reading
:
25 November 2002
Second and Third Readings
:
25 January 2003
Commencement
:
17 March 2003
75. 2004 Revised Edition — Road Traffic Act (Chapter 276)
Operation
:
31 December 2004
76. G.N. No. S 304/2005 — Revised Edition of the Laws (Road Traffic Act)
(Rectification) Order 2005
Operation
:
31 December 2004
77. Act 4 of 2006 — Road Traffic (Amendment) Act 2006
Bill
:
42/2005
First Reading
:
21 November 2005
Second and Third Readings
:
17 January 2006
Commencement
:
27 February 2006 (except sections 17,
22 and 23)
1 April 2006 (sections 17, 22 and 23)
78. Act 1 of 2006 — Payment Systems (Oversight) Act 2006
(Amendments made by section 60 of the above Act)
Bill
:
39/2005
First Reading
:
21 November 2005
Second and Third Readings
:
16 January 2006
Commencement
:
23 June 2006 (section 60)
79. Act 2 of 2007 — Statutes (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 2007
(Amendments made by section 15 of the above Act)
Bill
:
14/2006
First Reading
:
8 November 2006
Second and Third Readings
:
22 January 2007
Commencement
:
1 March 2007 (section 15)
xvi
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


80. Act 30 of 2007 — Employment of Foreign Workers (Amendment) Act
2007
(Amendments made by section 28 read with item (5) of the Schedule to the
above Act)
Bill
:
17/2007
First Reading
:
9 April 2007
Second and Third Readings
:
22 May 2007
Commencement
:
1 July 2007 (section 28 read with
item (5) of the Schedule)
81. Act 51 of 2007 — Penal Code (Amendment) Act 2007
(Amendments made by section 107 read with item (5) of the Third Schedule
to the above Act)
Bill
:
38/2007
First Reading
:
17 September 2007
Second and Third Readings
:
23 October 2007
Commencement
:
1 February 2008 (section 107 read
with item (5) of the Third Schedule)
82. Act 24 of 2010 — Road Traffic (Amendment) Act 2010
Bill
:
18/2010
First Reading
:
16 August 2010
Second and Third Readings
:
15 September 2010
Commencement
:
1 November 2010
83. Act 15 of 2010 — Criminal Procedure Code 2010
(Amendments made by section 430 read with item 90 of the Sixth Schedule to
the above Act)
Bill
:
11/2010
First Reading
:
26 April 2010
Second Reading
:
18 May 2010
Third Reading
:
19 May 2010
Commencement
:
2 January 2011 (section 430 read with
item 90 of the Sixth Schedule)
84. Act 25 of 2011 — Customs (Amendment) Act 2011
(Amendments made by section 20 of the above Act)
Bill
:
19/2011
xvii
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


First Reading
:
18 October 2011
Second and Third Readings
:
22 November 2011
Commencement
:
1 January 2012 (section 20)
85. Act 7 of 2012 — Consumer Protection (Fair Trading) (Amendment) Act
2012
(Amendments made by section 10 read with the Second Schedule to the above
Act)
Bill
:
3/2012
First Reading
:
14 February 2012
Second and Third Readings
:
9 March 2012
Commencement
:
1 September 2012 (section 10 read
with the Second Schedule)
86. Act 37 of 2012 — Road Traffic (Amendment) Act 2012
Bill
:
35/2012
First Reading
:
15 October 2012
Second and Third Readings
:
16 November 2012
Commencement
:
1 January 2013 (except sections 11 to
21)
1 June 2013 (sections 11 to 21)
87. Act 23 of 2013 — Road Traffic (Amendment) Act 2013
Bill
:
19/2013
First Reading
:
21 October 2013
Second and Third Readings
:
11 November 2013
Commencement
:
1 January 2014
88. Act 4 of 2014 — Statutes (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 2014
(Amendments made by section 9 of the above Act)
Bill
:
25/2013
First Reading
:
11 November 2013
Second and Third Readings
:
21 January 2014
Commencement
:
10 March 2014 (section 9)
89. Act 28 of 2014 — Road Traffic (Amendment) Act 2014
Bill
:
22/2014
xviii
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


First Reading
:
4 August 2014
Second and Third Readings
:
8 September 2014
Commencement
:
1 February 2015 (except sections 4, 8,
9 and 27(b) and (c))
1 November 2015 (sections 4 and 9)
1 January 2016 (sections 8 and 27(b)
and (c))
90. Act 17 of 2015 — Third-Party Taxi Booking Service Providers Act 2015
(Amendments made by section 34 of the above Act)
Bill
:
14/2015
First Reading
:
13 April 2015
Second and Third Readings
:
11 May 2015
Commencement
:
1 September 2015 (section 34)
91. Act 30 of 2015 — Bus Services Industry Act 2015
(Amendments made by section 54 of the above Act)
Bill
:
26/2015
First Reading
:
13 July 2015
Second and Third Readings
:
18 August 2015
Commencement
:
22 January 2016 (section 54)
92. Act 31 of 2015 — Public Transport Council (Amendment) Act 2015
(Amendments made by section 26 of the above Act)
Bill
:
27/2015
First Reading
:
13 July 2015
Second and Third Readings
:
18 August 2015
Commencement
:
22 January 2016 (section 26)
93. Act 10 of 2017 — Road Traffic (Amendment) Act 2017
Bill
:
5/2017
First Reading
:
10 January 2017
Second and Third Readings
:
7 February 2017
Commencement
:
22 January 2016 (section 2)
20 June 2017 (except sections 2, 3(a),
(f), (g), (h) and (i), 4, 5(a), 6, 10, 13,
15, 18, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 40, 41
and 46(1))
xix
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


1 July 2017 (sections 31, 32, 33, 34
and 35)
20 July 2017 (sections 13 and 18)
14 August 2017 (section 3(f), (h) and
(i))
24 August 2017 (sections 3(a) and (g),
5(a), 6 and 15)
1 May 2018 (section 30)
94. Act 3 of 2017 — Active Mobility Act 2017
(Amendments made by section 70 of the above Act)
Bill
:
40/2016
First Reading
:
9 November 2016
Second Reading
:
10 January 2017
Notice of Amendments
:
10 January 2017
Third Reading
:
10 January 2017
Commencement
:
20 June 2017 (section 70(1)(d))
14 August 2017 (section 70(1)(a) and
(c))
15 January 2018 (section 70(1)(b) and
(2))
1 May 2018 (section 70(3))
95. G.N. No. S 311/2017 — Road Traffic Act (Amendment of Second
Schedule) Order 2017
Commencement
:
20 June 2017
96. Act 24 of 2017 — Energy Conservation (Amendment) Act 2017
(Amendments made by section 30 of the above Act)
Bill
:
17/2017
First Reading
:
9 March 2017
Second and Third Readings
:
3 April 2017
Commencement
:
1 January 2018 (section 30)
97. Act 38 of 2018 — Land Transport (Enforcement Measures) Act 2018
(Amendments made by Part 6 of the above Act)
Bill
:
29/2018
First Reading
:
6 August 2018
Second and Third Readings
:
10 September 2018
xx
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


Commencement
:
1 May 2018 (section 67)
2 January 2019 (Part 6 except
sections 51, 59, 60, 62, 67, 68 and 69)
3 June 2019 (sections 51, 59, 60, 62,
68 and 69)
98. Act 9 of 2018 — Cybersecurity Act 2018
(Amendments made by section 50(11) of the above Act)
Bill
:
2/2018
First Reading
:
8 January 2018
Second and Third Readings
:
5 February 2018
Commencement
:
31 August 2018 (section 50(11))
99. Act 29 of 2018 — Customs (Amendment) Act 2018
(Amendments made by section 17 of the above Act)
Bill
:
26/2018
First Reading
:
17 May 2018
Second and Third Readings
:
9 July 2018
Commencement
:
18 February 2019 (section 17)
100. Act 19 of 2019 — Road Traffic (Amendment) Act 2019
Bill
:
13/2019
First Reading
:
6 May 2019
Second Reading
:
8 July 2019
Notice of Amendments
:
8 July 2019
Third Reading
:
8 July 2019
Commencement
:
1 November 2019 (sections 2, 3, 7, 11,
12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20 and
21)
29 June 2021 (sections 4, 5, 6, 9 and
10)
101. Act 15 of 2019 — Criminal Law Reform Act 2019
(Amendments made by section 186 of the above Act)
Bill
:
6/2019
First Reading
:
11 February 2019
Second Reading
:
6 May 2019
Notice of Amendments
:
6 May 2019
xxi
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


Third Reading
:
6 May 2019
Commencement
:
1 January 2020 (section 186)
102. Act 9 of 2020 — Active Mobility (Amendment) Act 2020
(Amendments made by section 28 of the above Act)
Bill
:
3/2020
First Reading
:
6 January 2020
Second and Third Readings
:
4 February 2020
Commencement
:
3 April 2020 (section 28(1) and (2))
1 August 2020 (section 28(3))
103. Act 20 of 2019 — Point-to-Point Passenger Transport Industry Act 2019
(Amendments made by Division 5 of the above Act)
Bill
:
14/2019
First Reading
:
8 July 2019
Second and Third Readings
:
6 August 2019
Commencement
:
29 May 2020 (sections 62(a), (b), (f)
and (g), 63(2) and 66)
30 October 2020 (sections 61, 62(c),
(d) and (e), 63(1) and (3), 64 and 65)
104. Act 26 of 2020 — Active Mobility (Amendment No. 2) Act 2020
(Amendments made by section 7 of the above Act)
Bill
:
22/2020
First Reading
:
4 May 2020
Second and Third Readings
:
26 May 2020
Commencement
:
28 August 2020 (section 7)
105. Act 25 of 2020 — Small Motorised Vehicles (Safety) Act 2020
(Amendments made by section 31 of the above Act)
Bill
:
21/2020
First Reading
:
4 May 2020
Second and Third Readings
:
26 May 2020
Commencement
:
1 April 2021 (section 31)
106. 2020 Revised Edition — Road Traffic Act 1961
Operation
:
31 December 2021
xxii
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


107. Act 12 of 2021 — Road Traffic (Amendment) Act 2021
Bill
:
8/2021
First Reading
:
5 April 2021
Second and Third Readings
:
11 May 2021
Commencement
:
30 June 2021 (except sections 3, 4, 5,
6, 7, 8, 24, 31 and 33(1), (2) and (3))
30 September 2021 (sections 3, 4, 5,
24 and 33(1) and (2))
3 January 2022 (sections 6, 7, 8 and
33(3))
108. Act 25 of 2021 — Courts (Civil and Criminal Justice) Reform Act 2021
(Amendments made by Part 7 of the above Act)
Bill
:
18/2021
First Reading
:
26 July 2021
Second and Third Readings
:
14 September 2021
Commencement
:
1 April 2022
109. Act 31 of 2022 — Statutes (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 2022
Bill
:
24/2022
First Reading
:
12 September 2022
Second and Third Readings
:
3 October 2022
Commencement
:
1 November 2022 (section 20(8))
110. G.N. No. S 678/2023 — Road Traffic Act 1961 (Amendment of Second
Schedule) Order 2023
Date of commencement
:
30 October 2023
111. Act 4 of 2008 — Statutes (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 2008
Bill
:
49/2007
First Reading
:
12 November 2007
Second and Third Readings
:
22 January 2008
Commencement
:
1 April 2024
112. Act 12 of 2023 — Misuse of Drugs (Amendment) Act 2023
(Amendments made by the above Act)
Bill
:
9/2023
First Reading
:
24 February 2023
xxiii
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


Second and Third Readings
:
21 March 2023
Commencement
:
1 June 2024
Abbreviations
.
(updated on 29 August 2022)
G.N.
Gazette Notification
G.N. Sp.
Gazette Notification (Special Supplement)
L.A.
Legislative Assembly
L.N.
Legal Notification (Federal/Malaysian)
M.
Malaya/Malaysia
(including
Federated
Malay
States,
Malayan Union, Federation of Malaya and Federation of
Malaysia)
Parl.
Parliament
S
Subsidiary Legislation
S.I.
Statutory Instrument (United Kingdom)
S (N.S.)
Subsidiary Legislation (New Series)
S.S.G.G.
Straits Settlements Government Gazette
S.S.G.G. (E)
Straits Settlements Government Gazette (Extraordinary)
xxiv
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


COMPARATIVE TABLE
ROAD TRAFFIC ACT 1961
This Act has undergone renumbering in the 2020 Revised Edition. This
Comparative Table is provided to help readers locate the corresponding provisions
in the last Revised Edition.
2020 Ed.
2004 Ed.
—
34D—(3) [Deleted by Act 1 of 2006]
—
37—(9) [Deleted by Act 28 of 2014]
—
110—(6) [Deleted by Act 10 of 2017]
—
PART VA
—
111A [Repealed by Act 20 of 2019]
—
111B [Repealed by Act 20 of 2019]
—
111C [Repealed by Act 20 of 2019]
—
111D [Repealed by Act 20 of 2019]
—
111E [Repealed by Act 20 of 2019]
—
111F [Repealed by Act 20 of 2019]
—
111G [Repealed by Act 20 of 2019]
—
111H [Repealed by Act 20 of 2019]
—
111I [Repealed by Act 20 of 2019]
—
111J [Repealed by Act 20 of 2019]
—
PART VB
—
111K [Repealed by Act 30 of 2015]
—
111L [Repealed by Act 30 of 2015]
—
111M [Repealed by Act 30 of 2015]
—
111N [Repealed by Act 30 of 2015]
—
111O [Repealed by Act 30 of 2015]
—
111P [Repealed by Act 30 of 2015]
—
111Q [Repealed by Act 30 of 2015]
—
111QA [Repealed by Act 30 of 2015]
—
111R [Repealed by Act 30 of 2015]
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024


2020 Ed.
2004 Ed.
—
111S [Repealed by Act 30 of 2015]
—
111T [Repealed by Act 30 of 2015]
—
111U [Repealed by Act 30 of 2015]
—
131—(3) [Deleted by Act 24 of 2010]
ii
Informal Consolidation – version in force from 1/6/2024