iii
Tables, Figures, and Boxes 
v
Foreword  
vii
Acknowledgments 
ix
About This Study  
x
Abbreviations  
xii
Executive Summary 
xiv
1	
Introduction  
1
Need for the Study  
3
The Targeted Sectors  
4
2	
Market Landscape of Energy Efficiency, Climate-Smart Infrastructure, and E-mobility 
7
Understanding the Energy Efficiency and Climate-Smart Infrastructure Energy Savings 
7 
and Investment Potential
Understanding the E-mobility Market Opportunity in India 
9
3	
Energy-Intensive Sectors and Technologies  
11
Mapping Energy-Intensive Sectors (Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises, Commercial Buildings, 
11 
and E-mobility)
Mapping Energy Efficiency Technologies for Energy‑Intensive Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises 
13
4	
Supply Chain for Energy Efficiency, Climate-Smart Infrastructure, and E-mobility Technologies  
23
Energy Efficiency and Climate-Smart Infrastructure Supply Chain for Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises  23
Understanding the E-mobility Supply Chain in India 
31
CONTENTS


iv
Contents
5	
Analyzing the Schemes and Policies Landscape  
34
Risk Guarantee Schemes 
36
List-Based and Technology Approaches  
37
Technical Assistance Schemes 
39
Understanding the Policy Landscape of India’s Electric Vehicle Ecosystem 
41
Policies Supporting Women Entrepreneurship  
43
Observations on Financing Schemes  
44
6	
Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities, and Threats Analysis and Policy Recommendations  
46
Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities, and Threats Analysis and Understanding the Opportunities 
46 
 
in Energy Efficiency and Climate-Smart Infrastructure
Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities, and Threats Analysis and Understanding the Opportunities 
48 
 
in E-mobility Financing
7	

Barriers and Opportunities in Financing Energy Efficiency, Climate-Smart Infrastructure, 
50 
and E-mobility
Mapping Private Sector Financial Institutions and Nonbanking Financial Companies Working 
50 
 
in the Small and Medium-Sized Enterprise Segment
Challenges and Barriers to the Financing of Energy Efficiency and Climate-Smart Infrastructure  
53
Proposed Solutions for Strengthening Energy Efficiency and Climate-Smart Infrastructure Financing 
54
Challenges Associated with Electric Vehicle Financing in Micro, Small, and Medium-Sized Enterprises 
57 
and Proposed Solutions for Strengthening the E-mobility Ecosystem
8	
The Way Forward  
60
Appendixes 
1	
Approach and Methodology for Identifying Sectors with the Most Energy Savings Potential 
65
2	
Methodology for Short-Listing Prominent Technologies  
68
3	
Identifying Women-Led Businesses in the Clean Energy Supply Chain 
72
4	

Long List of Technology and Service Providers in Energy Efficiency, Climate-Smart Infrastructure, 
75 
 
and the Electric Vehicle Ecosystem
5	
Details of Different Schemes for Energy Efficiency and Climate-Smart Infrastructure  
77
6	
Observations from Existing Schemes to Expand Lending for Low-Carbon Technologies  
88
7	
Discussion Guide for Technology Providers 
91
8	
Discussion Guide for Financial Institutions  
95
9	
Participating Financial Institutions under Existing and Previous Financing Schemes 
98
10	 Financial Institutions Short-Listed for Consultations   
101


v
Tables
1	

Projected Energy Consumption of High-Energy Sectors by 2031 
1
2	

Energy Savings and Investment Potential for Sectors of Economy (until 2031) 
2
3	

Greenhouse Gas Emission Reduction Potential for Study Sectors 
2
4	

Sector Energy Efficiency Potential until 2031  
7
5	

Short-Listed Energy-Intensive Small and Medium-Sized Enterprise Sectors 
13
6	

Summary of Technologies Based on Short-Listing Criteria 
15
7	

Electric Vehicle Sales (Actual and Projected)  
21
8	

Electric Vehicle Business Models and Ecosystem 
32
9	

Key Features of Different Financing Schemes   
35
10	

Summary of Key Risk Guarantee Schemes 
36
11	

Key List-Based and Technology Approaches 
38
12	

Summary of Technical Assistance-Supported Schemes 
40
13	

Details of Regulators Developing the Electric Vehicle Ecosystem 
41
14	

FAME I and FAME II Budget Outlay 
43
15	

Summary of Key Financing Schemes and Takeaways 
44
16	

Short-Listed Financial Institutions and Nonbanking Financial Companies 
50
17	

Expertise Supporting Clean Energy Financing  
51
A1	
Sector and Subsector Processes and Technologies 
67
A3	

Women-Led Enterprises Working in the Clean Energy Space 
72
A4	

Mapping of the Energy Efficiency and Climate-Smart Infrastructure Technology and Service Providers 75
A5	

Achievements of the Project 
84
A6.1	

State-Led Initiatives for E-mobility 
89
A6.2	 
List of Schemes by Financial Institutions for Women Entrepreneurs 
90
A10	

List of Financial Institutions with Experience 
101
TABLES, FIGURES, AND BOXES


vi
Tables, Figures, and Boxes
Figures
1	

High Energy-Consuming Subsectors 
12
2	

Approach for Identifying Most Promising Energy Efficiency and CSI Technologies 
13
3	

Criteria to Identify Most Relevant Energy Efficiency Technologies 
14
4	

Methodology Used for Ranking Key Technologies 
15
5	

Total Costs of Ownership of Electric Vehicles  
22
6	

Supply Chain Linkages 
23
7	

Reasons for Lower Adoption of Energy Efficiency Technologies 
26 
Among Micro, Small, and Medium-Sized Enterprises
8	

Preferred Business Models 
27
9	

Major Hurdles for Energy Services Companies 
29
10	

Supply Chain of E-mobility 
30
11	

Value Chain of Electric Mobility 
31
12	

Financing Schemes Supporting Micro, Small, and Medium-Sized Enterprises in India 
34
13	

Timeline and Progress of E-mobility, 2011−2022 
42
14	

Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities, and Threats Analysis of the Energy Efficiency 
46 
 
and Climate-Smart Infrastructure Financing Ecosystem
15	

Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities, and Threats Analysis of the E-mobility Financing Ecosystem 
48
16	

Promoting Investment from the Private Sector 
60
 A7.1	 
Discussion Guide for Technology Providers and Energy Service Companies 
92
A7.2	 
Technology Provider Recipients of the Discussion Guide  
94
A8.1	 
Discussion Guide for Financial Institutions 
95
A8.2	 
Financial Institution Recipients of the Discussion Guide  
97
Boxes
1	
Original Equipment Manufacturers 
23
2	
Local Service Providers 
25
3	
Energy Service Companies  
28


vii
On behalf of the Asian Development Bank (ADB), it is my pleasure to introduce this report Driving Energy-Efficient 
and Low-Carbon Investments for Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises through the Finance Sector. 
The report identifies the manufacturing industry, commercial building, and transport sectors in India with a focus on 
opportunities to scale the participation of small and medium-sized enterprises in adopting low-carbon technologies. 
These three sectors account for over two-thirds of the Indian energy consumption. The report presents a detailed 
assessment of energy savings, greenhouse gas emission reduction potential, and investment requirements.
India has set a target of a net carbon zero economy by 2070. This country-level commitment—along with India’s 
nationally determined contributions—places a clear priority and focus on the significant untapped potential to 
invest in energy efficiency and electric mobility solutions, among other climate-smart infrastructure (CSI) segments.
Investments in these sectors face different challenges. Many are well-documented and well-known barriers in the 
energy efficiency financing space ranging from awareness of suitable technologies or access to suitable financing 
solutions. Most of the interventions by international development agencies and the Government of India have 
developed and strengthened the basic framework to promote energy efficiency solutions. There are barriers and 
challenges in the larger-scale deployment of investments in low-carbon technologies across the target sectors. 
This report presents a detailed assessment of the market and operational barriers that need to be bridged through 
innovative financing solutions. Multistakeholder collaboration and innovative solutions are needed to get access 
to adequate financing suitable to meet the needs of the range of stakeholders in the energy efficiency and low-
carbon technology supply chain including energy service companies, small and medium-sized enterprises, original 
equipment manufacturers, local service providers, electric vehicle manufacturers, as well as other related suppliers 
of CSI solutions.
The report also presents possible solutions for the different sectors and addresses most of the challenges. 
It presents the outlook through strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats analysis and provides insights into 
actionable measures that could be taken to scale the proposed solutions.  
Financial institutions, nonbanking financial companies, original equipment manufacturers, energy service 
companies, industry players, government bodies, and the Reserve Bank of India must work together to ensure 
that the solutions outlined in the report are fully explored in the direction to support the country’s long-term 
decarbonization goals. 
FOREWORD 


viii
ADB would like to express gratitude to those who generously contributed their time and expertise to enrich this 
discussion, which helped form the basis for the recommendations for scaling access to finance for the energy 
efficiency, CSI, and electric mobility sectors in this report. ADB looks forward to working with the Government of 
India to implement these solutions and others in support of India’s net-zero goals.  
Suzanne Gaboury
Director General
Private Sector Operations Department 
Asian Development Bank 


ix
The report Driving Energy-Efficient and Low-Carbon Investments for Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises through the 
Finance Sector was prepared by staff of the Asian Development Bank (ADB) and experts in clean energy financing 
from PricewaterhouseCoopers Private Limited (PwC) India. 
The preparation of this report is supported under the Technical Assistance 6586 IND: Energy Efficiency and  
Climate-Smart Infrastructure Opportunities for Financial Institutions, phases 1 and 2 (54340-001) and 
administered by ADB. 
The study team would like to thank the Clean Technology Fund for financing this technical assistance project. 
This report is prepared under the overall guidance of Susan Olsen, principal investment specialist, Private Sector 
Financial Institutions Division Unit, Private Sector Operations Department, ADB. Key contributors to the report 
from ADB’s India Resident Mission are Priya Sunder, senior investment officer; Ashley S. Robertson, consultant; 
Anand Mahadevan, consultant; Nikunj Oli, investment specialist; and Saumadip Dey, senior investment officer.  
Energy efficiency and financing experts from PwC India include Amit Kumar (partner, Clean Energy), Kulbhushan 
Kumar (director), Jayakrishnan P. Nair (associate director), Ameya Subodh (associate director), Amit Seth (senior 
associate), and Prabhat Sharma (senior associate), who assisted in authoring this report. This report combined 
secondary research and primary consultations with a select group of stakeholders. 
The study also acknowledges the support provided by nonbanking financial companies, financial institutions, energy 
service companies, original equipment manufacturers, smart infrastructure players, electric mobility (e-mobility) 
players, and other stakeholders. 
Graphic designers and the Printing Services Unit of the Corporate Services Department and the publishing team of 
the Department of Communications and Knowledge Management at ADB provided support for the publication of 
this report. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS


x
The Asian Development Bank (ADB) is implementing a technical assistance project to provide support to Indian 
financial institutions for lending to small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) for energy efficiency and climate-
smart infrastructure (CSI) initiatives. The technical assistance is consistent with the ADB country partnership 
strategy for India, 2018–2022, which aims to boost economic competitiveness, address climate change, and provide 
inclusive access to infrastructure. The strategy states that ADB will work with domestic financial institutions to 
deepen access to climate finance. 
The promotion of energy efficiency and support for CSI technologies are part of ADB’s ambition to be the climate 
bank of Asia and to fund $100 billion in climate finance by 2030.1 ADB routinely lends to private sector financial 
institutions in its developing member countries for on-lending to targeted activities with high developmental impact, 
including enhanced energy efficiency and greenhouse gas emission reduction through CSI. 
ADB—through the Private Sector Operations Department—entrusted PricewaterhouseCoopers Private Limited to 
analyze the market needs for promoting investment in energy efficiency and CSI technologies and to identify private 
sector financial institutions interested in developing targeted lending programs to help SMEs in India focused on 
financing for energy efficiency and CSI technologies. 
Purpose and Objectives of the Study 
The purpose of this study was to outline a comprehensive review of the market landscape for SME investment in 
energy efficiency and CSI technologies, as well as barriers and opportunities to drive demand for further investments 
in such measures, primarily in energy-intensive SME industrial sectors, commercial buildings, and electric mobility. 
The study also intended to provide intelligence on a set of highly replicable energy efficiency and CSI technologies 
and their viability, which could support demand-side energy efficiency and may apply to major energy-intensive 
SME sectors, commercial buildings, and electric mobility. 
The study had the following objectives: 
(i)	
understand the market landscape of energy efficiency, CSI, and electric mobility;
(ii)	
identify attractive lending opportunities for private sector financial institutions for promising energy 
efficiency and CSI technologies (as recommended products) across various energy-intensive 
SME industrial sectors, commercial buildings, and electric mobility;
1	
ADB. 2021. DB Raises 2019–2030 Climate Finance Ambition to $100 Billion. News release. 13 October. 
ABOUT THIS STUDY 


About This Study 
xi
(iii)	 understand the supplier environment for recommended products with a focus on supply chain 
assessment and considerations for women-owned or women-led businesses;
(iv)	 identify barriers to financing energy efficiency and CSI, with a focus on gender-related barriers to 
accessing financing for these technologies and probable solutions to address these barriers; and
(v)	
identify potential partner private sector financial institutions and energy efficiency and CSI technology 
vendors seeking future collaboration with ADB.


xii
4E	
	
end to end energy efficiency	
ADB	
	
Asian Development Bank 	
BEE	
	
Bureau of Energy Efficiency (Government of India)	
CAPEX	 	
capital expenditure
CLCSS	 	
Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme	
CO2	
	
carbon dioxide 	
COVID-19	
coronavirus disease
CSI	
	
climate-smart infrastructure	
DFC	
	
Development Finance Corporation	
DPR	
	
detailed project report	
EESL	
	
Energy Efficiency Services Limited 	
EFL	
	
Electronica Finance Limited	
ESCO	
	
energy service company	
ESPC	
	
energy saving performance contract 	
FAME	
	
Faster Adoption and Manufacturing of (Hybrid and) Electric Vehicles 	
FCDO	 	
Foreign Common Wealth & Development Office 	
FEEM	
	
Financing Energy Efficiency at MSMEs	
GEF	
	
Global Environment Facility 	
GHG	
	
greenhouse gas	
ICE	
	
internal combustion engine	
IFC	
	
International Finance Corporation 	
IoT	
	
Internet of Things	
IREDA	 	
Indian Renewable Energy Development Agency Limited 	
JICA 	
	
Japan International Cooperation Agency	
LSP	
	
local service provider	
ABBREVIATIONS 


Abbreviations 
xiii
M&V	
	
measurement and verification 	
MoMSME	
Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises	
MSMEs	 	
micro, small, and medium-sized enterprises	
NBFC	
	
nonbanking financial company	
NDC	
	
nationally determined contribution	
OEM	
	
original equipment manufacturer	
PLI	
	
production-linked incentive
PRGFEE		
Partial Risk Guarantee Fund for Energy Efficiency 	
PRSF	
	
partial risk sharing facility	
PV	
	
photovoltaic 	
PwC	
	
PricewaterhouseCoopers Private limited 	
RBI	
	
Reserve Bank of India	
SFB	
	
small finance bank	
SIDBI	
	
Small Industries Development Bank of India	
SMEs	
	
small and medium-sized enterprises	
SPEED	 	
SIDBI – Loan for Purchase of Equipment for Enterprise’s Development	
TA	
	
technical assistance	
TEQUP	 	
Technology Upgradation Scheme for Micro, Small, and Medium Enterprises	
TUFS	
	
Technology Upgradation Funding Scheme	
UN	
	
United Nations 	
UNIDO		
United Nations Industrial Development Organization 	
UNNATEE	
Unlocking National Energy Efficiency Potential	
USAID	 	
United States Agency for International Development 	
Weights, Measurements, and Conversions
$1.00  	 =	
80.00
1.00 	
=	
$0.125
1 toe 	
=	
1x107 kCal
1 kWh 	 =	
860 kCal
kCal	
=	
kilocalorie
kWh	
=	
kilowatt-hour 
mtoe	
=	
million tons of oil equivalent
toe	
=	
ton of oil equivalent


xiv
Opportunities Under Climate Financing 
Investments in energy efficiency and climate-smart infrastructure (CSI) can significantly reduce energy costs and 
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. The purpose of this study is to outline viable investment opportunities for private 
sector financial institutions—both banking and nonbanking financial companies in India across three targeted 
sectors: (i) energy-intensive small and medium-sized enterprise industrial sectors; (ii) commercial buildings; and  
(iii) electric mobility for demand-side energy efficiency, as well as other CSI technologies (together referred to as 
low-carbon technologies).
The conclusions of this study are based on more than 25 consultations with diverse stakeholders including private 
sector financial institutions, nonbanking financial companies, technology service providers, and energy service 
companies. They are also based on an evaluation of more than 12 past initiatives in the Indian market focused on 
promoting large-scale adoption of energy efficiency and CSI technologies across the targeted sectors through 
various innovative financial instruments. 
Survey results indicate that the uptake of these low-carbon technologies has been impacted by various demand- 
and supply-side challenges. These challenges include limited awareness among the end consumers, the higher 
up-front cost of energy efficiency and CSI technologies, limited availability of a skilled workforce to adopt or operate 
these technologies, import dependence and limited reach of technology service providers, and the reluctance of 
financial institutions to finance these technologies due to various reasons such as perceived performance risks, 
smaller ticket sizes, higher transaction efforts and costs. 
Results reveal that targeted sectors offer significant energy savings and investment opportunities during 2023−2033 
and beyond. Commercialized energy efficiency and CSI technologies may offer immense business and financing 
potential for private sector financial institutions with minimal risks. Partnerships among private players, demand 
aggregation, and tailored financial products, backed by risk sharing and/or mitigation instruments, will lead to more 
sustainable and scaled financing solutions.
India is the world’s third-largest energy-consuming and carbon-emitting country. Increasing economic development 
and a growing population—together with the trend toward continued urbanization and industrialization—
will further enhance energy demand and therefore increase carbon emissions. This is a critical challenge considering 
the need for energy security and to reduce and mitigate the carbon emissions impact of energy consumption on  
the environment. 
	
	
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY


Executive Summary
xv
A focus on energy efficiency and the adoption of CSI technologies in major energy-consuming sectors of the 
economy can contribute to economic growth while minimizing negative environmental impacts and improving 
economic efficiency and competitiveness. Mobilizing investment for low-carbon technologies can significantly limit 
energy intensity and therefore GHG emissions, and may steer India toward a more climate-resilient economy with 
energy security and sustainable development. 
India has made significant progress in improving its energy efficiency and reducing emission intensity by targeting 
large energy-intensive industries and other sectors of the economy through policy mandates and structured 
market-based schemes and programs. However, the adoption of energy efficiency and CSI technologies by small 
and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) has been limited, and opportunities are yet to be tapped due to the limited 
availability of tailored financing products suitable for energy efficiency, CSI, and electric mobility (e-mobility). The 
Reserve Bank of India (RBI) recognizes the need for enhanced participation of domestic financial institutions to 
support climate-related investments and sustainability financing.
The country partnership strategy for India, 2018–2022 of the Asian Development Bank (ADB) aims to boost 
economic competitiveness, address climate change, and provide inclusive access to infrastructure. In line with this, 
ADB—through its Private Sector Operations Department—has elected to support SMEs with the expected impacts 
by helping to unlock financing opportunities in energy efficiency and CSI while addressing the associated risks, thus 
enabling the reduction of energy intensity of the Indian economy.
This study focuses on the assessment of viable investment opportunities across various energy-intensive SME 
industrial sectors, commercial buildings, and e-mobility for energy efficiency and CSI through the engagement of 
private sector financial institutions and nonbanking financial companies (NBFCs). 
Potential for Energy Efficiency and  
Greenhouse Gas Emission Reduction 
Energy Efficiency and Climate-Smart Infrastructure Technologies 
The manufacturing industry, commercial buildings, and transport are three major energy-consuming sectors that 
account for around two-thirds of primary energy demand. As per the national strategic plan (2017−2031) developed 
by the Government of India Bureau of Energy Efficiency, these three sectors hold more than 75% of India’s energy 
savings potential, which is more than 68 million tons of oil equivalent (mtoe) in a moderate scenario and more than 
102 mtoe in an ambitious scenario by 2031. 
The investment potential for energy efficiency and CSI deployment in the three sectors is huge, and is estimated to 
be over $705 billion between 2022 and 2032. Commercial buildings have the largest investment potential at $300 
billion, followed by transport at $266 billion, and industries at around $140 billion.
This potential also points to the significant financing need for targeted opportunities in these sectors to leverage 
financing through private sector financial institutions.
This report identifies eight energy-intensive SME industrial subsectors, along with the commercial buildings and 
e-mobility sectors, to provide an overview of attractive lending opportunities for private sector financial institutions 
in India with a set of highly promising energy efficiency and CSI technologies. 
Around 60 promising commercialized, semi-commercialized, and state-of-the-art (leading-edge or futuristic) 
energy efficiency and CSI technologies were short-listed based on defined selection criteria focusing on energy 
savings potential, investment potential, typical payback, GHG emission reduction potential, market acceptance, and 


replication potential. Energy savings potential for most technologies ranges from 5% to 30%, with a few technologies 
having a higher energy efficiency potential of up to 50%. These technologies offer significant potential for energy 
savings and GHG emission reductions of over 850 million metric tons by 2030.
This compilation of promising technologies is an attempt to offer a guide for financing institutions considering 
planning or expanding on their energy efficiency, CSI, and e-mobility financing portfolio, as well as for technology 
providers and energy service companies intending to collaborate with financing institutions and NBFCs.
The commercialized technologies with medium (1−3 years) and long (>3 years) payback periods offer greater 
potential for financing as these are widely adopted technologies and have vast replication potential. As the credit 
requirement is usually for smaller loan amounts (up to $125,000) for these solutions, strategic partnerships among 
financial institutions and technology service providers may support the aggregation of demand and bundling of the 
loans to make the business more lucrative. 
Electric Mobility 
The Government of India has a target of around 30% penetration of electric vehicles by 2030 in the total sales 
of new vehicles. India’s electric vehicle adoption will likely vary for different vehicle categories—which will be 
dominated by two- and three-wheelers—and around 80% of vehicles from these categories will be electric vehicles 
by 2030. Forecasts also estimate that around 50% of four-wheelers and 30% of buses will also be electric by 2030. 
Achieving these targets may result in a cumulative oil savings of around 474 mtoe over the total deployed vehicles’ 
lifetime, which will lead to a carbon emission reduction of around 846 mtoe and monetary savings of more than 
$185 billion at 2019 prices. 
Key Challenges to the Large-Scale Adoption  
of Energy Efficiency and Climate-Smart Infrastructure 
Technologies and Electric Mobility 
Technology Supply Chain-Level Challenges 
This report surveys a supplier environment for the identified products with a focus on supply chain assessment and 
additional challenges for women-owned or women-led businesses. 
Industrial Small and Medium-Sized Enterprise Sectors  
and Commercial Buildings 
Primary consultations with various technology suppliers indicate that one-time up-front payment is the prominent 
business model for energy efficiency and CSI technologies, and more than 75% of the technology providers operate 
with this model. The low credibility of SMEs to repay and the risk associated with payment recovery through 
deferred mechanisms contribute to this trend. Very few technology vendors are practicing leasing with regular 
payouts based on the operations and leasing business models due to associated business risks. 
Some of the prominent challenges in the targeted sectors are 
(i)	
import dependence; 
(ii)	
limited reach of energy efficiency and CSI technology providers;
Executive Summary
xvi


Executive Summary
xvii
(iii)	 limited availability of skilled labor for the execution and efficient operation of energy efficiency and CSI 
technologies; and
(iv)	 Needed adequate framework for the measurement and verification of actual results (i.e., energy savings 
and GHG emission reduction achieved) against committed and/or estimated outcomes.
Electric Mobility 
E-mobility technologies and the market are both evolving and have several business risks including technology risks 
and business model risks related to evolving adoption levels, charging infrastructure viability, and secondary markets. 
A risk-guarantee mechanism backed by the government and/or development banks is needed to accelerate 
investment through private sector financial institutions.  
Some of the prominent challenges in the targeted sectors are: 
(i)	
import dependency on the batteries and components required for electric vehicles; 
(ii)	
lack of an adequate ecosystem of the charging infrastructure;
(iii)	 limited range of electric vehicles and a higher initial cost;
(iv)	 unviable charging infrastructure business model (i.e., having a poor return on investment); and
(v)	
resale risk (the absence of a strong secondary market).
Technology Demand-level Challenges 
More than 70% of the consulted technology providers indicated that higher up-front costs (with the resulting high 
payback periods) and limited awareness regarding energy efficiency and CSI technologies among SMEs limited 
demand by the end user. 
Technology Financing Challenges  
This study attempts to recognize the major barriers to financing energy efficiency and CSI across the targeted 
sectors and gender-related barriers to accessing financing for these technologies in India. 
Financial institutions are reluctant to finance energy efficiency and CSI technologies to individual SMEs due to 
smaller loan sizes and higher transaction efforts and costs. The average ticket size of energy efficiency and CSI 
loans generally ranges from a few thousands of dollars to $125,000, which is not a lucrative business proposition for 
financial institutions as handling these small-sized loan portfolios will require more effort and resources resulting in 
increased transaction costs. 
The financing of energy efficiency, CSI, and e-mobility portfolios have different challenges, and these are therefore 
treated separately throughout this report. The energy efficiency and CSI and e-mobility portfolios and related 
risk guarantee mechanisms are therefore best treated separately. Some of the other prominent challenges in the 
targeted sectors are as follows:
Industrial SME Sectors and Commercial Buildings 
(i)	
Preference for balance sheet-based and collateral-backed financing by financial institutions,
(ii)	
Limited project or asset-based financing,
(iii)	 Limited knowledge about the energy savings resulting from the various technologies on the part of 
financial institutions,


Executive Summary
(iv)	 Higher risk perception of technologies requiring customization that results in higher financing costs, and
(v)	
Limited share of private sector financial institutions or NBFCs due to high-cost financing.  
Electric Mobility 
(i)	
Higher up-front costs of electric vehicles compared to their traditional internal combustion engine 
counterparts, 
(ii)	
Nonviability of the business model for charging infrastructure (due to lower utilization),
(iii)	 Financial institutions’ limited understanding of e-mobility technology, and 
(iv)	 Higher interest premiums charged due to perceived inherent risks associated with electric vehicles.
Solutions to Unlock the Potential for Scaling Climate Finance
To catalyze the scaling of climate finance, innovative solutions are essential. The following strategies present effective 
avenues for unlocking potential in this critical sector. These include portfolio-based risk guarantee mechanisms,  
long-term lines of credit from international development associations, and strategic partnerships among private 
players for tailored financial products. Each approach aims to mitigate risks, lower financing costs, and foster 
sustainable market mechanisms, thereby accelerating the adoption of energy efficiency and CSI technologies.
(i)	
Portfolio-based risk guarantee mechanisms, where risk cover is offered to financial institutions and 
NBFCs over their entire portfolio of projects, have some distinct advantages. These solutions offer 
financial institutions the flexibility to provide varying degrees of coverage based on their risk assessment 
on individual projects. This helps to optimize the guarantee fee component by providing need-based 
coverage. Risk guarantee mechanisms specific to business models—like the energy service company 
model for energy efficiency—are already in place. Risk guarantee mechanisms that are agnostic to 
business models will help to expand coverage across the entire spectrum of energy efficiency, CSI, and 
e-mobility projects where there is a legitimate risk perception at financial institutions. Simplicity and 
user-friendly processes—coupled with moderate guarantee fees—are critical to their success.
(ii)	
Long-term portfolio-based lines of credit offerings from international development associations 
to NBFCs and financial institutions can be relevant, especially in the context of the marginally higher 
cost of finance offered by NBFCs. NBFCs can pass on the benefits of lower interest rates to stakeholders 
in the financing ecosystem, improving the viability and/or attractiveness of the projects and potentially 
improving the demand. NBFCs should ideally retain the flexibility to decide on interest rates based 
on the specific risk profiles of individual loan cases. NBFCs are sometimes better placed for energy 
efficiency and CSI financing based on their portfolio, exposure to the sector dynamics, their ability to 
evaluate the energy efficiency or CSI projects, etc.
(iii)	 Partnerships among private players, demand aggregation, and tailored financial product 
offerings backed by a risk sharing or mitigation instrument will lead to a sustainable market 
mechanism. Experiences from previous schemes, programs, projects, or studies implemented by various 
Indian national and international agencies, and consultations with stakeholders, indicate a need to 
develop tailored financial products backed by a public finance and risk mitigation mechanism to support 
large-scale adoption of identified products in targeted sectors. A collaborative approach by private 
sector financial institutions (commonly referred to as FIs in the Indian context) through partnerships 
with suitable technology suppliers can extend support to the end consumer on both ends. It will support 
the demand aggregation for technologies as well as loans, which will create a sustainable market 
mechanism to drive energy efficiency and CSI technology business for a longer period. 
xviii


Executive Summary
xix
This study attempts to identify some of the probable solutions to address the barriers to financing energy efficiency 
and CSI technologies in targeted sectors.
The report also attempts to analyze strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats (SWOT) for financing energy 
efficiency and CSI in targeted sectors through SWOT analysis. Energy efficiency and e-mobility are driven by 
policy, and the Government of India has been supporting the development of the policy ecosystem for promoting 
a conducive environment for developing energy efficiency and CSI technologies. The government is also fostering 
the adoption of these technologies through regulatory mandates for the applicable sectors. To support faster 
implementation and adoption by each sector, the government provides financial incentives to the front-runners. 
Through this holistic framework, the government is creating an ecosystem to support sustainability.
RBI has also been supporting clean energy adoption through initiatives such as “priority sector lending.” To assess 
the progress of the regulated entities in managing climate risk, RBI published a discussion paper to understand the 
risks associated with clean energy and sustainability financing with regulated entities. 
RBI and different ministries are planning to widen priority sector lending to develop a strong platform to foster 
the financing of energy efficiency and e-mobility.  Driven by significant opportunities and backed by a conducive 
environment, private financing can play a pivotal role in redefining the new age of energy efficiency and e-mobility 
with new financing solutions. 




1
India is home to more than 1.38 billion people (around 17.8% of the global population), is one of the world’s fastest-
growing economies, and is the world’s third-largest energy-consuming country. The per capita energy use and 
emissions of India are less than half of the world average; however, improved affordability and access to energy, 
continued urbanization, and industrialization will increase energy demand. 
The efficient use of energy and restricting energy wastage is essential to meet future energy demand and pursue 
sustainable development. The Government of India Bureau of Energy Efficiency (BEE) has developed a national 
strategic plan toward developing an energy-efficient nation (2017−2031): Unlocking National Energy Efficiency 
Potential (UNNATEE).1
The report forecasted future energy demand under different scenarios for various sectors of the economy until 2031 
as a principal step toward the estimation of energy efficiency potential (Table 1).
Table 1: Projected Energy Consumption of High-Energy Sectors by 2031
Sectors of Economy
Energy Consumption 2031
(mtoe) 
Least Effort Scenario
Moderate Effort Scenario
Ambitious Effort Scenario
Commercial 
29.5
24.5
23.1
Industrial 
443.4
396.0
371.2
Transport 
232.9
217.2
209.1
Total
705.8
637.7
603.4
mtoe = million tons of oil equivalent.
Source: Government of India, Bureau of Energy Efficiency. 2019. Unlocking National Energy Efficiency Potential (UNNATEE): Strategy Plan 
Towards Developing an Energy Efficient Nation (2017–2031). New Delhi.
India has energy savings potential in the following sectors: (i) commercial (including energy efficiency in buildings 
and climate-smart infrastructure [CSI] technologies, energy conservation building code compliant buildings); 
(ii) industrial (including small and medium-sized enterprises [SMEs], large industries with a potential for energy 
efficiency, smart infrastructure technologies such as Internet of Things [IoT], Industry 4.0, automation, machine 
learning, artificial intelligence, etc.); and (iii) transport (fuel efficiency standards, improved penetration of clean 
energy fuel vehicles). This potential is estimated to be 68.2 million tons of oil equivalent (mtoe) with a “moderate” 
implementation of energy efficiency programs, and an estimate of 102.5 mtoe with an “ambitious” implementation 
1	
Government of India, Bureau of Energy Efficiency. 2019. Unlocking National Energy Efficiency Potential (UNNATEE): Strategy Plan Towards 
Developing an Energy Efficient Nation (2017–2031). New Delhi.  
INTRODUCTION 
1


Driving Energy-Efficient and Low-Carbon Investments for Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises through the Finance Sector
2
of energy efficiency programs. This would result in a 15% reduction in energy demand by 2031 compared to the 
“business-as-usual” approach. To meet this target, the estimated investment for energy efficiency interventions 
will amount to ~$117 billion for the ambitious scenario, with the highest energy savings investment potential in the 
industrial sector (Table 2). 
Table 2: Energy Savings and Investment Potential for Sectors of Economy (until 2031)
Sectors of Economy
Energy Savings Potential 2031
(mtoe)
Energy Efficiency Investment 
Potential by 2031 
($ billion)
Moderate Scenario
Ambitious Scenario
Moderate Scenario
Ambitious Scenario
Commercial 
4.9
6.4
10
13
Industrial 
47.5
72.3
38
58
Transport 
15.8
23.8
28
46
Total
68.2
102.5
76
117
mtoe = million tons of oil equivalent.
Source: Government of India, Bureau of Energy Efficiency. 2019. Unlocking National Energy Efficiency Potential (UNNATEE): Strategy Plan 
Towards Developing an Energy Efficient Nation (2017–2031). New Delhi. 
The energy sector is one of the major contributors to greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and accounts for about 
75.6% of total GHG emissions.2 India is committed to addressing the challenge of climate change associated with 
economic growth and increased energy demand and has progressively adopted cleaner energy in different sectors 
to reduce GHG emissions. The rising quantum of energy signifies the potential for GHG emissions reductions in 
various sectors (Table 3). 
Table 3: Greenhouse Gas Emission Reduction Potential for Study Sectors
Sectors of Economy
GHG Emission Reduction Potential by 2030 
(mtCo2e)  
Moderate Scenario  
Ambitious Scenario 
Commercial 
34
44
Industrial 
185
238
Transport 
97
141
Total
316
423
GHG = greenhouse gas, mtCO2e = million tons of carbon dioxide equivalent.
Note: Energy efficiency: Equipment and processes that consume lower energy than conventional operations.
Source: Government of India, Bureau of Energy Efficiency. 2019. Unlocking National Energy Efficiency Potential (UNNATEE): Strategy Plan 
Towards Developing an Energy Efficient Nation (2017–2031). New Delhi. 
Accelerating the adoption of energy efficiency, the deployment of CSI technologies, and demand-side 
electrification with enhanced integration of renewable energy sources on the supply side will steer India toward a 
low-carbon economy.
2	
World Resources Institute. 2020. 4 Charts Explain Greenhouse Gas Emissions by Countries and Sectors.


Introduction 
3
Need for the Study 
Major energy-intensive sectors of the economy, such as industries, commercial buildings, and transport, account for 
over two-thirds of national primary energy consumption (553 mtoe) and offer significant energy savings and GHG 
emissions reduction potential.3 
The substantial scaling up of investments in energy efficiency,4 CSI in industries and commercial buildings 
(especially in small and medium-sized establishments), and the electrification of vehicle fleets would require new 
and substantial financial resources and support.5
Despite an immense investment potential in the energy efficiency and CSI market, business is taking off in a limited 
way due to various challenges across the supply chain, from financial institutions and technology suppliers to end 
users. There have been challenges in making energy efficiency and CSI a convincing business case, and this has 
impacted the capital flow to the market. These challenges are a combination of knowledge, technical, and financial 
barriers. The energy efficiency and CSI market still calls for a well-planned strategy and effective instruments to 
develop a sustainable market mechanism. 
Public programs and participation from private players are needed to address these challenges and realize the full 
potential of the market. Private sector financial institutions would play a critical role in mainstreaming financing for 
energy efficiency and CSI technologies with their regular business activities.
Investments in energy efficiency, CSI, and electric mobility (e-mobility) contribute directly to climate change 
mitigation, which is of national priority. India submitted its nationally determined contributions (NDCs) target to the 
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change intending to reduce the emissions intensity of its gross 
domestic product (GDP). India also voluntarily committed to being a carbon-neutral economy by 2070.6
The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) published a discussion paper that highlights various risks for financial institutions 
and threats to local and global financial stability due to climate change with an intent to prepare a strategy based 
on global best practices for mitigating the adverse impacts of climate change. RBI drafted the paper to address 
the challenges and develop long-term risk mitigation plans to support and foster the uptake of climate financing, 
including the financing of energy efficiency and CSI.7
The discussion paper also highlighted that financial institutions should manage the risks and opportunities that may 
arise from climate change and environmental degradation. 
In this evolving framework for promoting private sector lending toward energy efficiency, CSI, and e-mobility—and 
given the substantial need for financial sector investment—it is important to identify the barriers faced by financial 
institutions in filling this financing need. This report describes the needs of financial institutions and the measures 
required to allow them to provide specialized financial products to mainstream access to energy efficiency and 
CSI—including in the building and mobility sectors—to achieve India’s emissions reduction goals. 
3	
Government of India, Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation. 2021. Energy Statistics India 2021 (accessed 7 December2023).
4	
Energy efficiency: Equipment and processes that consume lower energy than conventional operations.
5	
CSI includes the use of sophisticated sensors, modern IoT, digital integration, process automation, use of artificial intelligence and 
machine learning through programming, process optimization of operations, and energy conservation.
6	
BBC News India. 2021. COP26: India PM Narendra Modi Pledges Net Zero by 2070. 2 November.
7	
Reserve Bank of India. n.d. Discussion Paper on Climate Risk and Sustainable Finance.


Driving Energy-Efficient and Low-Carbon Investments for Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises through the Finance Sector
4
The Targeted Sectors 
Industrial Sector (Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises)
The manufacturing industry is the largest consumer of energy (328 mtoe) in terms of primary energy consumption 
in India (footnote 1). Larger corporates and large industries have better access to finance and the technical strengths 
to navigate this transition. SMEs in India (units having investments in plant and machinery or equipment of not 
more than $6.25 million and an annual turnover of not more than $31.25 million) will require ongoing guidance and 
innovative financing solutions to adopt clean energy technology and solutions. 
The SME sector contributes around 25% of energy consumption and is a critical growth driver of the Indian 
economy.8 This sector contributes to nearly 30% of GDP and holds significant potential to steer India toward a 
low-carbon economy. SMEs in India can be segregated into over 17 of the most energy-intensive industries such 
as foundries, textiles, ceramics, refractories, glass, dairy, buildings, e-mobility, etc. Because they use obsolete 
technologies and poor operating practices, SMEs offer significant potential for energy savings through energy 
efficiency and CSI adoptions. In addition to reduced energy consumption, local pollutants and GHG emissions 
are also eliminated by energy efficiency and CSI to achieve regulatory requirements and government targets. 
However, SMEs have limited technical capabilities to implement energy efficiency and CSI technologies, and limited 
capacities to access finance due to the lower strength of balance sheets and a lack of collateral. 
Affordability and access to finance for energy efficiency technologies in SMEs have been limited in enabling the 
large-scale deployment of energy efficiency and CSI technologies. SMEs (in industrial manufacturing) in India 
have been traditionally led and dominated by male entrepreneurs. Based on the emergence of new services and 
technology-oriented roles (new age technologies, Internet of Things IoT, robotics, automation, Industry 4.0, 
blockchain, etc.), the share of women in the industrial sector has witnessed growth. 
Commercial Buildings 
The commercial building sector (mainly comprising hotels, shopping malls, commercial buildings, corporate 
offices, technology parks, etc.) has seen a significant increase in the consumption of electricity. This consumption 
is expected to increase due to an increase in building floor space propelled by upcoming economic reforms, growth 
in various sectors, an improved standard of living, and other factors. India is improving the energy efficiency of 
buildings through mandatory building energy codes and voluntary rating schemes, as well as through policies 
and programs to improve the efficiency of appliances. Compared to the manufacturing sector—which is a male-
dominated sector—the commercial building sector has a higher presence of women across the different business 
segments (designing, conducting operations, coding, and developing standards). One of the largest certifying and 
energy efficiency building authorities—Green Business Certification Inc. (GBCI) India—is led by women and plays a 
crucial role in the entire value chain of this sector. 
Electric Mobility  
E-mobility refers to the cleaner fuel-driven road transport network ecosystem. It includes electric vehicles, charging 
stations, battery-swapping facilities, service providers, etc. The e-mobility market is still in a nascent stage in India. 
There have been developments concerning the introduction of new regulatory policies, the flow of funds and 
8	
Government of India, Bureau of Energy Efficiency. 2019. Unlocking National Energy Efficiency Potential (UNNATEE). Strategy Plan Towards 
Developing an Energy Efficient Nation (2017−2031), and Government of India, Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation. 2018.  
Energy Statistics 2018. New Delhi.


Introduction 
5
investments in the sector, an increase in the number of start-ups, etc. This segment is dominated by start-ups and 
SME players and possesses a higher potential for GHG emission reduction through energy transition.
To decarbonize the transport sector, India is among a handful of countries that have pledged to the global 
“EV30@30” initiative.9 To support India’s commitment to tackle climate change, the central and state governments 
have been proactively announcing several policy interventions and incentives to support the whole electric 
vehicle ecosystem. 
Compared to the manufacturing sector—which is male dominated—most e-mobility start-ups have a higher 
contribution of women at the different management levels providing impetus for this new energy transition drive. 
Evolving e-mobility and last-mile delivery are also empowering Indian women toward self-reliance through new job 
creation. This evolving sector of the Indian economy is supporting the new era of gender equality and promoting the 
share of women entrepreneurs and businesses. 
The Framework Adopted During the Study and Summary of the Sections 
An open, adaptive, and consultative framework with a methodology combining secondary research and primary 
consultations was adopted for the study. The broader objective of the study was to map the needs and requirements 
to bridge the challenges and gaps that are prevalent in the energy efficiency and CSI ecosystem. The focus of the 
study was to map the financial interventions and extent of the financing required to foster the uptake of the energy 
efficiency and CSI financing to support India to meet its NDC goals and long-term decarbonization. 
The approach and methodology adopted during the study, including the step-by-step procedures, are provided in 
Appendix 1 and Appendix 2.
The study outlined a comprehensive review of market benchmarking for SME investment in energy efficiency and 
CSI technologies and is organized in the following chapters of this report: 
Chapter 2: Market Landscape of Energy Efficiency, Climate-Smart Infrastructure, and E-mobility. 
This chapter elaborates on the energy consumption and energy savings potential for the different sectors, i.e., SMEs 
in the industry, building, and e-mobility sectors. 
Chapter 3: Energy-Intensive Sectors and Technologies. To tailor energy efficiency products, major energy-
intensive sectors and technologies have been mapped under this section. These short-listed key technologies cater 
to the larger part of energy consumption (Pareto principle). Technologies have been further categorized based on 
replication potential, cost, and commercialization aspects. 
Chapter 4: Supply Chain for Energy Efficiency, Climate-Smart Infrastructure, and E-mobility Technologies. 
The study mapped the supply chain and how different players of the supply chain work together. The chapter also 
presents the major challenges and barriers faced by prominent partners and stakeholders and details key linkages of 
the different partners working in the ecosystem. 
Chapter 5: Analyzing the Schemes and Policies Landscape. Schemes and programs for energy efficiency, CSI, 
and e-mobility are presented. The study mapped key learning and takeaways, and the success and penetration level 
of the different programmatic interventions. 
9	
NITI Aayog and Rocky Mountain Institute. 2019. India’s Electric Mobility Transformation.


Driving Energy-Efficient and Low-Carbon Investments for Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises through the Finance Sector
6
Chapter 6: Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities, and Threats Analysis and Policy Recommendations. This 
Chapter details strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats (SWOT) for the sectors under study and outlines 
prospects in these sectors that can be strengthened through a policy and regulatory framework. The study team also 
carried out a SWOT analysis for the ecosystem to map the possible long-term strategic interventions planned under 
energy efficiency, CSI, and e-mobility. 
Chapter 7: Barriers and Opportunities in Financing Energy Efficiency, Climate-Smart Infrastructure,  
and E-mobility. This chapter details the challenges and barriers faced by private sector financial institutions and 
nonbanking financial companies (NBFCs). The study provides detailed interventions and solutions that will foster 
private sector financing for energy efficiency, CSI, and e-mobility. 


7
This chapter presents the overall market landscape and investment potential for the sectors covered (i.e., industries, 
buildings, and transport) under the study.10 The energy savings potential and emission reduction from these energy 
conservation measures are also analyzed. 
Understanding the Energy Efficiency and Climate-Smart 
Infrastructure Energy Savings and Investment Potential
The industrial segment contributes to the bulk of energy consumption in India. 
Among this share, the micro, small, and medium-sized enterprise (MSME) 
sector contributes around 25% of the overall industrial energy consumption, 
estimated at ~82 mtoe. Commercial buildings have an energy consumption of 
9 mtoe. Nationally, there is immense potential to be realized from the large-scale 
implementation of energy efficiency interventions in various demand sectors. 
BEE has developed a national strategy plan Unlocking National Energy Efficiency 
Potential (UNNATEE).11 India’s energy savings potential is estimated to be 
86.9 mtoe in the case of a “moderate” implementation of energy efficiency 
programs, while the estimate is 129 mtoe using “ambitious” programs by 2031, 
resulting in a 15% reduction in energy demand compared to the baseline year of 
2017 (Table 4). 
Table 4: Sector Energy Efficiency Potential until 2031 
Sector
Energy Efficiency Potential until 2031 
(mtoe)
Moderate Scenario
Ambitious Scenario
Industrial (including SMEs)
47.5
72.3
Commercial Buildings 
4.9
6.4
mtoe = million tons of oil equivalent, SMEs = small and medium-sized enterprises.
Source: Government of India, Bureau of Energy Efficiency. Unlocking Energy Efficiency Potential (UNNATEE). Strategy Plan Toward Developing 
an Energy Efficient Nation (2017-2031).  
10	
Considering the similarity and variabilities involved across different sectors, i.e., industries, buildings, and transport (e-mobility), industries 
and buildings have been placed together for ease of analysis and e-mobility is presented as a separate subsection throughout this report.
11	
Data mentioned in this chapter (except for the potential of CSI) have been taken from the UNNATEE report published by the Bureau of 
Energy Efficiency.
MARKET LANDSCAPE  
OF ENERGY EFFICIENCY,  
CLIMATE-SMART INFRASTRUCTURE,  
AND E-MOBILITY
328
mtoe
Industry accounts for 56% of 
India’s primary energy 
consumption (i.e., 553 mtoe)
SMEs account for 25% of 
the industrial energy 
consumption   
2


Driving Energy-Efficient and Low-Carbon Investments for Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises through the Finance Sector
8
To cater to the estimated energy efficiency potential per the national strategy plan, investment for energy 
efficiency amounts to $140 billion over 14 years. The industrial sector—including SMEs—will contribute to 
around 50%–60% of total energy savings potential and has the energy efficiency investment potential of 
$40 billion–$60 billion by 2031. 
In addition to energy efficiency, CSI possesses enormous investment potential estimated 
at $3 trillion during 2018–2030 (International Finance Corporation [IFC] study on Smart 
Infrastructure in India).12 Green buildings will contribute around 50% of this investment potential 
by 2030. SMEs such as commercial buildings, shopping complexes, hotels, etc. will require an 
investment potential of ~$300 billion by 2031. 
UNNATEE projects a GHG emission reduction potential of 185 metric tons of carbon dioxide 
in the industrial sector. Energy efficiency and CSI deployment in the buildings sector will 
potentially reduce GHG emissions by 34 metric tons of carbon dioxide by 2030.
There is huge potential for energy savings. However, different scales of industries and buildings have different 
priorities and expertise for the execution of energy efficiency and climate strategies. Large industries and 
corporations have access to adequate resources, strong technical teams, and are well-equipped to leverage 
different financing options to support energy efficiency interventions compared to the SME sector where technical 
capabilities and capacities to access finance are limited. The immense quantum of energy consumed by the SME 
sector offers potential for energy savings through technology upgradation, energy efficiency, CSI retrofits in the 
production processes, and the adoption of best-in-class technologies. 
Energy efficiency is generally perceived as a secondary aspect when compared to the core business activity or is only 
considered when it directly links to an increase in production or output in the SME sector. This perception is also 
generated by a lack of awareness about energy efficiency especially in the SME sector. 
Fuel prices have increased steeply. At the same time, long-term initiatives have been planned by the Government 
of India such as net zero emissions by 2070, the promotion of the Energy Conservation Building Code, promoting 
ISO 50001, IoT, Industry 4.0 (including automation, process optimization, virtual audits, real-time monitoring and 
controls), energy management systems, etc. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic also brought to light 
inherent issues related to skilled labor and created an inclination toward digitization and automation through CSI 
and Industry 4.0 technologies. 
All these trends have cumulatively resulted in a gradual, but definite, attitudinal shift in SMEs toward adopting 
modern energy efficiency and CSI technologies. Adoption of energy efficiency and CSI technologies will empower 
SMEs to reduce the cost of production and become more competitive. 
To support this transformation, some key players in the ecosystem will play a pivotal role. It is imperative to 
understand key subsectors and the associated supply chain. During the detailed analysis, subsectors having the 
highest potential for energy savings were mapped, which will help in drafting focused solutions.
12	
International Finance Corporation. 2017. IFC Analysis Points to $3.4 trillion in Climate-Smart Investment Opportunities in South Asia. 
Press Release. 29 November. 


Market Landscape of Energy Efficiency, Climate-Smart Infrastructure, and E-mobility
9
Understanding the E-mobility Market Opportunity in India
To decarbonize the transport sector, India is among a handful of countries that 
have pledged to the global “EV30@30” initiative. As part of this initiative, the 
target is to have at least a 30% share of electric vehicles among the total new 
vehicle sales (footnote 1). To support India’s commitment to tackle climate 
change, the central and state governments have been proactively announcing 
several policy interventions and incentives to support the whole electric vehicle 
ecosystem ranging from manufacturing vehicles, batteries, and battery packs to 
developing a robust charging infrastructure. 
To create an entire value chain around e-mobility in India, significant investments 
will be required at each step. This presents massive investment opportunities for 
every key stakeholder.
Investment Opportunities for Original Equipment Manufacturers  
(Vehicle Manufacturers)
Two-wheeler electric vehicles are expected to be the primary driver of electric vehicle sales in the country, with an 
annual production cost of $1 billion expected in fiscal year (FY) 2021.13 This is expected to increase to $19 billion by 
FY2030.14 To meet the target of 80% electric vehicle sales by 2030, the cumulative cost is expected to be more 
than $91 billion during 2021–2030. 
Total production costs of four-wheeler electric vehicles are expected to be around $20 billion by FY2030 to meet 
the tentative target of around 30% new electric vehicle sales. The total cumulative production cost is expected to be 
around $74 billion by 2030. 
This presents total investment opportunities of around $177 billion from FY2021 to FY2030 
which includes fixed-cost investments such as those required to scale up assembly lines and 
product capacity to meet the respective targets.15
Investment Opportunity for Battery Manufacturing 
As of March 2022, close to 80% of lithium-ion batteries for electric vehicles running in the country were produced 
locally.16 The demand for battery manufacturing is driven by the sale of new electric vehicles and the demand for the 
replacement of batteries in existing electric vehicles. 
Investment Opportunity for Developing Charging Infrastructure
Developing a robust charging infrastructure network is critical to the success of an electric vehicle ecosystem.  
Public charging infrastructure is not solely proportional to the number of electric vehicles sold; it is critically 
dependent on the vehicle categories and their electric vehicle charging requirements. In a study on the charging 
13	
Data points under this section are taken from Government of India, NITI Aayog and Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale 
Zusammenarbeit. 2021. Status Quo Analysis of Various Segments of Electric Mobility and Low Carbon Passenger Road Transport in India.  
New Delhi.
14	
The fiscal year of the Government of India ends on 31 March.
15	
Centre for Energy Finance. Financing India’s Transition to Electric Vehicles.
16	
Press briefing, Road Transports and Highways Minister Nitin Gadkari. 19 March 2022.
58.7
mtoe
Transport accounts for ~9.5% 
of India’s primary energy 
consumption
Road transport 
accounts for 75% of 
energy consumption


Driving Energy-Efficient and Low-Carbon Investments for Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises through the Finance Sector
10
infrastructure of Europe—which has a far more developed electric vehicle ecosystem—only ~20% of the two-
wheelers, ~50% of the three-wheelers, ~20% of the personal four-wheeler vehicles, and ~50% of the commercial 
four-wheeler electric vehicles required public charging facilities.17 
Based on the projected vehicle sales in India until 2030, it is expected that cumulative investments of around 
$3 billion will be required to build a well-connected public charging network, especially across all urban areas and 
highways within India.18 
The clean energy investment potential has been identified for these three key sectors. Investment 
potential is $50 billion for industry, $300 billion for commercial buildings, and $266 billion 
for road transport to support long‑term energy efficiency and energy CSI requirements during 
2023−2033. These three sectors possess an overall investment potential of over $615 billion 
(including the energy efficiency and CSI potential for the SME industrial sector, commercial 
buildings, and e-mobility). 
17	
Government of India, NITI Aayog and Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit. 2021. Status Quo Analysis of Various 
Segments of Electric Mobility and Low Carbon Passenger Road Transport in India. New Delhi.
18	
Based on a PwC estimation for the sector by key experts.


11
This section maps and analyzes energy-intensive SME sectors to identify energy efficiency technology and CSI 
solutions. This analysis leads to suggesting tailored solutions and recommendations for an energy efficiency, CSI, 
and e-mobility financing strategy to be developed for the SME sector. 
Mapping and ranking of the various sectors based on aggregate energy consumption, energy cost share, and number 
of SME units in the sector are presented in this chapter, as well as energy efficiency, CSI, and e-mobility technologies 
that have high replication potential and a need for—and amenability to—third-party financing (see section on 
Mapping Energy Efficiency Technologies for Energy-Intensive Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises). 
These sectors and technologies can serve as focus areas for developing tailored financial products that help in 
promoting long-term sustainable goals and contribute to GHG emission reductions in line with India’s NDC 
commitments.19 Gaining an appreciation of the key market sectors and technologies, along with the supply chain 
dynamics, is vital. 
Mapping Energy-Intensive Sectors (Small and Medium-
Sized Enterprises, Commercial Buildings, and E-mobility)
The SME sector in India comprises organized (registered units) and a sizable unorganized segment. Out of 
60 million enterprises, nearly 20% are manufacturing industries and close to 80% of enterprises come under  
service sectors.20
There is considerable diversity among the industrial units in the manufacturing sector. SMEs in India are segregated 
into a handful of energy-intensive industrial sectors such as bricks, foundries, forging, textiles, ceramics, refractories, 
glass, dairy, etc. Several industrial sectors stand out in terms of their energy intensity. Energy costs form a significant 
share of the manufacturing cost at these SME sectors, with the share of energy cost, accounting sometimes for up to 
30% of the total production costs (including raw material cost). 
In addition to the industrial manufacturing (SME sectors), buildings and transport also stand out in terms of their 
energy intensity, market size, and future growth and investment potential. 
19	
India’s NDCs comprise eight goals. Three of these have quantitative targets up to 2030: cumulative electric power installed capacity 
from nonfossil sources to reach 40%; emissions intensity of GDP to reduce by 33%−35% compared to 2005 levels; and the creation of an 
additional carbon sink of 2.5 billion−3 billion tons of carbon dioxide equivalent (tCO2e) through additional forest and tree cover.
20	
Government of India, Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises. 2022. MoMSME Annual Report 2020−2021.
ENERGY-INTENSIVE SECTORS 
AND TECHNOLOGIES 
3


Driving Energy-Efficient and Low-Carbon Investments for Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises through the Finance Sector
12
E-mobility is one of the subsegments of the transport sector, which comprises electric vehicles, batteries, and 
charging infrastructure, and includes several SME players. The sector has exponential growth potential coupled 
with a high potential for reducing GHG emissions through the energy transition. The energy transition from internal 
combustion engine (ICE) vehicles to electric vehicles will change the entire ecosystem of the road transport sector 
and will help in supporting long-term decarbonization goals. Various subcategories in e-mobility include electric 
vehicles and charging infrastructure, maintenance, and value-added service providers.
Commercial buildings is a subsector that has a significantly high energy intensity trend in the building sector. 
This sector has contributed to a significant increase in the consumption of electricity. This consumption is expected 
to increase multifold in the coming years due to an increase in building floor space propelled by upcoming economic 
reforms, growth in various sectors, improved standard of living, and other factors. This sector will attract policy focus 
and investments toward energy efficiency and decarbonization. The subcategorization of commercial buildings 
includes commercial complexes, offices, shopping malls, and hotels. 
Identifying Sectors with the Most Energy Savings Potential
Sectors with energy efficiency potential have been ranked by identifying criteria such as absolute energy 
consumption, average energy intensity, GHG reduction potential, etc.:
Energy 
Consumption (toe) 
– A
Energy Intensity 
as % of Production 
Cost - B
Average Energy 
Efficiency Potential 
(%) – C
Sector Level 
Absolute GHG 
Emissions – D
The starting point for identifying values against each criterion is a comprehensive scan of previous programmatic 
interventions. The data gathered through secondary research was validated through stakeholder consultations. 
Table 5 summarizes the ranking and prioritization of SME manufacturing sectors based on distinct values against 
each criterion (Appendix 1). 
Figure 1: High Energy-Consuming Subsectors
 
Textile
Steel 
Re-rolling
Ceramics and 
Refractory 
Foundry
Chemical
Pharma
Plastics
Forging
Paper
Auto
Food
Engineering
Glass
Rubber
Sponge Iron
Hand tool
Brass
Source:  Government of India, Bureau of Energy Efficiency.


Energy-Intensive Sectors and Technologies 
13
Table 5: Short-Listed Energy-Intensive Small and Medium-Sized Enterprise Sectors
Rank
Sector
Energy 
Consumption 
(toe)
Energy Intensity 
as % of Prod. Cost
(%)
Energy Efficiency 
Potential
(%)
Calculated 
Weightsa 
1
Textile
5,590,040
20–35
8–12
0.75
2
Steel Re-rolling – Total
1,742,352
40–45
10–15
0.72
3
Foundry
1,292,320
40–45
10–15
0.69
4
Forgings
226,236
35–45
10–15
0.59
5
Ceramics and Refractory
1,655,348
25–35
8–10
0.44
6
Paper
137,971
20–25
10–15
0.44
7
Glassware
385,282
25–30
8–10
0.32
8
Brass
117,404
15–20
10–12
0.32
prod = production, toe = tons of oil equivalent.
a Calculated weights form the basis for ranks assigned. Refer to Appendix 1 for calculation parameters.
Source: Authors, derived from the SME reports for the different sectors and BEE energy audits report.
Using this prioritization matrix, the top eight energy-intensive SME manufacturing sectors are distilled out. Along 
with these, the two most pertinent sectors for clean energy financing—buildings and e-mobility—have been used to 
identify the most promising technologies for financing. 
An inclusive approach was adopted, and attempts were made to include some of the most promising technologies 
irrespective of the sectors in which these are applied.
Mapping Energy Efficiency Technologies  
for Energy‑Intensive Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises
Energy efficiency technologies were mapped by sector based on various criteria such as GHG reduction potential, 
replication potential, commercial aspects, financial feasibility, etc. The broader objective was the identification of 
key technologies that have high financing and/or investment potential. This will help in developing the solutions 
with a focus on key technologies (energy efficiency and CSI) that have a higher contribution in developing 
sustainable solutions. 
Identifying the Most Promising Energy Efficiency and CSI Technologies 
The study mapped the most promising energy efficiency and CSI technologies relevant to the energy-intensive 
MSME sector (see “Mapping Energy-Intensive Sectors” section) using secondary research from multiple resources 
and the following approach:
Figure 2: Approach for Identifying Most Promising Energy Efficiency and CSI Technologies
Mapping of subsectors  
for energy-intensive 
sectors
Mapping of processes/ 
technologies  
at sector and  
subsector levels
Mapping and ranking 
of energy-efficiency 
technologies relevant  
to different energy- 
intensive sectors
Source: Author Analysis.


Driving Energy-Efficient and Low-Carbon Investments for Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises through the Finance Sector
14
The study short-listed the top 50–60 most relevant energy efficiency technologies using key qualitative and 
quantitative criteria. The broader objective of the short-listing exercise was to map key potential technologies that 
can be used to develop long-term sustainable financing solutions. These criteria include measures of impact in 
terms of energy conservation, investment potential, and return on investments on the one hand, and measures of 
scalability like market acceptance and replication potential on the other. 
This report separated technologies into three major categories (commercialized, semi-commercialized, and state of 
the art) based on their maturity and availability. 
Technologies that are available as off-the-shelf products, require no energy study at the unit level for feasibility 
assessment, and with enough case studies in the public domain to define the proven energy savings potential,  
are categorized as commercial technologies. 
Technologies that require customizations at the unit level, require energy study and baseline assessment before 
implementation, and have a lower number of proven case studies available are categorized as semi-commercial. 
Some technologies are relatively new and do not have enough implementation in SMEs, the implementation 
of technologies requires significant investment but result in significant energy savings. Such technologies are 
categorized as state of the art. 
Figure 4 shows the methodology used for the ranking of key energy efficiency technologies.
Based on the parameters in Figure 4, the study ranked the technologies, and the ranking results and methodology 
were discussed during stakeholder consultations with technology providers and original equipment manufacturers 
(OEMs). The detailed methodology adopted for short-listing the technology is in Appendix 2. Table 6 summarizes 
the short-listed technologies based on the rankings from Figure 4.
Figure 3: Criteria to Identify Most Relevant Energy Efficiency Technologies
•	 Energy savings potential
•	 Investment potential
•	 Payback
Quantitative Criteria
•	 GHG emissions reduction potential
•	 Market acceptance
•	 Replication potential
Qualitative Criteria
GHG = greenhouse gas. 
Source: Author Analysis.


Energy-Intensive Sectors and Technologies 
15
Figure 4: Methodology Used for Ranking Key Technologies
Criteria
Weight 
Parameters 
used
for Analysis  
Energy 
saving 
potential
0.1
Investment 
potential
0.3
Payback 
Period
0.1
Relative % 
of energy 
savings 
Relative 
average 
ticket size of 
Energy 
Conservation 
Measure 
Relative 
payback 
of the 
ECMs
GHG 
emissions 
reduction 
potential 
0.1
Potential of 
GHG 
reduction 
(Low/
Medium/
High)
Market 
acceptance
0.1
Acceptance 
by the 
MSMEs and 
degree of the 
Commerci-
alization 
Replication 
potential
0.3
Potential of 
the ECM 
across the 
diferent 
SMEs across 
sectors
ECM = energy conservation measure; GHG = greenhouse gas; MSMEs = micro, small, and medium-sized enterprises; SMEs = small and 
medium-sized enterprises.
Source:  Authors.
Table 6: Summary of Technologies Based on Short-Listing Criteria
Overall 
Rank 
Technology
Most 
Applicable 
Sector 
Energy 
Savings 
Potential 
(%)
Ticket size 
 
( 100,000)
Replication 
Potential
(%)
Payback  
Period 
(years)
Market  
Acceptance
GHG 
Emission  
Reduction 
Potential 
Industrial Energy Efficiency Technologies 
1.
Induction billet 
heater for metal 
heating 
Forging 
50–75
20–50
High
2–3
Commercialized
High
2.
IGBT induction 
melting furnace
Foundry 
5–15
50–200
High
2–3
Commercialized
High
3.
Centralized 
space cooling 
and ventilation
Multiple 
10–30
20–100
High
3–5
Commercialized
Medium
4.
Box type billet 
heating furnaces
Steel and 
allied sectors
15–35
1–5
High
2–3
Commercialized
High
5.
LED lights
Multiple 
40–50
0–1
High
1–2
Commercialized
Medium
6.
EE blowers and 
fans 
Multiple 
20–50
3–7
High
3–5
Commercialized
Low
7.
Gas engine with 
integrated vapor 
absorption 
machine/hot 
water generator
Multiple 
20–40
100–500
Low
3–5
Commercialized
Medium
8.
Waste heat 
recovery
Multiple 
5–10
5–8
High
1–3
Commercialized
High
continued on next page


Driving Energy-Efficient and Low-Carbon Investments for Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises through the Finance Sector
16
Overall 
Rank 
Technology
Most 
Applicable 
Sector 
Energy 
Savings 
Potential 
(%)
Ticket size 
 
( 100,000)
Replication 
Potential
(%)
Payback  
Period 
(years)
Market  
Acceptance
GHG 
Emission  
Reduction 
Potential 
Industrial Energy Efficiency Technologies 
9.
IoT-based 
energy 
monitoring 
system
Multiple 
20–35
1–10
High
3–4
Semi-
commercialized
Medium
10.
Vapor 
absorption 
machine cooling 
system
Multiple 
10–15
10–40
High
3–4
Commercialized
Low
11.
IE3/IE4 motors
Multiple 
5–10
2–8
High
2–3
Commercialized
Medium
12.
Energy efficient 
star rated pump 
set
Multiple 
20–30
2–10
High
2–3
Commercialized
Low
13.
Reduction 
steam leakage 
and use of 
steam traps
Multiple 
25–30
1–20
High
2–3
Commercialized
Low
14.
Evaporative 
condenser for 
water cooling
Multiple 
5–10
20–30
High
3–4
Commercialized
Low
15.
Forging presses 
with variable 
frequency drive
Forging 
10–20
5–10
High
2–3
Commercialized
Low
16.
Co-generation 
boilers/gas 
engines
Multiple 
10–30
150–400
Low
3–4
Semi-
commercialized
Medium
17.
Microturbine
Chemicals/
Textile/Paper
 5–20
80–150
Medium
1–2
Commercialized
High
18.
CNC/VMC/
Multi-axis 
machine
Engineering/
Steel 
20–30
20–35
Medium
3–4
Commercialized
Medium
19.
Reheating 
furnace and 
combustion 
control
Multiple 
5–10
4–8
High
2–3
Commercialized
Low
20.
Screw air 
compressor 
Multiple 
15–20
2.5–10
High
1–2 
Commercialized
Low
21.
PM motor air 
compressors
Multiple 
25–30
10–20
High
1–2 
Semi-
commercialized
Low
22.
Falling film 
evaporator 
(Multi-effect)
Paper/
Chemicals 
10–20
200–400
Low
3–5
Semi-
commercialized
Low
23.
Soft flow fabric 
dyeing machines
Textile
25–30
60–100
Medium
2–3
Commercialized
Low
24
Air jet loom for 
weaving
Textile
15–20
36–54
Medium
3–4
Commercialized
Low
Table 6 continued
continued on next page


Energy-Intensive Sectors and Technologies 
17
Overall 
Rank 
Technology
Most 
Applicable 
Sector 
Energy 
Savings 
Potential 
(%)
Ticket size 
 
( 100,000)
Replication 
Potential
(%)
Payback  
Period 
(years)
Market  
Acceptance
GHG 
Emission  
Reduction 
Potential 
Industrial Energy Efficiency Technologies 
25.
PLC automation 
jet dyeing 
machine
Textile
15–25
1–2
High
3–4
State of the art
Low
26.
BLDC fans
Multiple 
40–50
1–2
Medium
2–3
Commercialized
Low
27.
EE stenter with 
waste heat 
recovery
Textile
20–30
100–200
Low
3–4
Semi-
commercialized
High
28.
EE injection 
moulding 
machines with 
servo drives
Plastics
25–30
5–20
Medium
2–3
Commercialized
Medium
29.
Heat treatment 
- EE electrical 
furnaces with 
EnMS 
Steel and 
allied sectors
10–20
3–10
Medium
2–4
Semi-
commercialized
High
30.
High 
temperature 
fabric dyeing 
machine
Textile
15–30
60–90
Medium
3–4
Semi-
commercialized
Low
31.
Insulation for 
furnace
Multiple 
4–6
1–4
High
0–1
Commercialized
Low
32.
LSU dryer for 
rice mills
Food 
Processing 
20–30
35–50
Medium
2–3
Semi-
commercialized
Medium
33.
Multi-axis 
machining 
center
Engineering/
Steel 
5–15
25–50
Medium
3–4
Commercialized
Low
34.
Water jet looms/
air jet weaving 
machine
Textile
5–15
30–45
Medium
3–5
Commercialized
Low
35.
Energy-efficient 
transformer
Multiple 
20–70
1–10
Medium
2–3
Commercialized
Low
36.
Automatic 
vacuum 
hydraulic 
machine
Multiple 
20–40
5–25
Medium
2–3
Commercialized
Low
37.
Solar steam 
generators/
water heaters
Multiple 
 
20–100
Low
3–5
Commercialized
High
38.
Gasifier
Multiple 
5–15
30–100
Medium
3–4
Semi-
commercialized
Low
39.
Metal melting 
(divided blast 
cupola/gas 
cupola)
Foundry 
15–20
20–30
Medium
2–3
Commercialized
Low
40.
Thermoforming 
sheet extrusion 
machine
Plastics
10–30
28–40
Medium
2–4
Commercialized
Low
Table 6 continued
continued on next page


Driving Energy-Efficient and Low-Carbon Investments for Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises through the Finance Sector
18
Overall 
Rank 
Technology
Most 
Applicable 
Sector 
Energy 
Savings 
Potential 
(%)
Ticket size 
 
( 100,000)
Replication 
Potential
(%)
Payback  
Period 
(years)
Market  
Acceptance
GHG 
Emission  
Reduction 
Potential 
Industrial Energy Efficiency Technologies 
41.
Condensate 
heat recovery
Textile/
Paper/
Chemicals 
10–30
2–5
Medium
2–3
Commercialized
Low
42.
Rotary screen-
printing range
Textile
15–25
150–150
Low
3–4
Commercialized
Low
43.
Aluminum 
compressed air 
pipeline
Multiple 
10–30
1–3
Medium
2–3
Commercialized
Low
44.
Automated core 
and sand plant
Foundry 
5–10
100–300
Low
4–5
Semi-
commercialized
Low
45.
Low thermal 
mass conveying 
system
Ceramics/
Steel 
10–20
1–3
Medium
2–3
Commercialized
Low
46.
Optimization of 
compressed air 
control 
Multiple 
10–30
1–5
Medium
2–3
Commercialized
Low
47.
EE vacuum 
pump
Paper/
Chemicals 
35–40
40–70
Low
3–4
Commercialized
Low
48.
Energy efficient 
blower/fans 
Multiple 
5–10
2–6
Medium
2–3
Commercialized
Low
49.
Automatic flat 
screen-printing 
machine
Textile
5–10
100–200
Low
3–4
Commercialized
Low
50.
Multi-layer film 
extruder
Plastics
35–50
30–30
Low
2–3
Commercialized
Medium
51.
Garment dyeing 
machines
Textile
25–30
60–60
Low
3–4
Commercialized
Low
52.
Thyristor-
based control 
of electrical 
heaters
Multiple 
5–15
1–5
Medium
2–3
Commercialized
Low
53.
Automatic 
power factor 
controller
Multiple 
5–10
1–10
Medium
1–3
Commercialized
Low
54.
EE steam boiler 
with automation
Multiple  
10–15
5–15
Medium
1–2
Commercialized
Low
55.
Yarn vacuum 
conditioning 
and heat setting 
systems
Textile
5–15
150–200
Low
3–5
Semi-
commercialized
Low
56.
Scouring and 
bleaching
Textile
15–20
100–200
Low
3–4
Semi-
commercialized
Low
57.
Rotating twin 
extruders
Plastics
15–20
50–50
Low
3–5
Commercialized
Low
Table 6 continued
continued on next page


Energy-Intensive Sectors and Technologies 
19
Table 6 continued
Overall 
Rank 
Technology
Most 
Applicable 
Sector 
Energy 
Savings 
Potential 
(%)
Ticket size 
 
( 100,000)
Replication 
Potential
(%)
Payback  
Period 
(years)
Market  
Acceptance
GHG 
Emission  
Reduction 
Potential 
Industrial Energy Efficiency Technologies 
58.
CSI and EE 
technologies in 
buildings
(HVAC, 
chillers, 
building 
envelope, RE 
power, gas 
engines, LED 
lights and 
BLDC fans, 
IoT-based 
automations)
Commercial 
Buildings 
5–35
15–1000
High
1–8
Commercialized
Medium
59.
CSI and EE 
technologies in 
buildings
(HVAC, 
chillers, 
building 
envelope, RE 
power, gas 
engines, LED 
lights and 
BLDC fans, 
IoT-based 
automations)
Commercial 
Buildings 
5–35
15–1000
High
1–8
Commercialized
Medium
BLDC = brushless direct current; EnMS = energy management system; HVAC = heating, ventilation, and air-conditioning;  
IE3/IE4 = International Efficiency; IGBT = Insulated Gate Bipolar Transistor; IoT = Internet of Things; LED = light emitting diode;  
LSU  Louisiana State University; PLC = Programmable Logic Controller; VAM = vapor absorption machine; VMC = vertical machining centers.
a This will support energy transition: conversion from oil to electrically driven transport.
Sources: BEE energy audit reports; cluster profiles prepared under different assignments; reports on commercial buildings by CII, GBCI; 
multiple reports from NITI Aayog, etc. These have been validated during the consultations carried out with original equipment manufacturers, 
energy service companies, and third parties.
Technologies mapped in Table 6 cater to energy-intensive sectors and have energy savings potential of 5%−30%. 
Few technologies have higher energy savings potential of 50% or more.
In addition to the energy-intensive sectors identified, many of the commercialized technologies are crosscutting and 
support energy conservation in other SME sectors. 
Commercialized technologies with medium and high payback have higher potential for financing, as these 
technologies are well-proven, and better financing solutions will support wider and faster adoption.
Commercialized technologies do not exhibit significant technical or performance risks and can be financed at scale 
through demand aggregation strategies.


Driving Energy-Efficient and Low-Carbon Investments for Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises through the Finance Sector
20
Demand aggregation strategies can be supported by different players in the ecosystem to boost the economies 
of scale for commercialized technologies with lower ticket sizes. For example, Energy-Efficiency Services Limited 
(EESL), under the United Nations Industrial Development Organization- Global Environment Facility (UNIDO-
GEF) project, is promoting the demand aggregation of the few industrial energy efficiency technologies such as 
variable frequency drives, jet dyeing machines, programmable logic computer-based automation, energy-efficient 
motors, and pump sets. EESL also has its own programs where it promotes demand aggregation of appliance related 
technologies such as light emitting diode (LED) light fixtures, brushless direct current and star labeled fans. 
State-of-the-art technologies require a higher level of customization and can involve inherent technical and 
performance risks. Risk guarantee mechanisms can support the financial institutions to cover the associated risk 
enabling them to support the financing requirements of the SMEs.
Some of the semi-commercialized technologies with limited customization needs can be standardized for 
implementation and financing processes by providing due technical assistance to the implementing agencies and 
financial institutions. This can be implemented where the degree of customization required is higher, through 
project financing models with risk guarantee coverage along the lines of state-of-the-art technologies. 
Based on the risk perception of financial institutions, semi-commercialized technologies can lend themselves either 
to standardization and demand aggregation strategies (like commercialized technologies) or to project financing 
with risk guarantee (like state-of-the-art technologies).
To capture the challenges and barriers before framing the solutions, it is important to map the supply chain 
for energy efficiency, CSI, and e-mobility technologies and draw on the key learnings from past programmatic 
interventions and the evolving policy landscape for developing better focused solutions.
Identifying the Most Promising E-Mobility Solutions
The Government of India has targeted around 30% electric vehicle penetration by 2030 (footnote 19). To achieve 
this target, there needs to be rapid transformational policies and measures that help pick up the pace of India’s 
electric vehicle penetration. To increase the penetration of e-mobility at the ground level, it is imperative to 
understand the landscape of e-mobility in the country. While other countries have much more mature electric 
vehicle markets, the Indian electric vehicle market is still at its nascent stage. Some of the key factors that 
differentiate India’s electric vehicle market from that of developed countries are as follows:
(i)	
The Indian consumer is still largely dependent on public transport (as of 2023, public transport has 
an oil-operated fleet) which includes buses, trains, three-wheeler automobiles, etc. for their day-to-
day commute and travel. This is the key differentiating factor between India and other industrialized 
countries that have higher per capita income and are more developed. 
(ii)	
With its limited infrastructure, the traffic density in the Indian metros and urban cities is higher than in 
industrialized countries.
(iii)	 The average Indian commutes around 5 kilometers (km) daily to reach their workplace, whereas, in the 
United States (US), this distance is approximately 26 km. 
(iv)	 Since India is still a developing country, the average income of an Indian is much lower compared 
with the average income of its foreign counterparts in more developed countries. As a result, Indian 
consumers have generally low affordability and are price sensitive. For a price-sensitive customer, 
the most preferred vehicle category in the Indian transportation context is two-wheelers. Two-wheelers 
make up almost 80% of the total vehicle sales in the country. In India, the use of three-wheelers is also 
higher than in industrialized countries. 


Energy-Intensive Sectors and Technologies 
21
(v)	
Being a price-sensitive economy with less than average income compared to developed countries, 
Indian consumers have overall lower vehicle ownership. For example, in 2018, data on vehicle ownership 
showed that India had 22 cars per 1,000 individuals, the US had around 980, and the United Kingdom 
had 850.21 
It is anticipated that India’s electric vehicle adoption will be led by two-wheelers and three-wheelers rather than 
four-wheelers. These vehicles are ideal for commuting short distances in cities and villages. They also have lower 
up-front costs compared to four-wheeler electric vehicles. It is also expected that the adoption of three-wheeler 
electric vehicles will be led by Indians to earn their livelihood. Three-wheeler electric vehicle solutions are expected 
to be the cheapest and safest solutions for last-mile connectivity of business-to-business and business-to-
consumer businesses. Electric vehicles will play a key role in developing the shared mobility ecosystem in India. 
Since the operational cost of an electric vehicle is low, shared mobility will emerge as a highly cost-effective mode 
of transportation in the future. A 2021 study by NITI Aayog showed that an 80% electric vehicle penetration is 
expected for two-wheelers and three-wheelers by 2030, whereas around 50% electric vehicle penetration for 
four-wheelers and 30% electric vehicle penetration for buses are expected. To support the transition, a further 
investment of $3 billion is required to strengthen the electric vehicle charging infrastructure. Table 7 shows expected 
electric vehicle sales for each vehicle category by 2030 as per projections prepared by NITI Aayog.
Table 7: Electric Vehicle Sales (Actual and Projected) 
Vehicle Category
Actual 2020 Sales
Projected 2030 Sales
Required Compound 
annual growth rate
(%)
Potential 
($ billion)
Two-Wheelers
89,000
56,594,000
91
91
Three-Wheelers
411,000
12,319,000
41
5
Four-Wheelers
15,000
10,587,000
92
73
Buses
600
542,000
98
8
Sources: Government of India, NITI Aayog and Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit. 2021. Status Quo Analysis of 
Various Segments of Electric Mobility and Low Carbon Passenger Road Transport in India. New Delhi; projections carried out based by experts 
considering the assumptions for the e-mobility sector.
Figure 5 shows the total cost of ownership for different electric vehicles.22
These targets, if achieved, will result in savings of around 474 mtoe, which accounts for approximate savings of  
15 trillion. With electric vehicles being a highly energy-efficient and green technology, the corresponding savings of 
carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions is expected to be around 846 million tons per year.23  E-mobility will support India 
to meet the NDCs and reduce the import dependency on oil and boost the growth of the sustainable economy.
21	
N. Rampal. 2022. Only 8% Indian Families Own Cars, NFHS Finds. Over 50% Still Use Bicycles, Bikes & Scooters. The Print. 27 May.  
22	
P. Kumar and C. Kanuri. 2020. Total Cost of Ownership of Electric Vehicles: Implications for Policy and Purchase Decisions. WRI INDIA.  
6 October. 
23	
Government of India, Public Information Bureau. 2019. NITI Aayog & RMI Release Technical Analysis of FAME II Scheme. Press release.  
5 April.


Driving Energy-Efficient and Low-Carbon Investments for Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises through the Finance Sector
22
Figure 5: Total Costs of Ownership of Electric Vehicles 
(per kilometer) 
CNG-Bus (12m_AC)
Comparison of TCO per km
Diesel-Bus (12m_AC_Low_Cost)
Diesel-Bus (12m_AC_High_Cost)
Diesel-Car (Sedan_Commercial)
Petrol-Car (Sedan_Commercial)
CNG car-Car (Sedan_Commercial)
e-car (Sedan_Commercial)
Diesel-Car (Sedan_Private)
Petrol-Car (Sedan_Private)
CNG-Car (Sedan_Private)
e-Car (Sedan_Private)
Vehicle Segment
2W (Petrol_Commercial)
e-2W (HC_Commercial)
e-2W (LC_Commercial)
2W (Petrol_Private)
e-2W (HC_Private)
e-2W (LC_Private)
Diesel-3W
Petrol-3W
CNG-3W
e-auto (LIB)
e-rickshaw (LIB)
e-Bus (12m_AC)
0
10
1.88
3.18
2.31
0.67
1.14
1.27
1.3
2.1
2.32
2.8
2.69
17.55
12.43
14.65
15.77
3.59
3.1
4.49
4.23
60.47
69.28
44.3
49.04
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
TCO ( /KM)
Daily Travel Distance
Bus - 200 km
Car (Commercial) - 190 km
Car (Private) - 35 km
3W - 100 km
e-rickshaw - 100 km
2W (Commercial) - 75 km
2W (Private) - 25 km
 = rupee, 2W = two-wheeler, 3W = three-wheeler, AC = air-conditioned, CNG = compressed natural gas, e = electric, HC = high cost, 
km = kilometer, LC = low cost,  LIB = lithium ion battery, m = meter, TCO = total cost of ownership.
Source: P. Kumar and C. Kanuri 2020. Total Cost of Ownership of Electric Vehicles: Implications for Policy and Purchase Decisions.  
WRI INDIA. 6 October. 


23
Energy Efficiency and Climate-Smart Infrastructure Supply 
Chain for Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises 
The energy efficiency and CSI supply chain and ecosystem can be broadly categorized (i) OEM, (ii) local service 
provider (LSP), and (iii) energy service company (ESCO). Figure 6 shows various linkages among the different 
players working in the supply chain.
Original Equipment Manufacturers 
Manufacturing facilities of OEMs to produce energy 
efficiency equipment and technology solutions are  
usually centralized at a few strategically selected locations 
based on the availability of the factors of production,  
and proximity to markets, etc (Box 1). They serve the 
clients through their regional and local sales offices or a 
usually elaborate network of channel partners that are 
locally available across the major SME clusters.  
SUPPLY CHAIN FOR ENERGY 
EFFICIENCY, CLIMATE-SMART 
INFRASTRUCTURE, AND 
E-MOBILITY TECHNOLOGIES 
Figure 6: Supply Chain Linkages
 
Raw Material and Components Procurement
 
Manufacturing / Assembly  of the Energy Efcient 
Equipment / Services 
Feasibility Studies—Energy Efcient Projects 
Sales and Marketing of Energy Efciency / Smart 
Infrastructure technologies
Implementation support and networking 
through allied partners  
OEM / LSP / Vendor ESCOs
ESCOs
Channel partners, Regional ofce 
of OEMs, LSPs
Supply Chain Mapping—Energy-Efcient 
Climate-Smart Infrastructure
Key players
ESCO = energy service company, LSP = local service provider, OEM = original equipment manufacturer.
Source: PwC experience.
Box 1: Original Equipment Manufacturers
Some examples of OEMs actively working in the Indian 
energy efficiency CSI technology supply chain are
Thermax, SPG Prints, Voltas, Schneider Electric, ABB, Plasma 
Induction, Inductotherm, Jyoti CNC, Milacron, Kaeser 
Compressors, NCON Turbines, Cheema Boilers, etc. 
These cover some of the key energy efficiency 
CSI technologies short-listed in chapter 2.
Source: PwC experience/Author analysis.
4


Driving Energy-Efficient and Low-Carbon Investments for Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises through the Finance Sector
24
For instance, Inductotherm Corp.—a manufacturer of electric induction melting and heating technologies—has 
its manufacturing facility in Ahmedabad. Plasma Induction (India) Pvt. Ltd.—another OEM for this technology—
has its manufacturing facility in Rajkot. They have regional teams and offices in all prominent SME clusters that 
utilize metal melting and heating operations (e.g., foundry and forging clusters across the country like Kolhapur, 
Coimbatore, Pune, etc.). These OEMs leverage the reach and expertise of their regional and local teams for sales 
and marketing of energy efficiency technologies. 
(i)	
An OEM is a crucial and integral part of the entire supply chain. They manufacture and implement 
energy-efficient equipment and/or technologies and solutions for the industries.
(ii)	
OEMs usually offer a wide spectrum of technology and solutions with the support of their extensive 
network of regional offices and/or channel partners. This may include standard off-the-shelf and fully 
commercialized energy efficiency technologies, as well as state-of-the-art modern technology solutions. 
OEMs may also manufacture tailored energy efficient equipment and/or solutions engineered to the 
specific requirements of SME customers and ESCOs working in the energy efficiency and CSI domain.
(iii)	 The large OEMs—especially with their significant sales pipelines through regional offices and channel 
partners—can leverage sales pipeline to drive energy efficiency and CSI finance by enticing the services 
of banks and/or NBFCs at the point of sale. This was validated by various OEMs during stakeholder 
consultations.
(iv)	 OEMs usually prefer the up-front payment (capital expenditure [capex] model) for implementation. The 
risk of the performance of the equipment is borne by the OEM against the design conditions. 
(v)	
Most of the technology suppliers have been working under the capex model with SMEs. Technology 
providers and/or OEMs (e.g., Schneider, Kaeser Compressors, Grundfos, etc.) that offer commercialized 
off-the-shelf energy efficiency products prefer to associate with channel partners for effective reach and 
local presence at SME clusters. 
(vi)	 These technology providers support the capacity development of their channel partners through training 
programs and hand-holding support. 
(vii)	 The OEMs who typically offer customizable solutions as part of their product range (e.g., Plasma, 
Thermax, Voltas, etc.) tend to operate through a network of regional and local offices in the SME 
clusters. These regional offices with technical experts provide the required support to the SMEs for sales 
and project execution.
(viii)	 Less than 5% of the large OEMs are led by women.24 They have been conventionally led by males since 
the industrial revolution in India. However, with the rapid evolution of businesses, the stake of women in 
management and decision-making roles has been gradually increasing. Corporate OEMs like Cummins, 
Bosch, Schneider, Siemens, etc. have a higher percentage of the female workforce along with a few other 
SME OEMs. For instance, Plasma is one of the women-led OEMs providing sustainable energy efficiency 
products. 
(ix)	 The building sector has women leaders who are leading the forms and institutions for defining new 
norms for sustainable and climate-friendly growth of the building sector. GBCI India is a women-led 
organization.
The execution of energy efficiency and CSI technology solutions also requires access to finance. Smaller OEMs 
require working capital loans for the execution of large-scale energy efficiency projects, while SMEs obtain finance 
mostly as term loans for the implementation of technology solutions. Leading OEMs also have tie-ups with NBFCs 
to ease the financing requirements for the SME units and to provide innovative financing arrangements including 
leasing. Financing institutions have an important role to play in the clean energy adoption and transition at SMEs. 
24	
Based on multiple consultations the value is estimated.


Supply Chain for Energy Efficiency, Climate-Smart Infrastructure, and E-mobility Technologies 
25
Energy efficiency solutions vary from $100 to a few thousand dollars. Based on the ticket size and their individual 
needs, the SME procures the equipment through self-financing, working capital financing, or term loans. Third-party 
financing plays a crucial role in fostering the adoption of modern energy efficiency and CSI technologies. NBFCs 
and financial institutions have the expertise in evaluating energy efficiency and CSI and will play a crucial 
role in the long run. 
Local Service Providers
LSPs are one of the crucial parts of the supply chain of the energy 
efficiency and CSI technology network (Box 2). LSPs are present 
locally in specific SME clusters and regions and provide energy 
efficiency solutions in the specific clusters. They have a limited 
geographical presence and usually cater to customized solutions 
and requirements of the specific MSME sectors located in the region 
or cluster. For instance, EnEFF provides energy efficiency furnaces 
for forging and heat treatment applications to the SME industrial 
requirement in and around Ludhiana. 
LSPs usually prefer the capital expenditure model for implementation. Investment in energy efficiency and CSI 
solutions varies from a few thousand dollars to less than $12,500. Most of the solutions offered by LSPs have 
lower payback periods, and SMEs generally do not opt for institutional finance for implementation of these 
energy efficiency solutions. Working capital limits available with the present banker are also used by SMEs for the 
implementation of these solutions.
Channel partners of the large OEMs working in the SME cluster would require working capital finance for the 
execution of energy efficiency projects. Typically, these channel partners are themselves SMEs. A few LSPs provide 
bank guarantees as a payment security mechanism while working with large OEMs during the execution of energy 
efficiency and CSI projects.
Key Supply Chain Challenges that Persist in the Energy Efficiency and CSI Supply Chain 
Addressing the complexities of the energy efficiency and CSI supply chain involves tackling several persistent 
challenges. These challenges underscore the sector's dependence on imported components for sophisticated 
machinery and automation, limited outreach of technology providers to smaller clusters, and barriers in integrating 
smart technologies like IoT and Industry 4.0. Furthermore, the shortage of skilled personnel and the absence 
of robust frameworks for measurement and verification pose additional hurdles in scaling up adoption across 
diverse sectors. Some of these challenges include:
(i)	
dependence on the import of the components for energy efficiency equipment and import dependence 
for large, sophisticated machinery, high-end sensors for automation (such as permanent magnets for 
motors, specialized castings for pumps and valves, electronic components and sensors for automation, 
high-end technologies for productivity enhancement, etc.).
(ii)	
limited reach of energy efficiency technology providers to smaller clusters. 
(iii)	 limited penetration of smart technologies (IoT, Industry 4.0, energy management system) and historical 
data requirement for customization of energy efficiency solutions. 
(iv)	 lack of local availability of skilled personnel for execution and operation of energy efficiency technologies 
(limits the adoption of the new technologies in least-advanced SME clusters only).
Box 2: Local Service Providers
Some examples of LSPs actively working in the 
Indian energy efficiency and CSI supply chain 
are Basotra Engineers, EnEFF furnaces, Airprax 
Pneumatics, ISCT, Channel partners of OEMs, 
Local Fabricators, etc.
Source: PwC experience/Author analysis.


Driving Energy-Efficient and Low-Carbon Investments for Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises through the Finance Sector
26
(v)	
lack of adequate framework for measurement and verification (M&V) activities for performing the 
guaranteed test for energy efficient equipment (highly customizable and state-of-the-art technologies 
require the M&V framework to prove the energy savings).
Major Challenges Resulting in Lower Adoption of Energy Efficiency Technologies in SMEs
The adoption of energy efficiency technologies among SMEs faces significant barriers that hinder their widespread 
implementation. These challenges include perceived high costs, lack of awareness and confidence in energy 
efficiency technologies, limited access to financing, and concerns regarding the techno-economic feasibility of 
these solutions within SME operations.
(i)	
Around 70% of the technology providers responded that the higher cost of equipment and lack of 
awareness or confidence in energy efficiency technologies (and the resulting limited demand for energy 
efficiency and CSI equipment) among SMEs are major hurdles to the adoption of energy efficiency 
technologies in MSMEs. Only a few of the respondents confirmed that they assist MSMEs to get finance 
from financial institutions and NBFCs during the procurement stage. A lack of financing for MSMEs 
delays the wider adoption of energy efficiency measures (Figure 7).
(ii)	
Around 18% of the OEMs consulted indicated the limited techno-economic feasibility of energy 
efficiency technologies at SMEs and a lack of capabilities to evaluate the allied benefits of energy 
efficiency technologies as barriers that hinder the implementation of capital-intensive technologies 
in MSMEs.
Business Models Preferred by Original Equipment Manufacturers and Local Service Providers 
(i)	
Around 77% of the technology providers operate on the capex model (up-front payment for a 
purchase). The following risks related to the SME sector also contribute to this trend: 
(a)	 Low credibility of SMEs to repay.
Figure 7: Reasons for Lower Adoption of Energy Efficiency Technologies  
Among Micro, Small, and Medium-Sized Enterprises
18%
35%
35%
6%
6%
Higher upfront cost of EE and/or SI equipment
Lack of awareness among the customers
Policy and/or regulatory barriers in 
adopting solutions
Lack of incentives and subsidies 
for EE and/or SI adoptions
Techno-commercial feasibility 
of EE technologies
EE = energy efficiency, SI = smart infrastructure.
Source: Based on 12 consultations through discussion guides carried out during the study.


Supply Chain for Energy Efficiency, Climate-Smart Infrastructure, and E-mobility Technologies 
27
Figure 8: Preferred Business Models
77%
8%
15%
Capex model
Leasing
Opex Model
capex = capital expenditure, opex = operating expenses. 
Source: Based on stakeholder consultations carried out during the study.
(b)	 Limited opportunities for M&V assessment in MSME units.
(c)	 Challenges in energy baseline assessments. 
(ii)	
Less than 8% of the OEMs consulted during the study also offer leasing-based financing 
solutions for their customers through special arrangements with financial institutions. OEMs that 
responded to this question provided commercialized solutions, and these technologies have good 
resale value and have access to a secondary market for resale. Some of the leading NBFCs and financial 
institutions actively supporting this model are Siemens Financial Services, Electronica Finance Limited 
(EFL), etc. Most of the equipment financed and executed under this model have a good secondhand 
market and/or are backed by appropriate buyback guarantees from the OEM that help financial 
institutions moderate the risk of default by MSMEs.
(iii)	 Around 15% of the respondents provide opex-based solutions (leasing and/or service-based 
payment mechanism). CSI and renewable energy solution providers usually use a hybrid mode, where 
some percentage of the payment is taken up front, and the rest of the payments are linked to long-term 
service agreements. OEMs take the loan on their balance sheet for the execution of the assignments 
(Figure 8).
Women Working as Employees or Value Chain Partners in Clean Energy Enterprises 
Traditionally, women have been understated as employees within the clean energy landscape, particularly in 
technology and engineering-related roles. The inclusion of women in tech-oriented roles within the clean energy 
sector will not only help generate more employment opportunities but will also create a better understanding of 
customer needs to design and create more gender-inclusive products and services.25 
25	
Details of women’s presence in the supply chain are presented in Appendix 3.


Driving Energy-Efficient and Low-Carbon Investments for Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises through the Finance Sector
28
Companies such as Dharma Life, Frontier Markets, etc. working in the energy efficiency space have smoothly 
incorporated women—especially rural women—as their product distributors and sales agents in villages and other 
rural parts of the country. Dharma Life’s sustainable products such as solar lights, clean cookstoves, etc. have 
reached 10 million beneficiaries across more than 50,000 villages in 13 states of India through its network of over 
16,000 rural women entrepreneurs. 
To enable participation from women entrepreneurs in the last-mile delivery segment, they must have support 
from other family members, businesses must provide them with the requisite training and safe working timing and 
conditions, etc. to easily commute and build a strong customer base to generate a viable income.
Energy Service Company
An energy service company (ESCO) forms a critical link in the energy efficiency supply chain. ESCOs are 
responsible for energy audits, preparing detailed investment grade project reports, procuring equipment, project 
implementation, and monitoring evaluations. ESCOs provide the technical support required by SMEs to understand 
energy efficiency solutions (Box 3). 
ESCOs are mostly situated in the metro regions, including 
Pune, Delhi NCR, and Bengaluru. Vendor ESCOs have central 
manufacturing facilities and operate through marketing and 
services teams across the different SME clusters, e.g., prominent 
ESCOs in Pune region include Yantra Harvest, Saven, and SWID. 
Vendor ESCOs such as Promethean, Bosch, and Schneider have 
corporate offices in Bengaluru region. Few ESCOs in India are led 
by women as partners or directors.
ESCOs can be broadly categorized into two categories:  
pure ESCOs and vendor ESCOs. 
(i)	

Pure ESCOs provide service-oriented solutions such as energy audits, preparing detailed investment 
grade project reports, support in procurement of equipment, energy efficiency project implementation, 
and monitoring or evaluation of resulting energy savings. Pure ESCO companies do not manufacture 
but source equipment and technologies from OEMs. ESCOs are concentered in the metro regions (e.g., 
Alien Energy, Smart Joule) and prominent MSME clusters (e.g., Yantra Harvest, Saven, SWID). ESCOs 
work closely with MSME and technology providers for the execution of ESCO projects in industries and 
buildings. They are positioned to be among the most effective enablers for demand aggregation as they 
work very closely with multiple MSMEs and buildings to support energy efficiency and CSI technologies. 
However, they are often limited in the size and extent of their operations. They usually originate as 
service sector start-ups and can scale their operations to varying degrees.
(ii)	

Vendor ESCOs are an integral part of the energy efficiency and CSI supply chain. They are engaged 
in the design and manufacture of energy efficiency and CSI technologies like their larger counterpart 
OEMs. They often are start-ups or operate at a smaller scale compared to large OEMs. In addition to 
the manufacture of technologies or equipment, they provide solutions and services around energy 
performance guarantees and performance contracting, like those offered by ESCOs. Vendor ESCOs 
offer high-end customizable energy efficiency solutions and state-of-the-art technologies based 
on unit-level parameters. Vendor ESCOs carry out an in-depth study of the processes, defining 
baseline, and M&V  protocols using data monitoring, and carry out the implementation on 
partially capex and ESCO models. 
Box 3: Energy Service Companies 
Some examples of pure energy service 
companies actively working in the Indian 
energy efficiency and climate-smart 
infrastructure technology supply chain are 
Smart Joules, Yantra Harvest, Servotech 
Power, Cosmoright Services Pvt. Ltd, Desire 
Energy, Power Tech, SWID, Alien Energy, etc.
Source: PwC experience / Author analysis.


Supply Chain for Energy Efficiency, Climate-Smart Infrastructure, and E-mobility Technologies 
29
Understanding the Key Challenges Faced by Suppliers and Energy Service Companies 
Based on multiple interactions with different suppliers, the study mapped the business models adopted by 
different suppliers.
In addition to inputs for the long list of energy efficiency and CSI technologies for MSMEs, the consultations helped 
the study to understand the various challenges related to energy efficiency financing in MSMEs. These technology 
providers serve as the first avenue to understand cluster dynamics such as local industry energy efficiency 
technology needs, market trends, adoption levels, and barriers toward energy efficiency.
The study conducted 12 consultations with OEMs and technology providers. The study asked questions 
regarding the preferred mode of implementation in the MSME sector, outreach to MSME clusters, and reasons for 
the lower adoption of energy efficiency technologies in MSMEs. 
Major Hurdles Faced by Energy Service Companies 
Less than half of the ESCOs (43%) responded that the lack of standard M&V protocols for ESCO projects is 
the key hurdle in assessing the energy efficiency potential of the projects (Figure 9).26 ESCOs advised that a better 
regulatory and legal system, along with strict M&V protocols, can boost ESCO projects in the country. Programmatic 
interventions around technical assistance support for M&V will be rolled out for developing the ecosystem and 
culture of energy efficiency in the industries and developing the M&V framework for ESCO projects.27
(i)	
Few ESCOs prefer to use IoT-enabled platforms for evaluating real-time energy savings for easier M&V 
processes. This requires the metering of multiple parameters and so is limited to the upper end of the 
medium-sized units that possess multiple metering points in the units.
(ii)	
Almost all ESCOs have confirmed that long lead times and high transaction costs associated with energy 
studies and baseline estimation are the major challenges for the execution of energy efficiency projects 
in MSMEs and remained the main hurdle for executing ESCO-based projects. 
26	
Alliance for an Energy Efficient Economy (AEEE). 2020. Transforming the Energy Services Sector in India Towards a Billion Dollar ESCO Market. 
27	
This is based on stakeholder discussions as per the original report.
Figure 9: Major Hurdles for Energy Services Companies
43%
28%
29%
Lack of conﬁdence in the 
new EE technologies
Low ﬁnancial credibility 
of MSME consumers
Lack of M&V practices 
and baseline estimation
EE = energy efficiency; M&V = measurement and verification; MSME = micro, small, and medium-sized enterprise. 
Source: This is based on stakeholder discussions as per the original report.


Driving Energy-Efficient and Low-Carbon Investments for Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises through the Finance Sector
30
(iii)	 All the ESCOs consulted responded that access to lower cost of funds is the major hurdle. Only a few 
responded that they can seek project financing from some NBFCs. Other ESCOs only have access to 
balance sheet-based financing for ESCO projects. 
Business Models Preferred by Energy Service Companies
(i)	
Pure ESCOs and vendor ESCOs prefer the guaranteed savings model in the absence of project finance 
or third-party loans. In a guaranteed savings model, an ESCO receives the agreed fee from the utility or 
owner once the savings are proven through a rigorous measurement and verification process. Payment  
of ESCO fees is based on the savings achieved. If no savings are achieved, no payments would be due to 
the ESCO.  
(ii)	
The shared savings model is preferred by an ESCO when project finance is available (term loan or 
line of credit) to meet the financing requirements of the energy efficiency and CSI implementation. 
A few niche NBFCs with the ability to evaluate energy efficiency and CSI projects support the ESCOs 
with financing solutions for the wider uptake of the energy efficiency and CSI loans. The shared savings 
model is when an ESCO and/or company installs energy-saving equipment and verifies or establishes 
the energy savings through a measurement and verification framework. Based on the monetary savings 
achieved, the ESCO is paid a percentage share of the savings within an agreed period for the duration 
of the contract. No up-front payment is made to the ESCO. The above findings are based on five 
stakeholder consultations carried out during the study. 
Figure 10: Supply Chain of E-mobility
• Hardware 
Manufacture
• OEMs
Sales/Retail
Pure-play 
services 
providers
Charging 
Network
Maintenance 
services
Value-added 
services
Utilities
EV Users/Customers
EV Manufacturer
Government(s)/Regulator(s)
Smart Cities/Smart Transportation
Charging Infrastructure 
Operators/Fleet Management
• Supply of power
• Allocation of system capacity 
for EV demand
• Power procurement and supply
• Inputs to regulators cooperation 
with regulators
• Clean/smart city transits systems
• 90 smart cities are selected in India
• EVs are good candidates under 
cleaner transit projects under smart 
city mission in India
• Inputs to regulators cooperation 
with regulators
• Providing charging 
infrastructure accessibility
• Providing ﬂeet management 
services
• Low electricity price 
through lifetime
• Easy accessibility for 
opportunistic/long period
• Preferential charging 
membership
• Creating competition 
in market
• Supporting EV manufacturers/
service providers
• Afordable tarif to EV users
• Creation of jobs and 
investments
• User experience while motoring 
i.e. access to charging stations for 
wide range of battery 
capacities/charger ratings
• Compatibility of chargers with its 
battery standards
• Owning charging networks 
(e.g., Tesla) or partnership with 
service providers
EV = electric vehicle, OEM = original equipment manufacturer.
Source: PwC project experience.


Supply Chain for Energy Efficiency, Climate-Smart Infrastructure, and E-mobility Technologies 
31
Figure 11: Value Chain of Electric Mobility
Value chain
Sales and distribution
Manufacturers
Telemetric and 
data processing
Engine 
manufacturers
OEMs
Battery/Motor/Parts 
manufacturers
Aftermarket kit/
Part manufacturers
Intra vehicle charging
Performance and 
diagnostics
Mobile/web platform, 
CRM
Fleet Management
End users of electric vehicles
Private owner
Fleet owner operator
New and old 
vehicle sales
Charging infra 
deployment
Energy 
supply
Consumers, 
usage
Maintenance
Financial services
Financing
Leasing
Insurance
Customers services
Network management
Government
Physical 
infrastructure 
maintenance
Charging infrastructure network
Energy companies
Physical energy supply
Smart metering
Billing
Telecom 
infrastructure
Battery 
replacement 
and waste 
management
Data centers
Billing
Change 
point Mfg.
Acquisition 
and 
deployment
Battery swapping
Maintenance
Metering
Municipalities
Parking Infrastructure
CRM = customer relationship management, mfg = manufacturing, OEM = original equipment manufacturer.
Source:  PwC project experience.
Understanding the E-mobility Supply Chain in India
Within the e-mobility value chain, several key stakeholders play an important role as key enablers in India’s transition 
to zero-emission mobility. Broadly, these stakeholders fall into one or more of the following categories: funding 
providers, regulation providers, and knowledge providers. Figure 10 shows the electric vehicle landscape in India 
along with the roles of its key stakeholders. Figure 11 shows how the different stakeholders are interconnected across 
the entire value chain.
There are several upcoming and innovative business models across the globe within the electric vehicle ecosystem. 
These business models are designed to address various challenges that are inhibiting the adoption of electric 
vehicles, such as high up-front cost, apprehension around battery life, battery charging time, and range anxiety. 
Table 8 describes various business models that exist in India within the e-mobility landscape.
Apart from the key business models in Table 8, several new and innovative business models have emerged across 
the e-mobility value chain within the evolving landscape of India’s electric mobility. 


Driving Energy-Efficient and Low-Carbon Investments for Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises through the Finance Sector
32
Table 8: Electric Vehicle Business Models and Ecosystem
Business Model
Description
Prominent Players
Vehicle Leasing Model 
•	 Vehicles are leased on a monthly rental basis 
allowing the customer to use the vehicle 
without owning it.
•	 The model aims to solve the problem of high 
up-front cost of electric vehicles.
•	 These schemes are specially designed to cater 
to the customer anxiety related to owning 
a vehicle as it takes care of the insurance, 
maintenance, registration, taxes, etc.
Autovert, ETO Motors, 
Orix Auto, Myles, Mahindra 
Finance
Battery Leasing Model 
•	 The Government of India issued a new 
regulation that allowed electric vehicle 
manufacturers to sell the vehicle without  
a battery.
•	 This model allows the consumer to lease the 
battery on a monthly rental or subscription 
model bringing down the high up-front cost of 
an electric vehicle.
Esmito, Sun Mobility,  
Ampere Electric
Battery Swapping Model 
•	 This business model essentially serves as an 
extension of the above-mentioned battery 
leasing model that allows customers to swap 
a drained or used battery with a fully charged 
battery by paying a certain fixed fee.
•	 The success of this model depends on 
developing a well-connected network of 
swapping stations that can help in addressing 
the range anxiety of customers.
Battery Smart, VoltUp, 
ChargeUp, Charge+Zone
Charging Infrastructure Providers
•	 Charging infrastructure providers follow a 
“charging-as-a-service” (CaaS model) that 
allows customers to charge their vehicles 
either on a subscription-based model or a pay-
per-use model. This business model is highly 
capital-intensive and has limited geographic 
penetration as of 2023. 
TATA Power, Panasonic, 
Exicom, Fortum India
Note: "Range anxiety" is a commonly used term in the electric vehicle ecosystem. It refers to the apprehension of the electric vehicle owner 
that the vehicle's battery will run out of power before completing the journey or a suitable charging point is reached.
Source: Consultations with original equipment manufacturers. 
E-mobility Suppliers  
Based on the short-listed electric vehicle and e-mobility technologies, suppliers have been identified (Appendix 4). 
The study reached out to multiple e-mobility players. The consultations helped the study to understand the supply 
chain dynamics; risk assigned at different levels; and what works and what does not for a particular technology such 
as investor confidence, reliability, adoption levels, payback period, etc.
Based on multiple interactions with different suppliers, the study mapped challenges and possible solutions.28 
28	
Five consultations were conducted with OEMs, technology providers, and service providers from the e-mobility sector.


Supply Chain for Energy Efficiency, Climate-Smart Infrastructure, and E-mobility Technologies 
33
Major Challenges and Barriers Faced by the Different Players in the E-mobility Ecosystem 
The e-mobility sector confronts a multitude of challenges and barriers impacting various stakeholders. Addressing 
these issues is crucial for fostering broader adoption and sustainability within the electric vehicle market. Some of 
these challenges include:
(i)	
import dependence on the batteries and components required for electric vehicles;
(ii)	
lack of an adequate ecosystem of charging infrastructure required for the wider adoption of electric vehicles;
(iii)	 limited range of electric vehicles and a higher initial cost of the vehicle;
(iv)	 charging infrastructure business model is unviable (i.e., having a poor internal rate of return) in present 
and immediate future scenarios;
(v)	
resale risk (absence of a strong secondary market);
(vi)	 high up-front cost of electric vehicles i.e., higher up-front cash outflow compared to ICE vehicles (higher 
interest rates, low loan tenure, low loan-to-value ratio); and
(vii)	 higher insurance costs compared to ICE vehicles.
Key Outcomes and Probable Solutions That Can Support E-mobility  
Some critical steps toward enhancing the affordability, accessibility, and sustainability of electric vehicles include:
(i)	
All players working in the e-mobility ecosystem should emphasize the need to strengthen the policy 
intervention around reusing, leasing, and recycling batteries to make electric vehicles more affordable.
(ii)	
Apply blended finance schemes for lowering the cost of financing will support the development of a 
long-term sustainable solution for prompting the penetration of e-mobility.
(iii)	 Policies or regulations that can support cost reductions related to land purchase or leasing for developing 
the e-charging infrastructure should be introduced. 
(iv)	 Use a risk guarantee mechanism that can support the larger deployment of the e-mobility ecosystem.
(v)	
Promote research and development institutes for developing the new age energy storage solutions. 
Women’s Empowerment through E-mobility Initiatives
ETO Motors—one of India’s leading electric mobility service providers—announced its collaboration with the Delhi 
Metro, together with the support of the GMR Varalakshmi foundation and MOWO, a nongovernment organization 
promoting safe mobility for women. As part of the agreement, around 300 women drivers will be deployed across 
various metro stations located in the Delhi NCR region to provide last-mile connectivity to commuters through 
ETO’s sustainable and environmentally friendly e-rickshaws. ETO’s electric vehicle charging stations are strategically 
located at various metro stations, residential societies, and other public places to enable easy access to vehicle 
chargers for women drivers. Further, MOWO will be responsible for the onboarding and training of women, and the 
entire initiative will be focused toward providing continued guidance and support to women to help them become 
micro-entrepreneurs, increasing their employability.29  
29	
ETO Motors Pvt Ltd. n.d. Electric Mobility Solutions in India – ETO Motors.  


34
In the context of the MSME sector, energy efficiency financing is inherently considered risky for financial institutions 
to support because of uncertainties associated with the performance of technology interventions (especially semi-
commercialized and state-of-the-art) and the difficulty in demonstrating the savings. 
Various financing schemes have been introduced to promote MSMEs and energy efficiency with a focus on 
promoting energy efficiency-centric financing in MSMEs. 
A single financial scheme cannot eliminate all the barriers faced by MSMEs availing of finance to support energy 
efficiency-enhancing projects. Several schemes have been designed which eliminate a few of the risks. Figure 12 
shows a broad classification of the financing schemes supporting MSMEs in India.30
30	
Various state initiatives and allied benefits for the different sectors is presented in Appendix 5.
Figure 12: Financing Schemes Supporting Micro, Small, and Medium-Sized Enterprises in India
Risk Sharing 
mechanism 
PRSF
SIDBI-SPEED/ 
SPEED Plus
SIDBI – STAR 
(Solar PV 
Scheme)
Capital Subsidy 
for EV – FAME I 
and FAME II
PRGFEE
JICA-SIDBI 
Scheme
WB-GEF Pipe 
Financing energy 
efciency at 
MSME
UNIDO energy 
efciency and 
renewable energy 
Adoption 
Direct Subsidy 
CLCSS and 
TUFS
Subsidy linked 
to EA 4E 
Scheme and 
TEQUP
EESL- GEF 5 
Market 
Transformation 
in MSMEs
CGTMSE 
USAID DFID 
Guarantee 
scheme for 
Solar PV
List or Technology 
based approach
Technical 
Assistance 
(Pipeline Creation) 
Subsidy 
Schemes 
Ongoing programs
Past interventions for EE and EE Financing   
4E = end to end energy efficiency; CGTMSE = Credit Guarantee Fund Trust for Micro and Small Enterprises; CLCSS = Credit Linked 
Capital Subsidy Scheme; DFID = Department for International Development of the United Kingdom; EA = energy audit; EE =  energy 
efficiency; EESL = Energy Efficiency Services Limited; EV = electric vehicle; FAME = Faster Adoption and Manufacturing of (Hybrid and) 
Electric Vehicles; GEF = Global Environment Facility; JICA = Japan International Cooperation Agency; MSMEs = micro, small,  
and medium-sized enterprises; PRGFEE = Partial Risk Guarantee Fund for Energy Efficiency; PRSF = partial risk sharing facility;  
PV = photovoltaic; SIDBI = Small Industries Development Bank of India; TEQUP = Technology Upgradation Scheme for Micro, Small, 
and Medium Enterprises; TUFS = Technology Upgradation Funding Scheme; UNIDO = United Nations Industrial Development 
Organization; USAID = United States Agency for International Development; WB = World Bank.
Sources: PwC project experience; consultations carried out during the course of the project.
ANALYZING THE SCHEMES 
AND POLICIES LANDSCAPE 
5


Analyzing the Schemes and Policies Landscape 
35
Table 9 summarizes key features of different financing schemes.
Table 9: Key Features of Different Financing Schemes  
Financing Scheme 
Incentives/ 
Subsidies 
Line of 
Credit 
(including 
Revolving 
Funds)
Risk 
Guarantee 
Technical 
Assistance 
(including 
Environmental 
Assessments 
and Capacity 
Building)
Energy Service 
Company 
Implementation
Awareness 
Creation 
Activities
Partial Risk Guarantee 
Fund for Energy Efficiency
Only shared savings 
(ESCO-based financing)
PP
PP
PPP
P
Partial Risk Sharing Facility
Both shared savings and 
guaranteed savings
PP
PP
PPP
P
Credit Guarantee Fund 
Trust for Micro and Small 
Enterprises
PPP
JICA – SIDBI LoC for 
MSME EE technologies
PP
P
P
SPEED and SPEED PLUS
PP
WB-GEF Financing EE at 
MSMEs
P
PPP
PP
UNIDO-GEF EE RE 
Adoption in MSMEs
P
PPP
PP
Promoting Market 
Transformation for EE in 
MSMEs 
P
PP
PPP
PP
Technology Upgradation 
Scheme for Micro Small 
and Medium Enterprises
PP
PP
P
4E scheme (end to end 
energy efficiency)
PP
P
PP
P
Technology Upgradation 
Funding Scheme
PPP
Credit Linked Capital 
Subsidy Scheme
PPP
Fame I and II
PPP
PP
USAID DFID
PPP
4E = end to end energy efficiency, DFID = Department for International Development of the United Kingdom, EE = energy efficiency,  
ESCO = energy savings company, GEF = Global Environment Facility, JICA = Japan International Cooperation Fund,  LoC = line of credit, 
MSME = micro, small, and medium-sized enterprises, RE = renewable energy, SIDBI = Small Industries Development Bank of India,  
UNIDO = United Nations Industrial Development Organization, USAID = United States Agency for International Development,  
WB = World Bank.
Source: Consultant's research work and stakeholder consultations.


Driving Energy-Efficient and Low-Carbon Investments for Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises through the Finance Sector
36
Risk Guarantee Schemes
A major issue that lenders face while financing MSMEs is the lack of indemnity on the part of MSMEs concerning 
the successful completion of the loan cycle. Risk-sharing schemes are designed so that this issue is significantly 
addressed. The uncertainty related to repayments is covered by risk-sharing facilities (guarantee funds and first-loss 
facilities) either through a guarantee or first-loss absorption. Details of these schemes are presented in Appendix 5. 
The Credit Guarantee Fund Trust for Micro and Small Enterprises (CGTMSE) was launched to promote 
the MSME sector by providing financial assistance for availing a loan of up to $250,000 without any collateral 
or third-party guarantee. The Small Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI) is the nodal agency for the 
implementation of the scheme, which is promoted by over 125 empaneled financial institutions and NBFCs. It offers 
additional incremental risk coverage to women entrepreneurs. Under this scheme, women-led firms are eligible 
for 80% of the credit risk for loan amounts up to $250,000 (Appendix 5).
The partial risk sharing facility (PRSF) and the now withdrawn Partial Risk Guarantee Fund for Energy 
Efficiency (PRGFEE) are two risk-sharing mechanisms supporting energy efficiency financing in India. These 
schemes provide financial institutions with partial coverage of the risk involved in extending loans for energy 
efficiency projects implemented under the performance contracting model. The risk-sharing facility encourages 
financial institutions to expand into new markets that are perceived to be risky and less proven energy efficiency 
technologies. 
The relatively low uptake of the scheme can be attributed to the unavailability of a robust ecosystem for ESCO players, 
rigorous documentation, procedures (including the need for energy audit and M&V for each loan case being perceived 
as tedious), low awareness, and some aspects of the operating mechanisms of the schemes, among others. 
The United States Agency for International Development (USAID) and the Development Finance 
Corporation (DFC) partnered with New York-based Encourage Capital—an environmentally focused investment 
firm—and two Indian NBFCs—cKers Financial and woman-owned Electronica Finance Limited (EFL)— 
to address challenges of risk associated with the implementation of solar photovoltaics by the SME sector. 
Table 10: Summary of Key Risk Guarantee Schemes
Name of Risk 
Guarantee Schemes 
Duration
Total 
Budget
($ million)
Uptake 
of the 
Scheme
Financial 
Institutions 
involved
% of Risk 
guaranteed
Eligible 
loan size
($ 
million)
EE/CSI/
EV
CGTMSE 
2000– Ongoing
High
126
75–85
0.2
EE
PRGFEEa
2016−2021
39
No 
Uptake
5
50
1.25
EE / RE
PRSF
2015– Ongoing
34.3
Limited 
uptake
14
75
1.9
EE
USAID DFID  
Guarantee scheme for 
Solar photovoltaics
2021− Ongoing
34.9
Recently 
Launched
2
Case-by-
case basis
CSI (RE)
CGTMSE = Credit Guarantee Fund Trust for Micro and Small Enterprises, CSI = climate-smart infrastructure, DFID = Department for 
International Development of the United Kingdom, EE = energy efficiency, EV = electric vehicle, PRGFEE = Partial Risk Guarantee fund for 
Energy Efficiency, PRSF = partial risk sharing facility, RE = renewable energy, USAID = United States Agency for International Development.  
a The scheme was withdrawn and details are presented on past programs on energy efficiency in Appendix 5.
Sources: CGTMSE annual report 2020; Partial Risk Guarantee Fund for Energy Efficiency; Partial Risk Sharing Facility; USAID-DFID scheme.


Analyzing the Schemes and Policies Landscape 
37
Key Features and Challenges
The key features of risk guarantee schemes aim to transform lending practices from traditional collateral-based 
approaches to project-based financing models. These schemes, facilitated through energy saving performance 
contracts like Energy Service Performance Contracting (ESPC), ensure both the techno-commercial viability of 
projects and mitigate barriers faced by ESCOs in accessing financing.
(i)	
The scheme attempts to reorient the lender perspective from collateral-based lending to project-
based financing. 
(ii)	
Energy saving performance contracts (Energy Service Performance Contracting [ESPC]) (ESCO detailed 
project report [DPR]) ensure the techno-commercial viability of the project and promotes project-
based financing. 
(iii)	 Reducing the barriers faced by ESCOs in availing of financing, enables ESCOs by providing a loan and 
in turn can serve as project implementors. 
The key challenges of risk guarantee schemes include:  
(i)	
Lack of ecosystem for ESCO uptake. Only a handful of the registered ESCOs provide the entire 
spectrum of services. No incentives and tax breaks on implementing ESCO projects. Also lack of 
regulation for ESPC contracting and M&V protocols.
(ii)	
Long lead time and transaction cost. ESCO implementations require energy study at MSME, which 
increases the lead time and transaction costs.
(iii)	 No direct financial benefits for MSMEs such as interest subsidies limit uptake. 
Detailed observations of the schemes are presented in Appendix 6.
USAID and the DFC announced that they are jointly sponsoring a $50 million loan portfolio guarantee to Kotak 
Mahindra Bank to support increased access to finance for women borrowers, and MSMEs across India.
This program will play a crucial role in women’s economic empowerment as at least 50% of the loans are 
earmarked to be lent to women-led or women-managed MSMEs, or MSMEs that employ a certain percentage 
of women or that produce a good or service that disproportionately benefits women. It is likely to benefit more than 
30,000 individual women borrowers and 7,500 MSME firms.
List-Based and Technology Approaches 
The list-based approach for financing energy efficiency has seen a lot of traction in India. The unique selling 
proposition of the list-based approach is that it is easy to understand and implement from financial institutions 
and MSMEs perspective. In this approach, a list of commercialized technologies that have a significant energy 
savings potential—usually 10% or more—is selected for financing by providing an extensive list of eligible energy 
efficient equipment. This approach helps reduce transaction costs and ensures faster processing of loans and 
implementation of energy efficiency projects. The Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) and SIDBI 
have successfully adopted this approach for energy efficiency and equipment financing. 
Capital subsidy schemes are non-recurring financial support from the government to the beneficiaries. These 
schemes tend to decrease the cost of investment on the side of the investor (here, it is the MSME). This type of 
support is usually popular among the beneficiaries. The capital subsidy schemes designed for MSMEs in India are 
not exclusively focused on energy efficiency. FAME II is focused on promoting the development of the ecosystem 
for e-mobility in the country. 


Driving Energy-Efficient and Low-Carbon Investments for Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises through the Finance Sector
38
Table 11: Key List-Based and Technology Approaches
Name of 
List-Based 
Schemes 
Duration
Interest Rates 
(%)
Key Features
Quantum of 
Assistance
Loan 
Tenure
EE / CSI / EV
SIDBI Speed 
Plus
2019–Ongoing
8.8−10.5
Collateral free 
loans
100% of the 
machine cost
$0.25 million for 
new customer
2−5 years
EE
SIDBI term 
loan for Roof 
Top 
2019–Ongoing
9.1–10.2
100% finance,
0% equity 
required
$0.3 million
5 years
RE
JICA - SIDBIa
2009–2018
5.0−8.5
Interest 
Subsidy (0.5% 
to 2% during 
different phase 
of the program)
900 EE equipment 
eligible for financing 
developed under 
the scheme  
with interest  
sub-invention
NA
EE / RE
FAME I and 
FAME IIb
2015–2024 
(Ongoing)
NA
Capital subsidy 
of 40% of the 
cost of the 
vehicle
(Over 160 
models of EV 
are eligible for 
subsidy)
Over 303,000 
vehicles 
incentivized under 
the FAME scheme 
and incentives of 
over $138 million 
disbursed under 
FAME II until 
FY2022
3−6 years
EV and EV-
charging
CSI = climate-smart infrastructure, EE = energy efficiency, EV = electric vehicle, FAME = Faster Adoption and Manufacturing of (Hybrid 
and) Electric Vehicles, FY = fiscal year, JICA = Japan International Cooperation Agency, NA = not applicable, SIDBI = Small Industries 
Development Bank of India. 
a	 The scheme was withdrawn and details are presented on past programs on energy efficiency in Appendix 5.
b	 
Government of India, Ministry of Heavy Industries. FAME India Scheme Phase II. 28 March 2022. 
Source: SIDBI. 
Key Features and Challenges 
Following are the key features of the list-based approach, designed to enhance scheme uptake, reduce transaction 
costs, and facilitate technology adoption in e-mobility and energy efficiency through innovative incentives:
(i)	
Increases the uptake of the schemes. 
(ii)	
Reduces transaction costs by removing the need for energy studies and providing interest 
subventions.
(iii)	 Removes the need for collateral and the equipment itself works as collateral (under SPEED Plus, 
no immovable property is required). 
(iv)	 Promotes growth in the adoption of new technologies in e-mobility and energy efficiency and 
productivity through incentives. 


Analyzing the Schemes and Policies Landscape 
39
Key challenges of the list-based approach include:
(i)	
It promotes only equipment-based (i.e., asset-based) financing of energy efficiency equipment, and has 
no emphasis on retrofitting and process improvement technologies.
(ii)	
Technologies listed under the scheme are perceived as productivity and quality improvement 
technologies, which broadens the spectrum of the scheme. Many policymakers do not consider these 
schemes as pure energy efficiency projects.
(iii)	 An ecosystem that is required to foster wider adoption of electric vehicle charging infrastructure 
is lacking.
Detailed observations of the schemes are presented in Appendix 6.
As a baseline study is not carried out, actual energy savings or impact cannot be measured.
Technical Assistance Schemes
Technical assistance (TA) programs are critical in sectors where market mechanisms are highly underdeveloped. 
TA programs and schemes help develop the capacities of stakeholders, create awareness, and help demonstrate 
feasibility through pilot projects. Overall, TA programs are essential for market transformation. Three TA programs 
(detailed in Table 12) were operationalized for creating a pipeline of energy efficiency projects and generating 
demand for energy efficiency in MSMEs. Details of these schemes are presented in Appendix 5.
The Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) and BEE are supporting the TA for energy-
intensive MSME sectors (steel, paper, textiles, glass, food, etc.). Under this program, the TA is extended to MSME 
sectors for developing a long-term (2030–2040) energy conservation road map, benchmark energy consumption 
level, technology compendium, etc. 
These interventions support the development of the pipeline of energy efficiency, CSI, and renewable energy 
opportunities in the clusters which will require financing to support long-term implementation. IFC supported a 
study for the ECO-Cities project where a pipeline of over $9 million was created for energy efficiency and renewable 
energy projects in SME units.31 
31	
Government of India, Bureau of Energy Efficiency. n.d. Partial Risk Guarantee Fund for Energy Efficiency (PRGFEE). New Delhi. 


Driving Energy-Efficient and Low-Carbon Investments for Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises through the Finance Sector
40
Table 12: Summary of Technical Assistance-Supported Schemes
Name of Technical 
Assistance Scheme 
Duration
Key Features / Target Micro, Small, 
and Medium-Size Enterprises 
Implementation 
Support
Energy Efficiency, 
Climate Smart 
Infrastructure, 
Renewable Energy
Promoting Market 
Transformation for 
Energy Efficiency in 
MSMEs, UNIDO, GEF
2010–
Ongoing
Aggregated size $0.1 million− 
$0.25 million (Overall potential 
identified ~$25 million; 80,600 ton  
of emission reduction)
Yes
Energy efficiency
Promoting Energy 
Efficiency and 
Renewable Energy 
in Selected MSME 
Clusters in Indiaa
2011−2022
5 energy-intensive sectors covering 23 
clusters (EE Implementations in more 
than 800 MSME units)
Yes
Energy efficiency, 
renewable energy
Financing Energy 
Efficiency Programme
2015− 
Ongoing
Awareness programs (multiple 
seminars, webinar conducted). Grading 
energy efficiency projects (No uptake 
as of 2022), etc.
Pilot projects
Energy efficiency
Financing Energy 
Efficiency at MSMEs 
(FEEM) – WB – GEF 
(SIDBI, BEE) b
2010−2019
Energy Audits and interest sub 
interventions (implementation of over 
$41 million was supported by TA under 
the project)
Yes
Energy efficiency, 
CSI, renewable 
energy
BEE = Bureau of Energy Efficiency; CSI = climate smart infrastructure; FEEM = Financing Energy Efficiency at MSMEs; GEF = Global 
Environment Facility; MSMEs = micro, small, and medium-sized enterprises; SIDBI = Small Industries Development Bank of India;  
TA = technical assistance; UNIDO = United Nations Industrial Development Organization, WB = World Bank.
Notes:
a	 BEE SME Project initiative. 
b	 The scheme was withdrawn and details are presented on past programs on energy efficiency in Appendix 5.
Source: PWC's own research and consultation with stakeholders.
Key Features of the Technical Assistance Schemes
The technical assistance schemes exhibit notable strengths and areas for improvement in fostering energy efficiency 
within clusters. These include successful programmatic interventions that have cultivated an energy efficiency 
culture and facilitated significant investments, albeit with challenges such as limited outreach to targeted clusters 
and varying implementation rates among participants.
Pros 
(i)	
The programmatic interventions have resulted in the development of a culture for energy efficiency  
in clusters.
(ii)	
Support provided in these programs has resulted in an energy efficiency investment of over $200,000.
Con 
Schemes have limited outreach to the focused clusters, and few clusters witness large implementations based on 
the peer-to-peer learning implementation rate in the cluster (units that are not front-runners and progressive take 
longer to implement energy efficiency technologies) and other clusters take longer lead times. 


Analyzing the Schemes and Policies Landscape 
41
Understanding the Policy Landscape of India’s Electric 
Vehicle Ecosystem
At the core of India’s e-mobility ecosystem lies several carefully designed, intricate policies and regulatory 
frameworks that have been created by various ministries and regulatory bodies (Table 13). 
Table 13: Details of Regulators Developing the Electric Vehicle Ecosystem
S. No.
Name of 
Regulatory Body
Role
1
Ministry of Heavy 
Industries and 
Public Enterprises
Under the Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises, the Department of Heavy 
Industries has been looking after policy intervention and implementation to increase the 
adoption of electric vehicles in the country. The Department of Heavy Industries notified 
the FAME-I scheme in 2015 and FAME-II scheme in 2019 with a focus on four key areas in 
developing the electric vehicle ecosystem: technology development, demand incentives, 
charging infrastructure, and pilot projects. 
2
Ministry of Road 
Transport and 
Highways
Under the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, the Automotive Research Association 
of India is responsible for carrying out all research and engineering-related work. This 
serves as input for the ministry in developing incentives (especially nonfiscal) to promote 
electric vehicle adoption by consumers. 
3
Ministry of Power
The Ministry of Power, through its Bureau of Energy Efficiency, and state nodal agencies 
are actively engaging to create policies and frameworks for creating a network of charging 
stations and infrastructure in the country. 
4
Ministry of Housing 
and Urban Affairs
The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs has been responsible for engaging with 
residential and/or housing, as well as commercial public spaces, to create spaces for 
electric vehicle charging within their respective premises. 
5
Ministry of Finance
The Ministry of Finance has been actively spearheading fiscal intervention in the e-mobility 
space through various measures such as income tax rebates, reduction in goods and 
services tax rates, etc. 
6
Ministry of 
Environment, Forest 
and Climate Change
The Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change has been an important 
stakeholder in India’s National Electric Mobility Mission Plan (2020) initiative as well as in 
notifying the Draft Battery Waste Management Rules (2020).
FAME = Faster Adoption and Manufacturing of (Hybrid and) Electric Vehicles.
Sources: 1. Ministry of Heavy Industries. 30 November 2023. Home. New Delhi; 2. Ministry of Road Transport and Highways. 8 December 
2023. About Us; 3. Ministry of Power. 7 December 2023. Home; 4. Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs. 2017. Home; 5. Ministry of Finance. 
17 November 2023. Home; 6. Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change. 9 November 2023.  
Figure 13 is a diagrammatic representation of India’s timeline and progress in the e-mobility space during 2011–2022 
through various national policies and initiatives.
The Faster Adoption and Manufacturing of (Hybrid and) Electric Vehicles (FAME) I and II policies have been 
at the forefront of India’s e-mobility evolution. The two policies paved the way for creation of a road map for the 
implementation and execution of policies and measures in the electric vehicle landscape of the country.
The FAME initiative was first launched by the Department of Heavy Industries (DHI) in 2015 under the National 
Electric Mobility Mission.32 This program aims to encourage the adoption of electric and hybrid vehicles by way of 
providing financial incentives and support. Phase one of the scheme (FAME-I) was initially implemented for 2 years 
(FY2015–2016 and FY2016–2017). It was extended for another year until FY2018–2019. This was followed by the 
launch of phase two of the scheme (FAME-II) from FY2019–2020 until FY2021–2022. 
32	
Government of India, Department of Heavy Industries. n.d.  FAME India Scheme Phase I. New Delhi. 


Driving Energy-Efficient and Low-Carbon Investments for Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises through the Finance Sector
42
The FAME-I scheme was launched with an overall outlay of ~$100 million. It was later extended with an additional 
outlay of $12.5 million. Under the FAME-I scheme, funds were allocated to provide direct subsidies to electric 
vehicle buyers. Although the scheme did not fully succeed in utilizing its allocated fund of $112.5 million, it was 
crucial for creating the required awareness and momentum in India’s electric vehicle market. As part of the scheme, 
several pilot projects for electric vehicles were sanctioned along with the sanctioning of grants required for research 
and development, technology development, etc. in the electric vehicle ecosystem. 
In March 2019, the FAME-II scheme was launched by the Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises with 
an overall outlay of $1.25 billion including a spillover of $47 million from FAME-I. Some of the key modifications in 
FAME-II are as follows: 33
(i)	
The DHI increased the demand incentive for electric two-wheelers to ~$185/kWh from $125/kWh, while 
raising incentive caps to 40% of the cost of vehicles from 20%.
(ii)	
EESL was appointed as the designated agency for aggregating demand for electric buses and electric 
three-wheelers. 
33	
Government of India, Department of Heavy Industries. n.d. FAME India Scheme Phase II. New Delhi. 
Figure 13: Timeline and Progress of E-mobility, 2011−2022
2011
National Council 
for Electric 
Mobility (NCEM)
2015
Faster Adoption and 
Manufacturing of 
(Hybrid &) Electric 
Vehicles – Phase I 
(FAME I) 
2018
Charging Infrastructure 
for Electric Vehicles – 
Guidelines and 
Standards
2021
Extension of Faster Adoption and 
Manufacturing of (Hybrid &) Electric 
Vehices – II
Production-linked incentive scheme for 
automobile and auto components, advanced 
chemistry cell battery (acc) storage
National Hydrogen Mission
2022
Revised Charging 
Infrastructure for Electric 
Vehicles – Guidelines 
and Standards
Battery Swapping Policy 
(expected)
2019
Amendments to Model 
Building Byelaws
Faster Adoption and 
Manufacturing of (Hybrid &) 
Electric Vehicles – II
National Mission on 
Transformative Mobility and 
Battery Storage
Phased Manufacturing 
Programme (PMP)
2013
National Electric 
Mobility Mission 
Plan 2020
Source: PwC project experience.


Analyzing the Schemes and Policies Landscape 
43
Table 14: FAME I and FAME II Budget Outlay
Initial allocation of funds under FAME-I
($ million)
Initial allocation of funds under FAME-I
($ million)
Component
2015– 
2016
2016–
2017
Total 
Fund
Component
2019– 
2020
2020– 
2021
2021– 
2022
Total 
Fund
Technology 
Platform
8.8
15.0
23.8
Demand 
Incentives
102.8
573.4
398.4
1,074.5
Demand 
Incentive
19.4
42.5
61.9
Charging 
Infrastructure
37.5
50.0
37.5
125.0
Charging 
Infrastructure
1.3
2.5
3.8
Administrative 
Expenditure
1.5
1.6
1.6
4.8
Pilot Projects
2.5
6.3
8.8
Total for  
FAME-II
141.8
625.0
437.5
1,204.3
IEC / 
Operations
0.6
0.6
1.3
Committed 
from FAME-I
45.8
-
-
45.8
Total
32.5
66.9
99.4
Total
187.5
625.0
437.5
1,250.0
FAME = Faster Adoption and Manufacturing of (Hybrid and) Electric Vehicles; IEC = information, education and communication.
Source: Government of India, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting. 2022. Faster Adoption and Manufacturing of (Hybrid and) Electric 
Vehicles in India. Press release. July 11. New Delhi.
Policies Supporting Women Entrepreneurship 
There has been a lower representation of women-led businesses, especially in the industrial sectors. However, with the 
different evolving new tech businesses and services in the country, the role of women has been increasing in the SME 
sectors (especially in commercial buildings and e-mobility). Manufacturing services in India have been traditionally 
male-driven, but women’s participation in different roles has been increasing (especially in technology and CSI). It is 
imperative to foster these technologies through policy, financial subsidies, and regulations to improve gender parity. 
The Government of India is undertaking initiatives in the form of policy intervention to strengthen women-led 
entrepreneurs in the country and promote entrepreneurship at the micro and small enterprise level through multiple 
programmatic interventions. 
In 2013, a women-only bank—Bhartiya Mahila Bank—was launched to cater to the various banking needs of 
women. The bank’s products and services were designed to provide concessions to women borrowers on loan 
interest rates. 
(i)	
In 2015, the Pradhan Mantri Mudra Yojana was launched and aimed at providing collateral-free loans 
of up to $12,500 for micro and small enterprises.34 As per data shared by the Ministry of Finance in 2021, 
close to 70% of the loans were disbursed to women entrepreneurs. 
(ii)	
There has also been significant improvement in providing women access to bank accounts, primarily 
driven due to the introduction of the government policy Pradhan Mantri Jan Dhan Yojana. As per 
the All-India Debt and Investment Survey (2019), around 80.7% of women in rural areas and 81.3% of 
women in urban areas had deposits in their bank accounts.35 
34	
Mudra.n.d. Pradhan Mantri Mudra Yojana. Mumbai.  
35	
Government of India, Ministry of Finance. 2020. Economic Survey 2019-20. New Delhi. 


Driving Energy-Efficient and Low-Carbon Investments for Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises through the Finance Sector
44
(iii)	 In 2016, Stand Up India was launched by the Government of India to offer loans ranging from $12,500 
to $125,000 for the underserved segments of society such as women-led businesses, businesses led by 
other groups, etc. 36 More than 81% of the loans sanctioned under Stand-Up India were disbursed 
to women entrepreneurs. 
(iv)	 In 2018, NITI Aayog set up a Women Entrepreneurship Platform to provide support to emerging 
and existing women entrepreneurs across the country, through free credit ratings, mentorship, funding 
support, apprenticeship, and corporate partnerships.37
Observations on Financing Schemes 
A summary of the key takeaways from the different schemes and programs is presented in Table 15.
Table 15: Summary of Key Financing Schemes and Takeaways
Major Feature
Key Schemes
Observations
Takeaways
Risk guarantee 
mechanism
PRSF
Low uptake
•	 Reorient the lender 
perspective from collateral-
based lending to project 
financing 
•	 ESCO ecosystem is not 
available as required for the 
scalability of the scheme
•	 Lack of incentives and 
regulations for ESPC 
contracting and M&V 
protocols
Risk guarantee schemes help 
in de-linking the risk of the 
projected energy performance 
and can be used for developing 
financing solutions for state-of-
the-art technologies and highly 
customizable technologies. 
Lower risk premiums with 
flexibility in norms in existing 
risk guarantee schemes will help 
in larger adoption. 
USAID DFC guarantee 
scheme for solar 
photovoltaics
•	 Portfolio-based risk guarantee 
increases flexibility in coverage 
for individual loan cases
•	 Dynamic policy and regulatory 
frameworks in different states 
make renewable energy 
investment highly sensitive 
CGTMSE
High uptake
•	 Simple procedural norms, 
hence higher uptake, 
supported by MoMSME
List-based scheme
SIDBI SPEED Plus
SIDBI, Star Medium uptake
•	 Pre-approved list of 
technologies helps in faster 
loan appraisal, hence higher 
uptake
•	 SPEED Plus scheme promotes 
collaboration with OEMs and 
vendors
•	 Mainly focuses on asset 
financing of equipment, with 
no emphasis on retrofitting 
Commercial technologies can 
be promoted through list-based 
approach with innovative 
financing instruments.
36	
Small Industries Development Bank. n.d. Stand Up India Scheme. 
37	
Government of India, NITI Aayog. 2021. The Women Entrepreneurship Platform. 
continued on next page


Analyzing the Schemes and Policies Landscape 
45
Major Feature
Key Schemes
Observations
Takeaways
Subsidy schemes
CLCSS and TUFS
High uptake
•	 High uptake of the scheme 
due to direct financial 
benefits through ministry for 
technology upgrades 
•	 Widely disseminated through 
a comprehensive list of 
lending institutes 
•	 Presently this scheme is being 
revamped 
Technologies that have a higher 
payback and possess higher 
GHG reduction potential 
should be supported through 
subsidies along with thrust 
for reducing the cost through 
economies of scale (e.g., LED 
lights)
FAME – I and FAME II
Low uptake 
•	 Challenges in the life of 
battery and reliability 
compared to internal 
combustion engines, lower 
battery range
•	 Lesser penetration of electric 
vehicle charging infrastructure 
across cities 
Revolving funds for EE
SIDBI 4E Scheme
Medium uptake
EESL GEF 
Low uptake
•	 Requires pipeline generation 
at cluster or sector level for 
faster uptake
•	 Benefits such as interest 
subsidies or lower costs are 
required for uptake
•	 Scheme requirements for 
energy study at each loan case 
increases the lead time for the 
4E scheme
Success of the scheme has led 
to the rollout of similar schemes 
from SIDBI. Interest subsidies 
help in improving the payback 
and should be included for the 
technologies with higher GHG 
reduction potential.
4E = end to end energy efficiency; CGTMSE = Credit Guarantee Scheme for Micro and Small Enterprises; CLCSS = Credit Linked Capital 
Subsidy Scheme; DFC = Development Finance Corporation; EESL = Energy Efficiency Services Limited;  ESCO = energy service company; 
ESPC = energy saving performance contract; FAME = Faster Adoption and Manufacturing of (Hybrid and) Electric Vehicles; GEF = Global 
Environment Facility; GHG = greenhouse gas; LED = light emitting diode; M&V = measurement and verification; MoMSME  = Ministry 
of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises; OEM = original equipment manufacturer; PRSF = partial risk sharing facility; SIDBI = Small 
Industries Development Bank of India; TUFS = Technology Upgradation Funding Scheme; USAID = United States Agency for International 
Development.  
Source:  PwC project experience.
Table 15 continued


46
Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities, and Threats 
Analysis and Understanding the Opportunities in Energy 
Efficiency and Climate-Smart Infrastructure
This chapter attempts to identify the strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats (SWOT) in the financing 
ecosystem which can be leveraged by NBFCs and financial institutions through the support of the international 
development agencies and strategic planning processes for long-term decarbonization. The study carried out a 
SWOT analysis on the energy efficiency and CSI financing ecosystem of SMEs based on desk research and multiple 
consultations with different stakeholders (Figure 14). 
STRENGTHS, WEAKNESSES, 
OPPORTUNITIES, AND THREATS 
ANALYSIS AND POLICY 
RECOMMENDATIONS 
Figure 14: Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities, and Threats Analysis of the Energy Efficiency 
and Climate-Smart Infrastructure Financing Ecosystem
Strengths
Estimated investment potential for energy efciency 
in SME sector is around $12.1 billion by 2031
Estimated Indian green buildings market has 
investment potential of around $1.4 trillion by 2030
Exports from SME sector expected to increase 
by 25% 
Weaknesses
Lower number of NBFCs and ﬁnancial institutions 
providing project-based ﬁnancing 
Vendor ESCOs, OEMs, and LSPs are not easily 
accessible except in most prominent SME clusters 
No mandate on energy efciency for SMEs
Opportunities
Based on a clariﬁcation being sought by BEE, 
renewable energy is priority sector lending account for 
ﬁnancial institutions and energy efciency is a subset 
of this priority sector lending account 
Incentives and subsidies for promoting energy 
efciency and SI 
RBI has ﬂoated a paper for discussion for develping 
solutions for risk mitigation 
Threats
Higher cost of ﬁnance for energy efciency 
technologies 
Lack of deﬁned M&V framework to evaluate 
energy efciency projects
Limited incentivization for adoption of energy 
efciency technologies 
BEE = Bureau of Energy Efficiency, ESCO = energy service company, LSP = local service provider, M&V = measurement and verification,  
NBFC = nonbanking financial company, OEM = original equipment manufacturer, RBI = Reserve Bank on India, SI = smart 
infrastructure, SMEs = small and medium-sized enterprises.
Sources: Government of India, Bureau of Energy Efficiency. 2019. Strategy Plan Towards Developing an Energy Efficient Nation  
(2017-2031). New Delhi; Government of India, Bureau of Energy Efficiency; Multiple International Finance Corporation. Climate 
Investment Opportunities in South Asia; Reserve Bank of India. n.d. Discussion Paper on Climate Risk and Sustainable Finance; and 
discussions with key stakeholders.
6


Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities, and Threats Analysis and Policy Recommendations 
47
An environment scan and SWOT analysis identified several opportunities and challenges. These can be addressed 
through policy push and programmatic interventions for this sector, such as:
(i)	
Developing a long-term mandate on energy efficiency through the strengthening of the Energy 
Conservation Building Code for commercial buildings, the launch of Perform Achieve and Earn for SMEs, 
and mandating the energy audits in medium- to large-scale units.38 
(ii)	
Strengthening the development of the state-of-the-art manufacturing facilities through incentives in 
the form of production-linked incentive (PLI) schemes to reduce the import challenges. The production 
linked incentivization scheme has been institutionalized for developing technologies for electric vehicles, 
batteries, and renewable energy, which will resolve risks in the long run. The government can extend this 
scheme to other key sectors.
(iii)	 Developing economies of scale for state-of-the-art technologies by promoting research and 
development, developing centers of excellence, and demand aggregation. EESL has been working with 
different stakeholders (Global Environment Facility [GEF] and United Nations Industrial Development 
Organization [UNIDO]) for standardization and promoting economies of scale for energy efficiency 
technologies.
(iv)	 Support can be provided through blended finance, risk-sharing facility for asset-based financing. 
This will strengthen the energy efficiency financing ecosystem.
(v)	
While BEE has been working from time to time on the development of the ESCO ecosystem, there is still 
a significant need for creating enabling policies—including fiscal and taxation-related incentives— 
for the ESCO model, creation of standard templates for ESCO performance contracts, M&V guidelines 
for ESCOs, etc. This will help to reduce the scope for ambiguities inherent in ESCO implementations at 
SMEs and in the related energy efficiency financing framework. 
(vi)	 The Government of India is planning to include energy efficiency under priority sector lending, 
which will further help different players access the funds.
The pledge to install 500 gigawatts of renewable energy power by 2030 will help in drastically reducing long-term 
carbon emissions from different economic sectors.39 These initiatives will help resolve the risks associated with  
long-term decarbonization goals. Energy efficiency and CSI are being prioritized by the government to achieve  
long-term decarbonization goals. 
To develop a complete ecosystem, policy and regulatory factors will play a significant role. These interventions can 
be facilitated through government policymakers and regulators as well as supported by multilateral and bilateral 
development agencies. Several of these are being actively considered and driven by the government:
(i)	
Systemic policy support helps both end consumers and technology providers. This could include 
mandating the minimum energy standards for the equipment and facilitating financing through 
developing priority sector lending accounts.
(ii)	
Investments that support domestic manufacturing of energy efficiency technology solutions, CSI, allied 
solutions, etc. This includes better access to consumer finance, an extension of the PLI scheme for 
energy efficiency equipment.
(iii)	 Developing new and innovative business models that thrive on public−private alliances and partnerships 
through the strengthening of risk guarantee mechanism and standardization of an M&V framework.
38	
Perform Achieve and Earn is a voluntary scheme envisaged by BEE for the SME industries. Participating SMEs will be given specific energy 
reduction targets and overachievers will be incentivized. The scheme is envisaged on similar lines to the policy mandated and market-
based scheme Perform Achieve and Trade which is being implemented by BEE with encouraging outcomes for large industries.
39	
Government of India, Ministry of Power. 2021. Mission 500 GW by 2030. Press release. 16 November. New Delhi. 


Driving Energy-Efficient and Low-Carbon Investments for Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises through the Finance Sector
48
(iv)	 Policy action to bring energy efficiency into the ambit of priority sector lending.40
(v)	
Developing research and development facilities for progress in the new age technologies and providing 
commercialized solutions.
Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities, and  
Threats Analysis and Understanding the Opportunities  
in E-mobility Financing
The study carried out a SWOT analysis of the e-mobility financing ecosystem of SMEs based on desk research and 
multiple consultations with different stakeholders (Figure 15). 
40	
Priority sector lending is the role exercised by the RBI to banks, imploring them to dedicate funds for specific sectors of the economy like 
renewable energy, agriculture, and allied activities, education, and housing and food for the poorer population.
Figure 15: Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities, and Threats Analysis  
of the E-mobility Financing Ecosystem
Weaknesses
Inadequate charging infrastructure and the consequent 
range anxiety
Dependency on the People's Republic of China, 
the Republic of Korea, and other countries for the import 
of batteries, components, and parts 
High up-front prices 
Lack of options for high-performance electric vehicles
Inadequate maintenance and repair facilities 
Opportunities
NITI Aayog and World Bank are in the process of setting up 
a $300 million risk-sharing instrument that will act as a 
guarantee mechanism for banks and NBFCs in case of 
payment delay or default on electric vehicle loans
NITI Aayog has also proposed the central bank of India, 
i.e., RBI to include electric vehicles in its priority-sector 
lending guidelines as it presents the opportunity for banks 
and NBFCs to achieve electric vehicle ﬁnancing market size 
of 40.0 billion by 2025
 
Threats
Potential global shortage of lithium and cobalt by 2025 
To make electric vehicles truly a green option, they need to 
be powered by electricity that is generated through 
renewable sources of energy such as solar, wind, etc. and 
not rely on coal-powered electricity
Fire-related accidents of two-wheeler electric vehicles in 
India have been a major deterrent to customer conﬁdence 
in electric vehicles
 
Strengths
Active policy intervention by both central and state 
governments through several ﬁscal incentives to promote 
the adoption of electric vehicles
Production-Linked Incentive scheme worth    181 billion 
approved investments in electric vehicle battery 
manufacturing 
100% ﬂeet electriﬁcation commitment by leading players 
such as Amazon, Capgemini, Zomato, etc. by 2030–2040
Venture funding of $601 million raised by several start-ups 
in the Indian electric vehicle landscape in FY2019
$ = United States dollars,  = Indian rupee, FY = fiscal year, NBFC = nonbanking financial company, RBI = Reserve Bank of India.
Sources: Government of India, NITI Aayog and Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit. 2021. Status Quo Analysis 
of Various Segments of Electric Mobility and Low Carbon Passenger Road Transport in India. New Delhi; Government of India, Bureau 
of Energy Efficiency. 2019. Strategy Plan Towards Developing an Energy Efficient Nation (2017−2031). Delhi; Government of India, 
Department of Heavy Industries. 2022.  PLI Scheme for National Programme on Advanced Chemistry Cell (ACC) Battery Storage. New 
Delhi; Reserve Bank of India. n.d.  Discussion Paper on Climate Risk and Sustainable Finance; Government of India, https://www.niti.gov.
in/sites/default/files/2021-; NITI Aayog and Rocky Mountain Institute. 2021. Mobilising Finance for EVs in India; World Business Council 
for Sustainable Development. 2019.  India Business Guide to EV Adoption; Government of India, NITI Aayog, RMI, and RMI India. 2022. 
Banking on Electric Vehicles in India: A Blueprint for Inclusion of EVs in Priority Sector Lending Guidelines; Government of India, Press 
Information Bureau. 2022. NITI Aayog, Rocky Mountain Institute (RMI), and RMI India release the ‘Banking on Electric Vehicles in India’ 
report. Press release. New Delhi; World Economic Forum. 2022. The world needs 2 billion electric vehicles to get to net zero. But is there 
enough lithium to make all the batteries?; and multiple discussions with key stakeholders.


Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities, and Threats Analysis and Policy Recommendations 
49
An environment scan and SWOT analysis identified several opportunities and challenges. These can be addressed 
through policy push and programmatic interventions for this sector, such as:
(i)	
Strengthening the development of the state-of-the-art manufacturing facilities through incentives in 
the form of a PLI scheme to reduce the import challenges. The PLI scheme has been institutionalized 
for developing battery renewable energy technologies, which will resolve the risks in the long run. The 
government can extend this scheme for other key sectors like electric vehicles in the longer term (i.e., 
beyond the horizon of the subsidies under the FAME scheme). 
(ii)	
NITI Aayog is progressively developing an ecosystem to support e-mobility as a sunrise sector, which 
will give a boost to economic growth and employment potential. NITI Aayog is supporting collaboration 
between the government and DFIs for devising innovative risk mitigation instruments that can address 
the major challenges associated with the wider adoption of e-mobility, including ease of access to 
e-mobility finance. 
(iii)	 A battery swapping policy was announced in the budget as a key area of focus during the budget 
speech from the finance minister in 2022.41 This will help address the technology and operational risks 
associated with storage batteries in the e-mobility space and in developing a conducive environment to 
foster financing in the sector.
(iv)	 The Government of India is also planning to include e-mobility under priority sector lending, which will 
further help different players access finance.
(v)	
Battery management rules and electric vehicle policies have been supported by the states in the recent 
past. Many states have announced an electric vehicle policy and some states have also incorporated 
incentivization for extended battery warranty programs, better buyback programs from OEMs, etc. 
These policy-driven initiatives and the involvement of OEMs will help address key risk areas associated 
with e-mobility. 
(vi)	 Considering the potential shortage of lithium for electric vehicle batteries, developing and evolving 
technology for new metal-based batteries and recycling old batteries will help to overcome the 
potential barrier.
There are significant opportunities in the e-mobility market space given the focus of the government and 
international development agencies community on long-term initiatives planned to eliminate the associated 
risks. The private sector—with well-considered and planned interventions—can leverage the significant financing 
opportunities in this market space and develop or expand their financing portfolios in this sector, while helping to 
achieve India’s long-term decarbonization goals. It is imperative to understand the barriers and challenges faced by 
the different stakeholders and develop financing solutions that can enhance the uptake of energy efficiency, CSI, 
and e-mobility. 
41	
Government of India, Public Information Bureau. 2022. Union Minister for Finance and Corporate Affairs announces the proposal for 
bringing out Battery Swapping Policy and inter-operability standards. Press release. 1 February. 


50
Mapping Private Sector Financial Institutions  
and Nonbanking Financial Companies Working  
in the Small and Medium-Sized Enterprise Segment
Financial institutions play an important role in developing the energy efficiency, CSI, and e-mobility market in India. 
Even with the opportunity of a new line of business and significant investment potential, energy efficiency, CSI, and 
e-mobility remain only on the periphery of their focus. 
To understand the perspective of the financial institutions in terms of the opportunities and challenges of leveraging 
energy efficiency, CSI, and e-mobility investment potential, stakeholders have been mapped into three categories: 
private banks, NBFCs, and financial technology (fintech) companies.
The study found key insights from financial institutions concerning energy efficiency and SME financing and 
the challenges faced in these sectors. The short-listed financial institutions are presented in Table 16, and the 
methodology adopted for the selection is in Appendix 3.
Table 16: Short-Listed Financial Institutions and Nonbanking Financial Companies
Name
Type
Empanelment and/or Key Lending Accounts 
Akasa Financial Services 
NBFC
Electric mobility, SME loans
Axis Bank
FI
Sustainable lending
Caspian Impact Investments
NBFC
Clean energy, energy efficiency
Ckers Finance
NBFC
Clean energy, Resource efficiency
Edelweiss Financial Services
NBFC
Clean energy and SME lending
Electronica Finance
NBFC
Energy efficiency in MSME, rooftop solar, climate finance
Federal Bank
FI
Energy efficiency, sustainable lending
HSBC Bank
FI
ESCO financing and demand-side management initiatives
ICICI Bank Limited
FI
Energy efficiency, sustainable financing (renewable energy)
IDFC First Bank
FI
PRSF/PRGFEE
IndoStar Capital Finance Limited
NBFC
Commercial vehicle and electric mobility
IndusInd Bank
FI
PRSF/PRGFEE
Investment and Finance Company Ltd.
NBFC
Commercial vehicle and electric mobility
BARRIERS AND OPPORTUNITIES  
IN FINANCING ENERGY EFFICIENCY, 
CLIMATE-SMART INFRASTRUCTURE, 
AND E-MOBILITY 
continued on next page
7


Barriers and Opportunities in Financing Energy Efficiency, Climate-Smart Infrastructure, and E-mobility 
51
continued on next page
Name
Type
Empanelment and/or Key Lending Accounts 
IREDA
NBFC
Renewable energy, energy efficiency
Kotak Mahindra Bank
FI
Energy efficiency, renewable purchase obligation
L&T Infrastructure Finance
NBFC
Solar and wind energy projects
Northern Arc
NBFC
Electric mobility
PTC Financial Services Limited
FI
PRSF/PRGFEE
Rev Fin
FinTech
Electric mobility
Siemens Financial Services
NBFC
Energy transition, leasing 
TATA Cleantech
NBFC
CleanTech solutions, sustainable strategy
Yes Bank
FI
ESCO financing / PRGFEE / PRSF
CleanTech = Clean Technology; ESCO = energy service company; FI = financial institution; Fintech = financial technology; IREDA = Indian 
Renewable Energy Development Agency Limited; MSME = micro, small, and medium-sized enterprises; NBFC = nonbanking financial 
company; PRGFEE = Partial Risk Guarantee Fund for Energy Efficiency; PRSF = partial risk sharing facility; SME = small and medium-sized 
enterprises.
Source: Primary consultations.
Throughout the study, several instances emerged where NBFCs stood out in terms of their understanding of the 
domain, effort, and collaborative relationships with stakeholders in the value chain (like ESCOs, vendor ESCOs, and 
technology suppliers). They could leverage their market strengths and demand aggregation capabilities and had an 
overall willingness to adapt to the demands of the energy efficiency, CSI, and e-mobility financing domain. 
Considering that several NBFCs are well-positioned for leveraging their strengths aligned with the energy efficiency, 
CSI, and e-mobility financing space, weightage and special attention were given to NBFCs during the identification 
of financial institutions and the short-listing for consultations. Details of the expertise of NBFCs and financial 
institutions consulted during the project are in Table 17.42 
Table 17: Expertise Supporting Clean Energy Financing 
Name
Type
Expertise in 
Evaluating 
Energy 
Efficiency 
Projects
Expertise 
in Leasing 
Models
Financing 
E-mobility
ESCO / 
RESCO 
Financing
MSME 
Loans
Empaneled 
under Risk 
Guarantee 
Schemes
Akasa 
Finance Ltd
NBFC
P
P
Axis Bank*
FI
P
Caspian 
Impact 
Investment 
NBFC
P
P
P
cKers Finance
NBFC
P
P
P
P
P
Edelweiss 
Financial 
Services*
NBFC
P
42	
The broader objective of this review is to explore the different financing models relevant to energy efficiency and CSI that are prevalent 
in the market and some of the financial institutions supporting these models. This is not intended to be a comprehensive list of the 
capabilities of financial institutions.
Table 16 continued


Driving Energy-Efficient and Low-Carbon Investments for Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises through the Finance Sector
52
Name
Type
Expertise in 
Evaluating 
Energy 
Efficiency 
Projects
Expertise 
in Leasing 
Models
Financing 
E-mobility
ESCO / 
RESCO 
Financing
MSME 
Loans
Empaneled 
under Risk 
Guarantee 
Schemes
Electronica 
Finance 
Limited
NBFC
P
P
P
P
P
Federal Bank 
FI
P
P
HSBC Bank*
FI
P
P
ICICI Bank 
Limited*
FI
P
IDFC First 
Bank*
FI
P
P
IndoStar 
Capital 
Finance 
Limited*
NBFC
P
P
IndusInd 
Bank*
FI
P
P
Investment 
and Finance 
Company 
Ltd.*
NBFC
P
P
IREDA
NBFC
P
P
P
P
Kotak 
Mahindra 
Bank*
FI
P
L&T 
Infrastructure 
Finance*
NBFC
Northern Arc 
Capital
NBFC
P
P
PTC Financial 
Services 
Limited*
NBFC
P
P
RevFin
Fintech
P
Siemens 
Financial
NBFC
P
P
P
Tata 
Cleantech 
Capital 
Limited
NBFC
P
P
P
P
YES Bank
FI
P
P
P
ESCO = energy service company; FI = financial institution; IREDA = Indian Renewable Energy Development Agency Limited;  
MSME = micro, small, and medium-sized enterprises; NBFC = nonbanking financial company; RESCO = renewable energy service company. 
* 
Not consulted for this report. Evaluation is based on secondary research only (with a focus on the major business initiatives presented by 
these firms in the public domain).
Source: Primary consultations. 
Table 17 continued


Barriers and Opportunities in Financing Energy Efficiency, Climate-Smart Infrastructure, and E-mobility 
53
Challenges and Barriers to the Financing of Energy Efficiency 
and Climate-Smart Infrastructure 
The discussion guide adopted for primary consultations with technology providers for this report is in Appendix 7, 
and the discussion guide for financing institutions is in Appendix 8.
Challenges and Barriers to Financing Energy Efficiency and Climate-Smart 
Infrastructure Solutions 
(i)	
The average ticket size of energy efficiency and CSI loans generally ranges from a few hundred 
dollars to over $125,000. Financial institutions and NBFCs are typically interested in lending for 
higher ticket sizes. The minimum ticket size that financial institutions and NBFCs prefer for lending lies 
in the range of $62,500–$625,000. OEMs and LSPs face challenges during the sale of energy efficiency 
equipment as SMEs are not able to get access to finance for lower ticket sizes. 
(ii)	
Financial institutions and NBFCs charge interest premiums while lending to SMEs. This increases 
the interest rates, but the financiers are also partially financing the assets with an overall lower than market 
loan-to-value ratio. Higher interest rates hinder the larger uptake of energy efficiency and CSI projects 
with medium to higher payback periods as these rates inflate the financial payback and drop the 
internal rate of return (IRR) and net present value for the projects. Higher interest rates also decreased 
the viability of the ESCO-based projects and sales of capital-intensive energy efficiency and CSI 
equipment financing. 
(iii)	 A few financial institutions have been associated with risk-sharing schemes such as SIDBI’s partial 
risk sharing facility (PRSF); however, there has been limited or nil participation and/or utilization of these 
mechanisms. The ticket size of projects associated with such schemes is generally on the lower side. 
ESCOs face challenges to avail the project-based financing for the implantation of energy efficiency and 
CSI ESCO projects. Most ESCOs in India are smaller and have a debt skewed balance sheet and, in the 
absence of project financing, they are not able to execute larger ESCO projects. 
(iv)	 Several financial institutions have expressed their inability to understand the technicalities of 
energy savings or energy efficiency-related projects that are usually undertaken by ESCOs. While energy 
savings-related projects contribute to the bottom line of the company, they rarely affect the top-line, i.e., 
the revenues of the company. As a result of their inability to generate any tangible production-related 
cash outflow, most financiers find it difficult to understand how energy savings can be captured as actual 
cash flow savings to ensure their repayment security. 
(v)	
Only a handful of financial institutions provide asset-based financing solutions. These financial 
solutions are limited to a handful of the standard technologies (e.g., plastic manufacturing—molding and 
injection machines—done by few NBFCs). There is no risk coverage or any other support offered under 
any program to these financial institutions in case of default. In case of a loan default, the financier has 
the option to recover the loan amount by seizing the physical asset. Only limited OEMs and LSPs can serve 
SME units under an asset-based financing model. 
(vi)	 Most financial institutions have dedicated financial products that cater to the MSME segment 
for working capital loans, term loans, and business loans. However, the majority of the leading 
financial institutions do not have specialized financial schemes or products that are dedicated to 
the clean energy financing segments: energy efficiency projects or equipment financing.


Driving Energy-Efficient and Low-Carbon Investments for Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises through the Finance Sector
54
Understanding the Barriers Faced by Women-Led Enterprises
Women-led enterprises face various barriers while accessing finance to grow their businesses:
(i)	
Lack of collateral. Women, who have traditionally been excluded from property ownership and land 
ownership, often fail to provide any collateral while availing loans from banks and financial institutions. 
(ii)	
Inherent biases and perceptions. Women-led businesses are perceived to be high risk–low return 
in nature by financial institutions. Irrespective of whether the perceived high risk is based on facts 
or experiences or pure conjecture, it limits women-led businesses to access secure financing. When 
banks conduct their risk assessment of the loan applicants, female applicants are often asked to be 
accompanied by a male guarantor: a husband, brother, father, or any other male in the family. 
(iii)	 Lack of customized loan products. Several financial institutions—including banks and NBFCs—do not 
have specific loan products that are designed specially to cater to women-led businesses. In the absence 
of a strong credit history and any substantial collateral, women struggle with generic loan products and 
services. Factors such as low loan repayment periods and high interest rates further reduce their chances 
of securing loans.
(iv)	 Legal and compliance-related barriers. In many cases, women belonging to rural or semi-urban areas 
also face compliance-related challenges while applying for a loan. Some women fail to provide legal 
documents that serve as prerequisites for a loan such as a national identity document, passport, etc. 
Proposed Solutions for Strengthening Energy Efficiency  
and Climate-Smart Infrastructure Financing
During detailed consultations with private sector financial institutions, the study validated probable solutions 
that can foster energy efficiency financing through collaborative efforts of the institutes working in policy circles, 
international development agencies, and players working in the ecosystem. Several financial institutions expressed 
their concerns related to their overall low confidence in customized energy savings projects. To tackle this and to 
further mobilize investments in the domain of energy efficiency, technical assistance can be provided to financial 
institutions for developing financial products that are aligned toward the standardization and structuring of M&V 
and ESCO contracts, developing the case studies of successful implementations, and financing highly customized 
energy efficiency projects. 
Facilitating Demand Aggregation Through Collaboration Between Financial 
Institutions and Technology Providers
Financial institutions have been trying to tackle the issue of the limited ticket size of energy efficiency projects. 
This calls for the bundling of projects or demand aggregation for financing. Some financial institutions consulted 
also expressed their concerns regarding the limited deal pipeline (i.e., limited demand among SMEs or project hosts) 
for energy efficiency and ESCO-related projects. The creation of deal pipelines through demand aggregation is a 
resource-intensive activity and involves significant customer acquisition costs.
ESCOs working in the country can carry out the bundling of projects as they are working with multiple SMEs, 
e.g., waste heat recovery solutions can cost from a few hundred to thousands of dollars, which is a lower ticket size 
for any financial institution or NBFC to finance. ESCOs can club the demand from different locations, SMEs, and 
clusters to formulate higher-value tickets in the range of $50,000−$100,000, which NBFCs can consider as one 
loan (ESCOs will do the publicity and provide the units with financed equipment and with performance guarantee). 


Barriers and Opportunities in Financing Energy Efficiency, Climate-Smart Infrastructure, and E-mobility 
55
The financial institution or NBFC will deal with one ESCO and provide the loan based on the energy savings projects 
and its credibility in the energy efficiency space. This will help in building the finances through collaborative efforts. 
As a possible work-around to this problem, NBFCs and financial institutions can collaborate with ESCOs and 
OEMs to leverage their marketing channels for the aggregation of demand. NBFCs can standardize the technology 
financing and implementation solutions through collaborative efforts with ESCOs and OEMs to facilitate faster and 
more economical financing solutions. 
Financial institutions, OEMs, and ESCOs—through long-term financing agreements and collaborative efforts—
can solve this challenge of demand aggregation. Another possible solution can be through the development of 
integrated digital platforms that can help aggregate this demand. 
Enabling Financial Institutions Through Portfolio-based Lines of Credit 
Coupled with Blended Finance
ESCOs—players who usually have medium- to small-scale operations—generally have to avail finance at a relatively 
higher cost from NBFCs and financial institutions. This impacts the financial viability and/or attractiveness of the 
project developed by them. 
NBFCs are sometimes better placed for energy efficiency and CSI financing based on their existing portfolio, 
exposure to the sector dynamics, ability to evaluate the energy efficiency and CSI projects, etc. However, their 
typically higher cost of finance becomes a deterrent. This can be mitigated to an extent with blended finance. 
Blended finance for energy efficiency will help lower the cost of finance, supporting a higher IRR for the energy 
efficiency and CSI project. 
Long-term portfolio-based line of credit offerings from international development agencies, NBFCs, and 
financial institutions can especially be of relevance in this context. NBFCs can pass on the benefits of lower interest 
rates to the relevant stakeholders in the financing ecosystem, improving the viability and/or attractiveness of the 
projects and potentially improving the demand. NBFCs should ideally retain the flexibility to decide on interest rates 
based on the specific risk profiles of individual loan cases.
The line of credit can be provided by NBFCs or financial institutions to ESCOs or vendor ESCOs (small-scale 
OEMs) and service providers, where their business model involves financing the technology or equipment. This can 
be one of the ways for financial institutions to collaborate with technology providers and leverage their demand 
aggregation potential.
Portfolio-based Risk-Sharing Facilities 
The single dedicated risk sharing facility for energy efficiency that is functional in the country is PRSF. PRSF has 
helped in supporting the ESCO project financing space, despite modest uptake due to various limiting factors 
including an underdeveloped ESCO ecosystem in the country. However, PRSF evaluates and offers risk coverage on 
a per project basis. Portfolio-based risk guarantee mechanisms, where risk cover is offered to financial institutions and 
NBFCs over their entire portfolio of energy efficiency, CSI, and e-mobility projects, have some distinct advantages. 
These solutions offer financial institutions flexibility to provide varying degrees of coverage based on their risk 
assessment on individual projects. This helps to optimize the guaranteed fee component by providing  
need-based coverage. 


Driving Energy-Efficient and Low-Carbon Investments for Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises through the Finance Sector
56
Some of the smaller NBFCs with proven capacities to undertake project-based financing are not eligible for PRSF, 
limiting its reach. Risk guarantee mechanisms (preferably portfolio-based) that are agnostic to business models 
will help to expand coverage across the entire spectrum of energy efficiency and CSI projects irrespective of ESCO 
or other business models. Simplicity and user-friendly processes, coupled with moderate guaranteed fees, are 
critical to their success. 
There is limited availability of asset-based energy efficiency or CSI financing solutions to SMEs. SMEs have 
to settle for collateral-based finance in many cases. This limits the faster adoption and penetration of the new 
energy efficiency and CSI technologies. Only a few NBFCs thrive predominantly on asset-based financing solutions, 
and that too for a limited set of technologies. Based on feedback from NBFCs, it was concluded that setting up a 
risk guarantee fund for the asset-based financing will help to expand the range of energy efficiency and CSI 
technologies covered through this financing model that has been proven to be user-friendly and scalable. 
Technical Assistance for Energy Efficiency and Climate-Smart  
Infrastructure Financing 
During consultations, financial institutions showed a limited understanding of energy efficiency and CSI projects. 
Some of the typical challenges faced by financial institutions are the absence of standardization including 
standard contracts, frameworks, and tools to evaluate energy savings and resultant cash flows; difficulties in 
developing deal pipelines given the limited demand from project hosts coupled with low ticket sizes; and inherent 
complexities associated with evaluation and financing of innovative or unfamiliar energy efficiency and  
CSI technologies, etc. 
NBFCs and financial institutions have advocated the need for projects related to the financing of energy efficiency 
and CSI solutions. TA projects can assist financial institutions newly venturing into energy efficiency and CSI 
financing to address the various challenges. 
In the case of asset financing, a TA project will help to standardize the financing solutions related to specific 
energy efficiency and CSI technologies. A TA project for developing the standardization of the appraisal 
process for specific technologies and/or equipment will support financial institutions and NBFCs with a better 
understanding to evaluate the cash flows, secondary market assessment, risk associated during the operations, 
and allied contingencies. A two-pronged approach that combines the TA with portfolio-based risk guarantees can 
support the uptake of assets-based financing solutions for SMEs.
Special Financing Schemes for Women 
There is a need to create specialized loan products and services that treat women borrowers as a special category: 
providing customized loan offerings to women-only businesses that suit their requirements. 
To address the large financing gap, banks and NBFCs that are at the forefront of India’s formal lending 
mechanism must earmark funds for women-owned enterprises. This will encourage participation from more 
women-owned businesses in a space that has predominantly been male-dominated.
Women, who are often not able to provide any collateral, face higher chances of rejection of their loan applications. 
To remove this barrier, it would be helpful if financial institutions allow women to provide any movable assets 
available to them as collateral. For example, in many countries—while sanctioning loans to women—gold jewelry 
is accepted as collateral. Alternative collateral, such as postdated checks or movable assets or business 
assets, must be explored while sanctioning loans to women-led businesses. 
Existing schemes by financial institutions for women entrepreneurs are presented in Appendix 6.


Barriers and Opportunities in Financing Energy Efficiency, Climate-Smart Infrastructure, and E-mobility 
57
Challenges Associated with Electric Vehicle Financing in 
Micro, Small, and Medium-Sized Enterprises and Proposed 
Solutions for Strengthening the E-mobility Ecosystem
Despite many constant developments in the e-mobility ecosystem of India, several challenges and barriers stand 
in the way of electric vehicle adoption. Based on broad observations and detailed conversations with financial 
institutions, the following challenges and their possible solutions can help accelerate e-mobility financing in India:
(i)	
Product-specific challenges. A major barrier to electric vehicle adoption is its higher up-front cost 
compared to traditional ICE counterparts. While the central government and several state governments 
have been trying to bring down the costs through several incentives, such as goods and services tax rate 
cuts, lower vehicle registration costs, the cost of procuring an electric vehicle is still 1.2 to 3 times more 
than its counterpart ICE vehicle. 
	
To tackle this, easy access to finance will be one of the most critical factors. However, without a strong 
proven performance track record, electric vehicle financing is not well accepted by financiers, both from 
the point of view of vehicle operation and maintenance as well as battery performance. In addition to 
this, the lack of a strong secondary market for electric vehicles acts as a major deterrent to the free flow 
of finance into the electric vehicle ecosystem.
	
Being a new age technology, financing institutions such as banks and NBFCs are not actively looking to 
lend for electric vehicles due to the inherent asset and business model-related risks. Since the broader 
market perception is that electric vehicles are not yet a proven vehicle type, their longevity and asset life 
remain questionable. Another challenge in the context of electric vehicles is the uncertainty about the 
price fluctuation related to electric vehicle batteries. This, coupled with apprehensions about the overall 
low battery life, is one of the major deterrents to electric vehicle financing.  
	
Some of the financial institutions in the study are offering loans to electric vehicle OEMs or battery 
manufacturers for very low loan tenures, i.e., around 30 months. A shorter loan tenure automatically 
means an increase in equated monthly installments.
	
As a result of some of the asset and business model-related risks, the interest rate at which electric 
vehicles are being financed is quite high (20% or more) compared to ICE vehicle counterparts. Electric 
vehicles are excluded from the various financing schemes, and there are very limited financing options 
available with financial institutions that specifically cater to electric vehicles. Some of these are SBI 
Global Factors Limited’s Green Car Loan, and Union Bank’s Green Miles. 
	
To tackle these issues at various levels, the following mechanisms can be undertaken:
(a)	 
Setting up risk-sharing platforms that act as hedging mechanisms to safeguard the lending 
institutions (banks, fintechs, NBFCs) from the risk of loan defaults, OEM survival risks, etc.
(b)	 
Creating a platform that brings together financiers and technology suppliers to increase the 
confidence of investors in electric vehicles and their allied technologies. This will be a continuous 
exercise to be undertaken in addition to the existing central and state-level electric vehicle policies 
and regulations. 
(c)	 
Promoting joint ventures between Indian OEMs with global large players in the e-mobility space will 
support the development of better-quality e-mobility products and services through technology 
transfer (new age batteries solutions, flexible power trains, etc.) and will boost the confidence of 
financial institutions and NBFCs in financing e-mobility and joint ventures.


Driving Energy-Efficient and Low-Carbon Investments for Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises through the Finance Sector
58
	
Conventional or mainstream private banks and NBFCs are reluctant to enter the electric vehicle 
financing segment citing apprehensions around the residual vehicle value as the reason. As a result, 
specialized financiers have stepped in with their electric vehicle-specific, tailored financing solutions 
that cater specifically to the electric vehicle market. For example, few financial institutions are catering to 
low-income groups that are primarily the target market for three-wheeler electric vehicles. Their lending 
options are designed to specifically cater to people engaged in the informal sector who are traditionally 
excluded from the banking and lending framework. Such financiers rely heavily on tech-driven solutions 
(such as biometrics, psychometrics, etc.) to ease out the loan appraisal process. A multi-stakeholder 
approach that brings together the technology supplier (such as electric vehicle OEM), local financier, 
and large international financing institutions can help create a robust tech-driven lending business 
model on a large scale. The success of such a model will help other financial institutions to replicate the 
same and ultimately increase the adoption of electric vehicles in India. 
(ii)	
Technical assistance. In the absence of any historical data regarding the credibility of electric vehicles 
concerning their residual value, business viability, etc., financial institutions are uncertain regarding 
lending in the electric vehicle segment. 
	
Since electric vehicles are traditionally different from ICE vehicles, conventional automotive loan 
products will not be suitable for electric vehicle lending. Since electric vehicles follow a different life 
cycle compared to ICE vehicles, lending at the loan tenure and interest rates that apply to ICE vehicles 
will make the loan product unaffordable for the electric vehicle end customer. 
	
As a result, financial institutions must develop some understanding of electric vehicle technology 
through some TA projects to create electric vehicle-specific loan terms and payment options. This will 
also apprise the financial institutions about the dynamics and trends of the electric vehicle industry 
globally and nationally to facilitate better decision-making. 
(iii)	 Original equipment manufacturers.  Electric vehicle financing is being done at much higher interest 
rates compared with the interest rates at which their ICE vehicle counterparts are being financed. Due to 
the perceived inherent risks associated with electric vehicles, financial institutions are financing only a 
small share of the vehicle value, i.e., a low loan-to-value ratio compared to the market average in the case 
of vehicle financing. This, coupled with higher insurance rates for electric vehicles and the availability of 
very few electric vehicle-specific loan products, is among the barriers to electric vehicle adoption. 
	
These barriers can be catered to with the involvement of OEMs to some extent. OEMs can be involved 
to provide assurances to both the financier (through any guarantees) and to the end customer (through 
performance-related warranty) to create a more robust financing model. 
	
A few financial institutions specifically mentioned that the lack of a strong resale or secondary market 
in the case of electric vehicles is a major barrier restricting the uptake of more financing projects in the 
clean energy domain. 
	
Policy push for buyback through state government will help in developing the OEM-led buyback and 
refurbish programs; OEM-led provisions related to battery-repurposing will lead to the formation of a 
strong secondary market to safeguard the interests of the lender in case of a loan default. 
(iv)	 Blended finance. Loan financing is highly dependent on the actual cash flows generated through 
operations. While conventional OEMs and tier-1 suppliers of auto parts are well-financed and have 
strong balance sheets, several OEMs in the e-mobility ecosystem and auto-component suppliers that 
fall into the SME category have been struggling to access financing primarily due to the size of their 
balance sheets and uncertainty regarding future operational cash flows.


Barriers and Opportunities in Financing Energy Efficiency, Climate-Smart Infrastructure, and E-mobility 
59
	
The interest rates at which financial institutions are offering loans to their end customers (business or 
consumer loan) in the electric vehicle segment is presently quite high—particularly for NBFCs. These 
presently high interest rates can be brought down if the financier can source finances at lower interest 
rates and thereby pass on the benefit to its end customers. Improving the affordability of loans is the 
key to bringing e-mobility financing at par with other more mainstream technologies in the clean energy 
space such as solar, and solar rooftops. 
	
Due to the perceived high risks associated with electric mobility, obtaining finance from traditional 
sources on commercially viable terms is difficult. Blended finance is an effective way to support projects 
that provide environmental and social returns to bridge the existing funding gaps. 
	
Tailored financial solutions specific to the different product portfolios should be promoted blended 
finance solutions coupled with risk guarantees for two-wheelers and three-wheelers (considering the 
risk perception of the end user, credit profile, etc.). Financial institutions and NBFCs working in the 
e-mobility space when powered with risk guarantee and blended finance can support in offering these 
tailored solutions. This will help improve access to affordable finance to end users and can potentially 
revolutionize e-mobility (two-wheelers and three-wheelers) financing.
	
Tailored financial solutions such as long-term leasing, blended finance, battery buyback, etc. can cater to 
four-wheelers, commercial fleets, buses, and cargo vehicles.
(v)	
Charging infrastructure business model. The establishment of a well-connected charging network 
across rural areas and highways is imperative for the success of the electric vehicle model. In an early-
stage market like India’s, the business model of operating charging stations is weak. The high up-front 
costs required to set up the business and the associated lower cash inflows make the business model 
unviable for potential investors. Since the uptake of electric vehicles in the country is slow, the utilization 
level at public charging stations is expected to be low in the first few years, i.e., around <25%−30%, 
making it an unviable business proposition.
	
To develop a complete ecosystem around e-mobility, the following key factors will play an important role:
(a)	 Systemic policy support to help both the end consumers and the technology providers.
(b)	 Investments that support domestic manufacturing of vehicles, batteries, supply equipment, etc. 
(c)	 
Better access to consumer finance in the e-mobility market (especially two-wheelers and three-
wheelers, a segment that is presently being driven through NBFCs).
(d)	 
Developing new and innovative business models that thrive on public−private alliances and 
partnerships. Public sector companies for oil such as Indian Oil, Bharat Petroleum, etc. can forge 
long-term collaborations with OEMs and electric vehicle-charging manufacturers for developing 
the e-mobility charging infrastructure at their existing fuel refilling facilities. This will also help in 
improving the financial viability of these solutions.
(e)	 
Providing financiers with an understanding of the inherent technology behind electric vehicles 
to bring more investor confidence will also help financiers create electric vehicle-specific loan 
products.


60
Private sector participation needs to support demand-side energy efficiency (energy efficiency and CSI 
technologies in India is evolving). Some private stakeholders—including financial institutions, technology solution/
service providers, etc.—have made impressive business gains in the endeavors. To establish a self-driven and 
sustainable market mechanism with enhanced private sector participation, some key areas need to be addressed. 
Establishing an appropriate support mechanism to make the lending for energy efficiency and CSI technology 
commercially competitive and secure is one of them. An appropriate regulatory framework will support the 
development of energy performance contracting businesses and enhance private sector participation. An inclusive 
path forward to promote investment in energy efficiency, CSI technologies, and e-mobility can be found through 
private sector financial institutions (Figure 16).
8
THE WAY FORWARD 
Figure 16: Promoting Investment from the Private Sector
Partnership with 
selected PSFIs /
 NBFCs by DFIs
Standardization of 
products and business 
models (EE/CSI/EV)
(jointly by OEM 
and PSFIs)
Extension of 
dedicated credit line 
to selected PSFIs 
by DFIs
Developing suitable 
marketing strategies 
by OEM / ESCO
Creation of portfolio 
based risk sharing 
facility by DFIs
Demand aggregation 
and creation of 
strong deal pipeline 
by technology service 
providers 
Strategic partnership 
with technology 
service providers by 
selected PSFIs
Project executions 
by OEM/
service providers 
(EE/CSI/EV)
Extension of 
portfolio-based line 
of credit to OEM, 
vendor ESCO / ESCO 
by PSFIs
CSI = climate-smart infrastructure, DFI = development financial institution, EE = energy efficiency, ESCO = energy service company,  
EV = electric vehicle, NBFC = NBFC = nonbanking financial company, OEM = original equipment manufacturer, PSFI = private sector 
financial institution.
Source: PwC experience.


The Way Forward 
61
Broadly, the financing solutions can be categorized into portfolio-based risk sharing facilities, blended lines of credit, 
and TA. The specific challenges to be addressed differ significantly for energy efficiency, CSI, and e-mobility. Even 
within e-mobility, the challenges and operational context differ significantly for the two-wheeler and three-wheeler 
segment, and heavy vehicles (buses and trucks). The modalities and operating procedures should therefore be 
defined separately for each intervention to ensure effective implementation and outcomes. 
Extend of a Dedicated Credit Line to Selected Private Financial Institutions 
by Development Financial Institutions 
Commercial competitiveness of the offerings with the market is needed to gather the business demand and to grab 
significant business opportunities. The majority of private sector financial institutions and NBFCs are lending at a 
higher rate than public financial institutions. 
Development financial institutions (DFIs) may extend a dedicated and long-term portfolio-based credit line at a 
viable rate to selected private sector financial institutions and NBFCs (who are committed to widening their deal 
pipeline through collaborations with OEMs and service providers of energy efficiency and e-mobility) to support 
building their capacities to lend at an attractive rate through blended finance. 
Create a Portfolio-Based Risk-Sharing Facility  
by Development Financial Institutions
Keeping the offerings competitive with the market is a core need to accelerate the adoption of energy efficiency and 
CSI technologies. The creation of a portfolio-based risk sharing facility will help private sector financial institutions 
in optimizing the risk guarantee component based on needs and determined risks of the individual projects, keeping 
the offerings competitive.
Setting up risk-sharing platforms for e-mobility that act as hedging mechanisms will safeguard the lending institutions 
(banks, fintechs, NBFCs) from the risk of loan defaults and cases of business insolvency. Electric vehicles are an 
emerging market with higher risk, hence setting up the facility will support reducing the nonperforming assets.
DFIs may support the creation of this facility to encourage the participation of private sector stakeholders by limiting 
their business risks. This facility may also inclusively support both project-based and asset-based financing. The 
inclusion of risk guarantee coverage for asset-based financing will help to expand the range of technologies covered 
through this financing model that has been proven to be user-friendly and scalable.
Establish Strategic Partnerships Among Selected Private Financial Institutions 
and Technology Solutions and Service Providers 
Building confidence in business propositions may require strategic partnerships to leverage the subject expertise of 
counterparts. Partnerships among stakeholders in the financial and technology supply chain will help in developing 
tailored products with combinational offerings for targeted consumers. This will increase the conviction around 
energy efficiency and CSI technologies as promising technologies for financing and will help in creating a strong deal 
pipeline through demand aggregation.
Private sector financial institutions, OEMs, and service providers (ESCO, e-mobility) should take the lead in building 
these strategic partnerships. DFIs, national public agencies, etc. may also support this endeavor by providing a 
common platform and bringing these stakeholders together. 


Driving Energy-Efficient and Low-Carbon Investments for Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises through the Finance Sector
62
Develop New and Innovative Business Models that Thrive  
on Public−Private Alliances and Partnerships
Private sector financial institutions and technology solutions and/or service providers (ESCO, e-mobility) should 
take the lead in building this alliance and developing partnerships with public departments for strengthening the 
ecosystem required for e-mobility. Financial institutions, electric vehicle promoters, national public agencies, state-
level departments, etc. may also support this endeavor for developing financially viable solutions for electric vehicle 
charging (including charging, battery swapping facilities, etc.). 
Standardize of Products and Business Models 
Limiting the business risks through standardization of credit analysis and financing processes for specific technology 
solutions will help optimize the financial appraisal process and improve the overall delivery time for the end 
consumers. Operational efficiency is one of the keys to success. Standardization of business models for these 
products can drive effective results. These models will also be easier to understand for end consumers and may help 
in reducing the business conversion lead time. 
Specialized TA projects can be provided to private sector financial institutions in standardizing the financial 
appraisal process and business models. OEMs and/or service providers (ESCOs) are also well-positioned to 
collaborate with financial institutions for this.
DFIs may support private sector financial institutions and OEMs and/or service providers in standardizing the 
business contracts, frameworks, tools, etc. to evaluate energy savings and resultant cash flows. 
Develop Suitable Marketing Strategies for Demand Aggregation  
and a Strong Deal Pipeline 
Once the partnerships among selected private sector financial institutions and OEMs and/or service providers 
(ESCOs) are established, setting out clear priorities is needed in describing their ambitions and the strategies to 
achieve operational excellence. 
OEM and ESCO providers may play an important role in dealing with end consumers through their established 
marketings and sales channels and in generating demand from them. Hassle-free and easy financing will need to be 
ensured by the private sector financial institutions with an innovative and strategic approach.
Provide Project and/or Asset-Based Financing (Blended Financial Solutions)
Project and/or asset-based financing for energy efficiency and CSI technologies is a much more convincing business 
case for end consumers. Commercialized technologies with standardization are suitable to be financed with 
this model. 
Financial institutions and NBFCs can work closely with DFIs to develop financial products with blended finance to 
reduce the cost of finance which can leverage the higher uptake of energy efficiency, CSI, and e-mobility projects. 
Loan financing is highly dependent on the actual cash flows generated through operations. The availability of lower 
cost of capital will support better internal rate of return and net present value.
OEMs and service providers may support private sector financial institutions in developing a list of products to 
be considered under this model. This will help leverage opportunities for financing these products at a much 
faster pace. 


The Way Forward 
63
Promote the Participation of Women
Gender equality has always been an important aspect of DFIs. Women have a limited business share at both supply 
and demand ends for energy efficiency and CSI technologies. Supporting competent women entrepreneurs to 
ensure their greater participation in this sector will require innovative initiatives through financial institutions. 
Financial institutions may consider accepting alternative collateral options including postdated checks or movable 
and/or business assets, etc. in case of conventional financing. Financial institutions may also consider providing 
customized loan offerings to women. DFIs or other leading national financial institutions may earmark dedicated 
funds for women to be routed through private sector financial institutions. 
Summary of Proposed Actions for Key Stakeholders 
To develop a focused approach for strengthening the energy efficiency and CSI ecosystem—including a strong 
cadre of ESCOs and a robust e-mobility ecosystem—the following actions are proposed for major stakeholders. 
These initiatives will help in de-linking the challenges, to support and strengthen the climate and sustainability 
finance framework for India. The financing framework developed will lay a strong foundation to support financing 
projects helping in energy and environmental conservation, which will support India to meet the short-term NDC 
goals set for 2030 and in achieving the long-term goal of a carbon-free economy by 2070.
Financial regulator. RBI has to play a pivotal role in inculcating the culture of prioritizing climate finance among 
private sector financing institutions and in devising new and innovative solutions. RBI is proactively working toward 
this and with a consultative approach and has floated the discussion paper to support a green taxonomy.43 RBI may 
introduce energy efficiency and e-mobility as priority sector lending to sectors to support the climate agenda. 
The financial regulator may collaborate with NITI Aayog, the Ministry of Power, the Bureau of Energy Efficiency, 
and other ministries and stakeholders to seek views and suggestions while developing special climate-specific 
recommendations, reporting mandates, etc. to support wider adoption of energy efficiency, CSI, and e-mobility. 
Relevant ministries and the Government of India. The Government of India is already supporting activities allied 
with sustainability and energy efficiency. The production-linked incentive scheme for batteries, renewable energy, 
and energy efficiency appliances are strengthening the ecosystem. Mandates on energy efficiency for industries 
and buildings by the Ministry of Power were instrumental to initiating the activities of energy efficiency and CSI in 
the country. Such mandates and periodic reviews of the regulations and modifications will support India to become 
a carbon-neutral economy by 2070. A series of steps are needed in the ESCO ecosystem including access to 
affordable finance for ESCOs, creating a robust set of rules and documentation around ESCO contracting, and the 
measurement and verification of savings, etc. 
Development finance institutions. DFIs have been proactively supporting the climate agenda through multiple 
initiatives. DFIs could explore strengthening the collaboration with NBFCs and financial institutions to develop 
tailored and customized financial solutions for energy efficiency, CSI, and e-mobility. International development 
agencies can support the capacity-building activities and programs required to strengthen energy efficiency, CSI, 
and e-mobility financing. International development agencies can develop portfolios for climate finance through 
partnerships and collaborations with NBFCs and financial institutions.
43	
Reserve Bank of India. n.d. Discussion Paper on Climate Risk and Sustainable Finance.


Driving Energy-Efficient and Low-Carbon Investments for Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises through the Finance Sector
64
Nonbanking financial companies and financial institutions.  Financial institutions are key stakeholders in 
the entire scheme of things. Financial institutions are beginning to recognize and respond to the importance 
of developing or enhancing their climate finance portfolio, given global and national priorities. They will need 
to actively seek collaboration with DFIs on climate finance. Areas of collaboration could include risk-sharing 
instruments and innovative financing instruments.  
Financial institutions will also need to play a lead role in collaboratively working with ESCOs and OEMs. They can 
leverage the capabilities of OEMs, ESCOs, and vendor ESCOs—including their market connections—and their 
understanding of energy efficiency, CSI, and e-mobility technologies. The collaboration will be very useful for 
devising and implementing demand aggregation, customer acquisition, and pipeline creation strategies. 
Another potential area for collaboration with technology and service providers is for standardization of energy 
efficiency, CSI, and e-mobility solutions, possibly in combination with technical assistance support through 
DFIs. Several NBFCs have already demonstrated the effectiveness of such collaborative approaches and are well 
positioned to scale up their activities. 
Original equipment manufacturers, energy service companies, and vendor energy service companies. 
These are key stakeholders in the entire framework. OEMs, ESCOs, and vendor ESCOs typically have a sound 
engineering and technology base as manufacturers, project implementors, and system integrators. They are best 
positioned to leverage their technical know-how and market connections to create a deal pipeline in collaboration 
with NBFCs and financial institutions. 
There are instances where ESCOs have successfully serviced lines of credit from NBFCs allowing them the comfort 
of generating and executing a deal pipeline asynchronously over time. This possibility should also be actively 
explored by ESCOs aspiring to achieve scale. 
The roles of the various stakeholders are interlinked and complement each other. This study attempts to propose 
various solutions that are also interlinked and complementary. These are derived based on consultations with 
relevant stakeholders and observation of market dynamics and the successes and learnings from previous 
schemes and interventions. Several promising climate-smart technologies are also identified as ready reckoners for 
financial institutions.
It is up to the relevant private and public sector stakeholders to collaborate and arrive at a judicious mix of 
the proposed solutions to best leverage the significant market opportunity in the energy efficiency, CSI, and 
e-mobility domains. Decarbonizing the national economy is a big challenge and an even bigger opportunity. 
As technology and financing markets evolve in response to the important national and global priorities of climate 
change and decarbonization, private sector entities, including financial institutions that brace themselves for 
early adoption of climate-friendly and green strategies, will position themselves to make the most of the immense 
business opportunities.


65
The study approach involved: 
(i)	
Desk review of relevant knowledge documents.
(ii)	
Consultation with relevant stakeholders.
(iii)	 Detailed analysis of the stock of views and information collected through secondary research and 
primary consultation. 
(iv)	 Identification of probable solutions and potential financial and/or technology partners.
An extensive review of relevant knowledge documents, including various financial schemes and policy landscape 
for energy efficiency and climate-smart infrastructure (CSI) technologies in targeted sectors of the economy, 
was carried out. Major stakeholders, including various financial institutions, technology suppliers, energy service 
companies, electric mobility players, etc., were consulted to draw out benefits from their views, suggestions,  
and feedback. 
Gender sensitivity and inclusiveness was an important aspect throughout the study. The study analyzed the share 
and profile of women-owned or women-led businesses in targeted segments and identified the constraints they 
face in accessing technologies or managing the supplier dynamics that differentiate them from male-led businesses.
The methodology for identifying the sectors having the most energy savings potential used the following 
selection criteria:
Selection Criterion 1: Energy Consumption
Sectors were ranked based on their absolute energy consumption. A list of small and medium-sized enterprise 
(SME) sectors with the highest total energy consumption was prepared using data from various cluster manuals 
available in the public domain. 
Some of the highest energy-consuming sectors in India are textiles, foundries, steel re-rolling, ceramics, and 
buildings. This is mainly due to the number of SME establishments in the sector using high energy compared to 
other sectors. Operations and processes in these sectors require higher energy consumption (energy-intensive 
operations such as metal melting, high-temperature heating, matching, multiple operations, etc. are carried out 
during the processing of the products in these sectors) for processing the unit output.
APPENDIX 1
APPROACH AND METHODOLOGY  
FOR IDENTIFYING SECTORS WITH  
THE MOST ENERGY SAVINGS POTENTIAL


Appendixes
66
Selection Criterion 2: Energy Intensity
Clusters were ranked based on energy intensity as a percentage of production costs in typical micro, small, and 
medium-sized enterprise (MSME) units in clusters. Energy intensity is usually governed by sector-specific energy-
consuming processes and technologies; it is also affected by the type of fuels used, the level of mechanization, etc. 
Foundries and steel re-rolling mill sectors usually have the highest energy intensity, but it also depends on the type 
of technologies deployed in a particular subsector or SME cluster. 
Selection Criterion 3: Average Energy Efficiency Potential
Sectors were ranked based on the energy savings potential from the business-as-usual scenario in a typical SME unit 
in the sector. This factor is mainly governed by energy reduction potential through the adoption of energy efficiency 
and CSI technologies, retrofits, the potential for a fuel switch, and efficient utilities applicable to the sector. 
This data was prepared using data from various sector and/or cluster manuals, energy audit detailed project reports 
available in the public domain, and team experience in energy efficiency programmatic interventions.
Selection Criterion 4: Sector-Level Absolute Greenhouse 
Gas Emissions
Sectors were ranked based on the reductions in greenhouse gas (GHG) emission potential from the business-as-
usual scenario by type of the MSME unit in the sector. The existing fuel mix and potential for a fuel switch, carbon 
dioxide conversion factors, and GHG reduction potential through the adoption of energy efficiency technologies, 
and retrofits were considered for estimating GHG emissions potential.
Methodology for Ranking the MSME Sectors
(i)	
The study estimated the value against each parameter for various sectors and provided weights to each 
criterion for ranking the MSME sectors. 
(ii)	
Equal weight (0.25) was provided to each of the four parameters. 
(iii)	 The value of 1 was assigned to the highest value in each parameter, and the value for other sectors 
for those parameters was proportionately calculated. For example, if an energy intensity of 30% is 
highest in that category, the value “1” was assigned to that, and 15% energy intensity has been 
assigned (1,530x1) 0.50 value against that category. 
During consultations with technology providers and energy service companies, the study revalidated the data 
gathered during secondary research for mapping and short-listing the energy efficiency and CSI technologies for the 
SME sector (Table A1).


Appendixes
67
Table A1:  Sector and Subsector Processes and Technologies
Sectors and Subsectors
Sectors and Energy Consuming Processes
Commercial 
Buildings 
Office complexes
Commercial 
Buildings 
Space cooling
Data centers 
Water pumping
Cold storage 
Lummanaire
Forging
Open die forging
Forging
Metal heating 
Closed die forging
Metal forming 
Ring rolling
Heat treatment and finishing
Foundry
Precision casting
Foundry
Metal Preparation
Green sand molding
Metal melting 
Shell baking
Casting
Plastics
Blow molding
Plastics
De moisturization (granules)
Injection molding
Melting and forming
Sheet/ film making
Heating and holding
Chemical  and 
Pharma
Chemical formulation
Chemical  and 
Pharma
Raw material preparation-dry mixing
Activated pharmaceutical ingredients
Drying and Granulation
Bulk drugs
Screening, Compression
Transport
Electric vehicle charging
Transport
DC fast chargers
Battery swapping and hybrid vehicles
Fuel cells and battery storage
Paper
Recycle paper 
Paper
Shredding and digester 
Kraft paper 
Bleaching and pulping 
Writing paper 
Vacuum and steam drying
Source: PWC research.


68
Selection Criterion 1: Energy Savings Potential 
Technologies were ranked based on their energy savings potential. Energy savings potential for the different 
technologies was assessed through the review of the detailed project reports (DPRs), technology compendiums, 
etc. Details for each technology were revalidated through consultations with technology providers and energy 
service companies working in these sectors and providing similar energy efficiency and climate-smart infrastructure 
(CSI) solutions. 
Some technologies—such as the replacement of inefficient conventional box type metal heating furnaces (fossil 
fuel fired) with modern, state-of-the-art insulated gate bipolar transistor induction billet heater with Internet of 
Things (IoT)-based control—possess higher energy savings potential compared with other technologies. Energy 
savings will vary from unit to unit based on the difference in operating efficiency for similar equipment or machine. 
Based on secondary research and prior experience working in the small and medium-sized enterprise (SME) 
sectors, the study assigned a typical range of energy savings potentials for each of the technologies. The range is 
assigned based on the overall sector dynamics (considering variation in operating practices across SME units). 
To rank the technologies based on this criterion, the average value of the range was considered. 
Selection Criterion 2: Investment Potential (Ticket Size)
Technologies were ranked based on the investment potential required for implementation in the SME sector. 
Through the review of DPRs, technology compendiums, and consultations with technology providers, the study 
identified the investment range for the technologies across the SME segment. Typically, the process upgradation 
and/or technology switch projects are highly capital-intensive compared to simple retrofit of energy efficiency and 
CSI technologies and crosscutting technologies. 
For example, automated high-pressure casting with robotic fettling for the foundry sector (state-of-the-art 
facility development) is a highly capital-intensive technology that helps in energy conservation and improvement 
in productivity. Switching from cupola melting furnaces to induction melting furnaces (process upgradation) is 
comparatively less capital intensive. Energy efficiency crosscutting technologies and utilities are generally less capital 
intensive compared to process technologies. 
Using secondary research and experience working in the SME sector, the study categorized the investment potential 
into buckets or ranges applicable to the SME units. The average value of this range was considered to rank the 
technologies based on this parameter.
APPENDIX 2
METHODOLOGY FOR SHORT-LISTING 
PROMINENT TECHNOLOGIES 


Appendixes
69
Selection Criterion 3: Replication Potential
To evaluate the comparative market size for the different energy efficiency and CSI technologies, replication 
potential is the key parameter to be reviewed along with investment size. During desk research, attempts were made 
to qualitatively capture the replication potential in the sector based on the categorizations high, medium, and low. 
For example, crosscutting technologies such as an energy-efficient pump and/or screw air compressors have higher 
replication potential across the different sectors. These technologies, which have wider replication potential, were 
marked as high during evaluation. Subsector-specific technologies, such as new co-generation plants, have limited 
replication potential within the sector. These technologies are limited to specific sectors only, hence marked as low 
during evaluation. Replication potential for electric vehicle charging is high due to push from e-mobility campaigns 
and policy incentives. 
Selection Criterion 4: Sector-Level Absolute Greenhouse 
Gas Emissions Reduction 
Technologies were ranked based on the reductions in greenhouse gas (GHG) emission potential compared to a 
baseline scenario. Reduction in GHG emissions is important for moving toward a sustainable economy. During 
desk research, the study evaluated this criterion on a qualitative basis. Technologies that use cleaner fuels such as 
electricity, gas, solar, and renewable energy have higher GHG mitigation potential; these are marked as high. Energy 
efficiency technologies that have lower energy savings potential and use the same fuel type were marked as low 
during evaluation. 
For example, the switch to an electric vehicle from a fossil fuel-operated vehicle or the use of an induction heating 
furnace in place of fossil fuel-fired metal heating furnaces possess high GHG emission reduction potential. These 
technologies were marked as high under the criterion of GHG emission reduction potential. 
Selection Criterion 5: Payback 
Technologies were ranked based on typical payback based on the implementation of technology in the SME 
sector. Through the review of DPRs, technology compendiums, and consultations with technology providers, and 
experience of past projects, the study defined the payback range for the technologies across the SME segment. 
Typically, process upgradation and/or technology switches are highly capital intensive and have a longer payback 
period compared with retrofitting energy efficiency and CSI technologies and crosscutting technologies which 
typically have lower payback. 
For example, automated high-pressure casting (state-of-the-art facility development) is a highly capital-intensive 
technology that helps in energy conservation and improvement in productivity having higher payback. Use of central 
air-conditioning and/or higher energy efficiency-labeled air conditioners also have higher payback. 
Energy efficiency crosscutting technologies and/or utilities are generally less capital intensive and have lower 
payback periods. To rank the technologies based on this parameter, the average value of the range was considered. 


Appendixes
70
Selection Criterion 6: Market Acceptance 
This qualitative criterion defines the market acceptance of a particular technology as having been categorized as 
commercial (most accepted), semi-commercial (moderate acceptance), and state-of-the-art (lower acceptance). 
Technologies that are available off-the-shelf (i) require no energy study at the unit level before implementing such 
technologies, (ii) have enough case studies present in the public domain that define the proven energy savings 
potential, and (iii) are categorized under commercial technologies. These technologies have the highest market 
acceptance among SMEs. For example, energy efficiency technologies such as energy-efficient pump sets, screw 
compressors, CSI including LED lighting, energy-efficient air-conditioning, occupancy sensors in buildings, etc. 
Technologies that require customizations at the unit level are based on the energy study and baseline assessment 
before implementation. A lower number of proven case studies are available and categorized under the semi-
commercial category. Some examples are microturbines for steam pressure to reduce power generation, and electric 
vehicle fleet charging infrastructure. 
Technologies that do not have enough implementations in micro, small, and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs)—
specifically in the micro- and small-sized enterprises—where implementation of technologies requires significant 
investment but also results in huge energy savings. These technologies are categorized as state-of-the-art. Some 
examples are automated casting lines for foundries, and use of fuel cells as an energy source in the transport sector.
For example, a switch to an electric vehicle from a fossil fuel-operated vehicle, the use of induction heating 
furnaces in place of fossil fuel-fired metal heating furnaces possess high GHG emission reduction potential. These 
technologies were marked as high under the criterion of GHG emission reduction potential. 
Replacement of inefficient pumps with an energy-efficient pump will have a limited impact on GHG emission 
reduction and was marked as low during the evaluation. 
Methodology for Ranking Technologies 
Rankings have been calculated separately for the following two broad categories of technologies: 
(i)	
technologies related to energy CSI (building and transport sectors), and
(ii)	
technologies for the industrial sector (energy efficiency). 
Calculating the Relative Rank of Each Technology Against Each Criterion
The ranking of each of the technologies was done based on the above six criteria. Weights were assigned to each 
criterion. During the analysis, higher weights have been assigned to the factors that are linked to the total market 
potential of the particular technology. 
Criteria such as ticket size and replication potential broadly define the total energy efficiency potential for a 
particular technology. During the evaluation, a weight of 0.3 was allocated to these two factors to gauge the 
technologies that have higher energy efficiency potential. The four other parameters were GHG emission, payback, 
market acceptance, and energy savings, and are considered equally important for the adoption of energy efficiency 
technologies. Equal weights of 0.1 were assigned to these four factors.
Weights were assigned to different technologies for the quantitative criteria (energy savings, ticket size, 
and payback). 


Appendixes
71
For example, energy savings of 30% is the highest in that category, with a value of “0.1” (i.e., the value of the weight 
for that parameter). Accordingly, 15% energy savings will be assigned (1,530x.1) 0.05 value against that category. 
Weights were assigned to different technologies for the qualitative criteria (replication potential, market acceptance, 
and GHG emission reduction potential). Qualitative parameters were marked as low, medium, and high 
(i.e., replication potential, and GHG emission reduction potential). High was given the assigned weight, medium was 
assigned two-thirds of the assigned weight, and low was assigned one-third of the assigned weight. 
For example, for the market acceptance criterion, commercialized technology was assigned the highest weight (0.1) 
and semi-commercialized was assigned a weight of 0.1/3*2 = 0.667, and state-of-the-art was assigned a value of 
0.1/3 = 0.33. 
Calculating the Overall Rank of Each Technology 
For each technology: Cumulative weight = Summation of relative weights for all six criteria
The ranking is done corresponding to the cumulative weights, i.e., the technology with the highest cumulative weight 
is assigned the highest rank.


72
continued on next page
APPENDIX 3
IDENTIFYING WOMEN-LED 
BUSINESSES IN THE CLEAN ENERGY 
SUPPLY CHAIN
While the various barriers, challenges, and possible solutions to encourage more women to access financing in the 
clean energy micro, small, and medium-sized enterprise (MSME) sector have been identified, there are case studies 
on different success stories of women-led businesses. These real-time business case studies will help understand 
how women can be involved at each step of the clean energy value chain. 
With a focus on micro and small enterprises, the engagement of women within the clean energy market can be 
categorized as follows: 
(i)	
Women-owned enterprises that provide clean energy-related products and solutions 
In January 2019, a joint initiative of Shell Foundation, Zone Startups, DFID India (Government of the United 
Kingdom), and the Government of India, Department of Science and Technology—known as “POWERED 
Accelerator”—announced its support to nine women-led enterprises working in the clean energy space 
(Table A9.1):
Table A3: Women-Led Enterprises Working in the Clean Energy Space
S. No.
Name of Enterprise
Founder
Business Description
1
REVY Environmental 
Solutions
Dr. Vanita Prasad
REVY Environmental Solutions was incorporated in 
2018 and is based in Gujarat, India. The company 
provides waste management solutions in a cost-
effective and energy-efficient manner. 
2
Cydee Technologies Pvt. Ltd. 
Monika Jha
Cydee Technologies is based in Bengaluru, Karnataka, 
and was founded in 2017. It focuses on the 
manufacturing of energy-saving, and anti-theft solar 
streetlight systems. 
3
DD Biosolution Technology 
Pvt. Ltd.
Debashree Padhi
DD Biosolution Technology was founded in 
Bhubaneswar, Odisha, in 2016 with a focus on producing 
green energy from agricultural waste to provide end-to-
end cooking solutions for women in rural and semi-
urban parts of the country. 
4
FinEffi Energy Solutions
Bhavana Chittawar
FinEffi brings together the concepts of finance and 
efficiency to reduce electricity costs for homes, hotels, 
hospitals, and other domestic as well as commercial 
buildings through Internet of Things and data analytics. 
5
GTarang Energy Solutions
Manvi Dhawan 
GTarang was founded in Mumbai, Maharashtra, in 2018 
to convert individual as well as industrial waste into 
useful energy. 


Appendixes
73
Table A3 continued
S. No.
Name of Enterprise
Founder
Business Description
6
Pushan Renewable Energy 
Pvt. Ltd
Susmita 
Bhattacharjee
With a focus on solar energy, Pushan Renewable 
was founded in Indore, Madhya Pradesh, as a social 
enterprise that aimed to provide innovative solar-
powered systems and products to generate income for 
women in rural parts of the country. 
7
Paterson Energy Pvt. Ltd.
Vidya Amarnath
Paterson Energy was incorporated in Chennai in 2016 
and works toward recycling plastic waste through the 
process of Plastic Thermochemical Depolymerization. 
8
Prakriti Biosystems 
Engineering
Disha Ahuja
Prakriti Biosystems provides decentralized food waste, 
kitchen waste, and solid waste bio-methanation 
solutions. It was founded in 2019 and is based in 
Hyderabad, Andhra Pradesh. 
9
Durga Energy
Rukmani Katara
Durga Energy is based in Rajasthan and is focused on 
manufacturing solar panels and other solar products. 
Durga actively engages women employees in the 
manufacturing, installation, and maintenance of solar 
products and solutions—thereby providing them with 
employment opportunities. 
Source: PwC project experience.
(ii)	
Women working as employees or value chain partners in clean energy enterprises
Traditionally, women have been underrepresented as employees within the clean energy landscape, particularly 
in technology and engineering related roles. The inclusion of women in tech-oriented roles within the clean 
energy sector will not only help generate more employment opportunities but also would help create a better 
understanding of the customer needs to design and create more gender-inclusive products and services. 
There are a few companies such as Dharma Life, Frontier Markets, etc. working in the energy efficiency space that 
have included women—especially rural women—as product distributors and sales agents in villages and other rural 
parts of the country. Dharma Life’s sustainable products such as solar lights, clean cookstoves, etc. have reached 
10 million beneficiaries across more than 50,000 villages in 13 states of India through its network of more than 
16,000 rural women entrepreneurs. 
To enable participation of women entrepreneurs in the last-mile delivery segment, businesses must provide them 
with the requisite training, support from other family members, safe working timings and conditions, etc. for easy 
commute and generate a strong customer base to be able to generate a viable income. 
(iii)	 Women as end users of clean energy products and services
This category is primarily about women that are the end users of machines that are powered through clean energy-
related technologies. As per a study conducted by the Council on Energy, Environment and Water, the following 
clean energy-based technologies are the most popular among women entrepreneurs:
(a)	 Solar energy-related technologies such as solar panels, solar pumps, solar lighting, etc.;
(b)	 E-rickshaws; and
(c)	 Improved cookstoves, biomass gasifiers, etc. 
In July 2022, ETO Motors—one of India’s leading electric mobility-as-a-service providers—announced its 
collaboration with the Delhi Metro together with the support of the GMR Varalakshmi Foundation and MOWO, 


Appendixes
74
a nongovernment organization promoting safe mobility for women. As part of the agreement, around 300 women 
drivers will be deployed across various metro stations located in the Delhi–NCR region to provide last-mile 
connectivity to commuters through ETO’s sustainable and environment-friendly e-rickshaws. Electric vehicle 
charging stations of ETO are strategically located at various metro stations, residential societies, and other public 
places to enable its women drivers easy access to vehicle chargers. Further, MOWO will be responsible for the 
onboarding and training of women, and the entire initiative will be focused on providing continued guidance and 
support to women to help them become micro-entrepreneurs and thereby increase their employability. 
While it is contrary to the popular perception, women-led businesses generate higher profit margins compared with 
that generated by businesses owned by male entrepreneurs. 
Further, as per a study conducted by Bain (2019),1 it is estimated that women-owned enterprises have the potential 
to generate from 150 million to 170 million new jobs by 2030. It is imperative to create a business environment 
that not only supports and nurtures the growth of women-led enterprises but also creates equal opportunities for 
women across all steps of the value chain.
Source: Bain and Company. 2019. Powering the Economy with Her. New Delhi.


75
continued on next page
APPENDIX 4
LONG LIST OF TECHNOLOGY 
AND SERVICE PROVIDERS IN ENERGY 
EFFICIENCY, CLIMATE-SMART 
INFRASTRUCTURE, AND THE  
ELECTRIC VEHICLE ECOSYSTEM 
Table A4: Mapping of the Energy Efficiency and Climate-Smart Infrastructure Technology  
and Service Providers
Name
Category
Unique Selling Proposition
75f
OEM
Energy management systems and buildings
ABB
OEM
Utilities - multiple sector applications / automation - CSI
Airprax Pneumatic
LSP
Compressed air solutions
Ankur Scientific
OEM
Utilities - multiple sector applications (paper, chemical, steel)
Basotra Engineers
LSP
Compressed air solutions
Battery smart
OEM
Electric vehicle battery swapping stations
Battery smart
OEM
Electric vehicle battery swapping stations
Bosch
Vendor ESCO
ESCO - energy efficiency
Bounce
OEM
Commercial fleet-electric vehicle financing and charging solutions
Desire Energy
ESCO
ESCO - energy efficiency
Electronics and Engineering 
Company Pvt Ltd
OEM
Textile / Automation - energy efficiency, CSI
Electrotherm / Megatherm
OEM
Steel and allied sectors
EnEFF furnaces
LSP
Heating furnaces and insulations
Eto motors
OEM
Electric vehicle fleet aggregator/service solutions
Etrio
OEM
Electric vehicle manufacturer (3W)
Exicom
OEM
Electric vehicle batteries
Gardner Denver
OEM
Utilities - multiple sector applications
ISCT
LSP
Thermal insulation solutions
Jyoti CNC
OEM
Crosscutting - multiple sectors
Kaeser
OEM
Air compressors and related energy efficiency technologies
Magenta Group
OEM
Electric vehicle charging infrastructure manufacturer
Milacron
OEM
Plastics sector - injection molding and other machinery
MoEVing
OEM
Commercial fleet, electric vehicle financing and charging solutions
NCON Turbines
OEM
Multiple sectors - thermal solutions (chemical, textile, pharma, rubber, 
paper etc.)


Appendixes
76
Table A4 continued
Name
Category
Unique Selling Proposition
Parker Legris
OEM
Compressed air solutions
Plasma Induction
OEM
Steel and allied sectors
Pranat Energy
Vendor ESCO
ESCO - energy efficiency, CSI
Promethean energy
Vendor ESCO
ESCO - energy efficiency
Rrdye
OEM
Electric vehicle fleet aggregator/service solutions
Saven
ESCO
ESCO - energy efficiency
Schneider Electric
OEM
Multiple sectors - energy efficiency, CSI technologies
Servotech Power Systems Pvt 
Ltd.
Vendor ESCO
ESCO - energy efficiency, CSI
Smart Joules
ESCO
ESCO - energy efficiency, CSI
SPG Prints
OEM
Textile / automation - energy efficiency, CSI
Thermax
OEM
Multiple sectors - energy efficiency technologies
Voltas limited
OEM
Crosscutting energy efficiency technologies and energy efficiency 
solutions for textiles
Yantra Harvest
ESCO
ESCO – energy efficiency, renewable energy
CSI = climate-smart infrastructure, ESCO = energy service company, LSP = local service provider, OEM = original equipment 
manufacturer.
Source: PwC research.


77
APPENDIX 5
DETAILS OF DIFFERENT SCHEMES 
FOR ENERGY EFFICIENCY AND 
CLIMATE-SMART INFRASTRUCTURE 
SPEED and SPEED PLUS
(Sources: Details of the schemes are taken from the SIDBI website.)
Scheme Duration: June 2019–Ongoing 
The Small Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI) launched the SPEED and SPEED Plus schemes for 
machinery purchase from original equipment manufacturers (OEMs) at a competitive rate of interest. The SPEED 
and SPEED PLUS schemes facilitate the flow of credit to micro, small, and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs) for 
investing in machinery. This scheme was launched as SPEED in June 2019. An upgraded version SPEED PLUS was 
also launched by SIDBI thereafter. 
The scheme does not specifically focus on energy efficiency equipment. The unique selling proposition of this 
scheme is the quick processing time of loans. The loan processing time is less than 72 hours, which is deemed 
extremely suitable for MSMEs. A few observations on the scheme are as follows:
(i)	
Eight OEMs signed memorandums of understanding with SIDBI; machinery purchased from these 
OEMs is eligible for financing; all OEMs empaneled provide the energy-efficient equipment. 
(ii)	
Up to 100% financing of high-end machinery; no immovable property needed as collateral; lower 
interest rates.
(iii)	 Interest rates range from 8.80% to 10.5% with a loan tenure of up to 5 years including a moratorium of 
3–6 months.
(iv)	 SIDBI Term Loan Assistance for Rooftop Solar Photovoltaic Plant (STAR). 
Scheme Duration: June 2019–Ongoing 
SIDBI’s STAR Scheme (SIDBI term loan assistance for rooftop solar photovoltaic plant) provides loans to MSME 
units to replace existing grid power with solar power. Eligible units can borrow up to $31,250 under this scheme to 
install rooftop solar plants with 25–500 kilowatts (kW) capacity. 
(i)	
Financing up to 100% with collateral accounting for 15%−25% of the cost of the solar photovoltaic has to 
be provided by the borrower in the form of the FD.
(ii)	
The maximum capacity of the panel installed shall not exceed the connected load.
(iii)	 Interest rates range from 9.1% to 10.2% with a loan tenure of up to 5 years including a moratorium  
of 3–6 months.


Appendixes
78
(iv)	 The STAR scheme offers collateral-free loans for on-site rooftop solar photovoltaic plants. The scheme 
covers the equipment and the installation cost of the project. The unique selling proposition of the 
scheme as promoted by SIDBI is quick sanction and fast disbursement for eligible MSMEs. The loan is 
also covered by a credit guarantee. 
SIDBI signed a memorandum of understanding with Tata Power for the uptake of this initiative. Tata Power is 
providing the financing of renewable energy installation for MSME customers of Tata Power for both off-grid and 
on-grid installations.
Risk Guarantee Schemes 
Partial Risk Sharing Facility
(Source: SIDBI PRSF scheme)
Scheme Duration: 2015–Ongoing 
The partial risk sharing facility (PRSF) was created to mobilize commercial financing for energy efficiency projects. 
PRSF is a Global Environment Facility (GEF)-funded project, and the implementing partners are the World Bank, 
SIDBI, and Energy Efficiency Services Limited (EESL). The fund is managed by SIDBI, and technical assistance is 
provided by EESL and/or SIDBI. All scheduled commercial banks and nonbanking financial companies (NBFCs) 
registered with the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) are eligible as participating financial institutions after empanelment. 
As of 2023, 14 financial institutions have been empaneled (Appendix 9). PRSF guarantees a maximum of 75% of the 
loan amount for a loan from $125,000 to $1.875 million. 
The PRSF guarantee fund corpus is $37 million ( 2.74 billion); up until 2023, loans of over $18.75 million have been 
sanctioned for more than 35 projects under the scheme. Under PRSF, there is a provision to cover loans on the 
balance sheet of either the energy service company (ESCO) or the host. 
A few observations on PRSF are as follows: 
(i)	
The scheme saw a lower uptake than expected due to the underdeveloped ESCO ecosystem as well as 
transaction cost and lead time increments on account of the requirement for a baseline energy study.
(ii)	
No direct financial benefits for MSMEs such as interest subsidies which limits the uptake in MSMEs.
(iii)	 PRSF ensured flexibility in the scheme during the implementation phase, e.g., coverage for loans 
disbursed on balance sheet of the host entities and not just on the ESCOs balance sheet. 
(iv)	 PRSF has a $6 million technical assistance  component for capacity building, pipeline creation, etc. 
Credit Guarantee Fund Trust for Micro and Small Enterprises
(Source: CGTSME scheme document)
Scheme Duration: May 2000–Ongoing 
The Credit Guarantee Fund Trust for Micro and Small Enterprises (CGTMSE) was launched to promote the MSME 
sector by providing financial assistance for availing a loan of up to $250,000 without any collateral or third-party 
guarantee. SIDBI is the nodal agency for the implementation of the scheme. CGTMSE is not restricted to energy 
efficiency improvements but covers loans for diversification, expansion, and modification. There are  


Appendixes
79
126 member lending institutions empaneled under the scheme which include scheduled commercial banks, 
specified Regional Rural Banks, SIDBI, National Small Industries Corporation Limited, North Eastern Development 
Finance Corporation, small finance banks, and NBFCs. Several member lending institutions are listed in Appendix 9.
The scheme covers 75% (small and medium-sized units) and 85% (micro units) of the loan amount based on the 
different criteria for a loan of up to $250,000, and maximum credit risk borne by CGTMSE is restricted to $187,500, 
i.e., 75% of the amount in default. Women-led firms are eligible for 80% of the credit risk for loan amounts of 
up to $250,000. 
It charges annual guarantee fees varying from 1% to 3%. The scheme has been active since 2000, and is ongoing.  
It has emerged as a successful tool in facilitating access to formal credit sources for MSMEs. Key observations 
related to CGTMSE are as follows:   
(i)	
The scheme moved from a flat guaranteed fee structure to risk-based pricing to ensure proper due 
diligence of loans by the member lending institutions.
(ii)	
The additional guaranteed fees associated with CGTMSE (risk guarantee scheme) are a bottleneck for 
higher uptake as it leaves it to the discretion of the financial institutions to decide about passing on the 
incidence of annual guarantee fees to the borrower.
United States Agency for International Development–Development Finance 
Corporation Loan Guarantee Program for Rooftop Solar in SMEs
(Source: USAID–DFC Scheme)
Scheme Duration: May 2021–Ongoing 
On 18 March 2021, the United States Agency for International Development (USAID) and the US International 
Development Finance Corporation (DFC) announced the sponsorship of a $41 million loan portfolio guarantee to 
help finance investments by Indian small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) in renewable energy solutions. 
Since SMEs pay high charges for their electricity, the focus of the guarantee program is to enable SMEs in accessing 
reliable power and reduce electricity expenses, by making rooftop solar a sustainable, cost-saving investment and 
removing the barriers associated with securing the financing needed to install rooftop panels. 
USAID and DFC partnered with New York-based Encourage Capital, an environmentally focused investment 
firm, and two Indian NBFCs, cKers Financial and woman-owned Electronica Finance Limited (EFL), to address 
this challenge. Encourage Capital has invested $15 million in EFL—which will use the USAID−DFC loan portfolio 
guarantee to stimulate the rooftop solar market, representing a $9 billion market opportunity—for SMEs.
The credit risk guarantee is extended to the two NBFCs based on an assessment of the operations and strengths of 
these NBFCs and offers some flexibilities that may include, for instance, an ability to vary the extent of guaranteed 
cover based on the needs of each loan within the loan portfolios of these NBFCs.


Appendixes
80
FAME Scheme for E-mobility
(Sources: Government of India, Ministry of Heavy Industries, National Automotive Board; and List of Vehicles 
Empaneled under FAME).
Scheme Duration: 2015–2024 
The first phase of the Faster Adoption and Manufacturing of (Hybrid and) Electric Vehicles (FAME) scheme 
in India was launched in April 2015 and was extended to March 2019. Under the policy, several benefits and 
incentives were extended to electric vehicle manufacturers and other related technology providers to encourage 
the manufacturing of electric vehicles in the country. The eligible category of vehicles under the scheme were two-
wheelers, three-wheelers, four-wheelers, light commercial vehicles, heavy commercial vehicles, and retrofits. 
The FAME-II policy was implemented for 3 years effective from April 2019 to March 2022 and has been extended 
until March 2024. The scheme lays special focus on indigenous manufacturing, advanced and emerging e-mobility 
technologies, infrastructure, and public transportation. This phase aims to generate demand by supporting 7,000 
e-buses, 500,000 e-three-wheelers, 55,000 e-four-wheeler passenger cars (including strong hybrid), and 1 million 
e-two-wheelers. 
The Government of India's FAME (Faster Adoption and Manufacturing of Hybrid and Electric Vehicles) scheme  
has been instrumental in promoting electric mobility and infrastructure development across the country. With 
significant budget allocations and subsidy incentives, the scheme aims to accelerate the adoption of electric 
vehicles and bolster the electric vehicle charging infrastructure network. Key aspects of the FAME scheme include 
subsidies on vehicle purchases, infrastructure development for EV charging stations in cities and on highways,  
and incentives for advanced batteries and registered vehicles. Below are the detailed provisions and achievements 
of the FAME II scheme:
(i)	
The budget outlay under the FAME II scheme is $1.2 million and $66 million under FAME I. 
(ii)	
The government provides subsidy incentives of $200 per kilowatt-hour (with a cap of 40% of the cost 
of the vehicle) on the purchase of the electric vehicle. The government provides the subsidy on  
two-wheeler, three-wheeler, and four-wheeler vehicles. 
(iii)	 The government has allocated $1.2 million for electric vehicle infrastructure development. Under this 
part, 2,877 electric vehicle charging stations will be developed across 68 cities in 25 states and union 
territories, and 1,576 charging stations have been sanctioned across 9 expressways and 16 highways.
(iv)	 Advanced batteries and registered vehicles will be incentivized under the scheme. A total of 166 vehicles 
under different categories have been registered under the FAME II scheme. 
(v)	
Over 303,000 vehicles have been incentivized under the FAME scheme, and incentives of over 
$137 million had been disbursed under FAME II up to 31 March 2022. 


Appendixes
81
Past Programs on Energy Efficiency 
Partial Risk Guarantee Fund for Energy Efficiency
(Source: BEE PRGFEE operational document)
Scheme Duration: May 2016–Now Withdrawn 
The Partial Risk Guarantee Fund for Energy Efficiency (PRGFEE) was launched by the Government of India 
to promote the financing of energy efficiency projects through ESCOs in different sectors including MSMEs. 
The Bureau of Energy Efficiency (BEE) is the nodal agency for PRGFEE. Five financial institutions have been 
empaneled under PRGFEE as participating financial institutions (Appendix 9). PRGFEE guarantees up to 50% of the 
loan amount or $1.25 million per project, whichever is lower than the empaneled production-linked incentives for 
energy efficiency projects through ESCOs.
The PRGFEE fund corpus was $39 million. PRGFEE saw no uptake as of June 2023, and no loan guarantees were 
issued. The scheme is no longer active. A few reasons for no uptake of PRGFEE are as follows: 
(i)	
The ESCO ecosystem in India is underdeveloped. The lack of regulations for energy saving performance 
contracts and measurement and verification (M&V) protocols to simplify the energy performance 
contracting limits the take-up of these schemes.
(ii)	
PRGF requires a baseline energy study at the MSME level, which increases the lead time and transaction 
cost due to energy auditing costs, resulting in a lower uptake by MSMEs.
(iii)	 PRGFEE only allows loans to be taken on the balance sheet of ESCO; however, ESCOs often prefer to 
invest through the balance sheets of MSMEs due to their low financial credibility to repay.
(iv)	 The risk coverage of 50% is on the lower side, disincentivizing the PLIs. 
(v)	
The scheme procedures are rigid, stringent, and extensive. 
(vi)	 Reimbursement to PLIs starts only after the start of legal proceedings. 
Japan International Cooperation Agency–SIDBI Financing Scheme  
for Energy Saving Projects in MSME Sector
(Source: JICA–SIDBI Scheme for MSME)
Scheme Duration: 2008–2017 
The Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA)−SIDBI financing scheme utilized a list-based approach to 
encourage MSME units to undertake energy saving investments in plant and machinery to reduce energy consumption, 
enhance energy efficiency, reduce carbon dioxide emissions, and improve the profitability of the units in the long run. 
It disbursed the line of credit of $1.5 billion to more than 5,000 MSMEs through SIDBI under three phases of the 
project. A list of more than 900 energy efficiency equipment eligible for financing was developed under the scheme 
covering more than 20 sectors. The JICA−SIDBI program is a pioneer program in energy efficiency financing. 
The key observations of the program are as follows:
(i)	
Quick sanction and disbursement with no need for baseline study and energy audit at MSME premises.
(ii)	
A list of energy efficiency technologies accompanied by a description of the technology and  
cost−benefit analysis helped MSMEs make informed decisions on technology adoption.


Appendixes
82
(iii)	 A list of energy efficiency technologies and equipment, vendors, and equipment suppliers developed by 
the program was updated regularly.
(iv)	 Provision of soft loans with lower interest rates, moratorium periods, and longer loan tenure.
(v)	
The operationalization of the scheme initially required significant effort in terms of capacity building of 
the bank’s operational staff across their network in India.
Financing Energy Efficiency at MSME–World Bank–Global Environment 
Facility (SIDBI, BEE)
(Source: SIDBI GEF programme)
Scheme Duration: May 2010–May 2019 
Financing Energy Efficiency at MSMEs (FEEM) was a Global Environment Facility (GEF)-funded project, with a 
budget of $63.61 million. It aimed to increase the demand for energy efficiency investments in target MSME clusters 
and to build their capacity to access commercial finance. The GEF implementing agency was the World Bank, and it 
was jointly executed by BEE and SIDBI.  
The project was focused on four components: 
(i)	
Activities to build capacity and awareness
(ii)	
Activities to increase investment in energy efficiency 
(iii)	 Knowledge management 
(iv)	 Project management support
FEEM was conceived to complement the World Bank’s engagement with the Government of India on the 
$520 million International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)-funded SME Finance and 
Development Project. The GEF-funded FEEM was designed to increase the flow of capital for energy efficiency 
measures and address institutional weaknesses and capacity constraints of financial institutions that restricted  
them from supporting MSMEs. The primary aim of the GEF-funded FEEM program was to:
(i)	
Increase demand for energy efficiency investments in target MSME clusters.
(ii)	
Build the capacity of MSMEs to access commercial finance.
The FEEM project has made significant strides in enhancing energy efficiency across various sectors in India. 
By training a substantial number of experts and professionals, preparing numerous detailed project reports, and 
facilitating substantial investments in energy efficiency initiatives, FEEM has played a pivotal role in promoting 
sustainable practices. Notably, the project's support for SIDBI's 4E scheme and the provision of performance-linked 
grants underscore its commitment to fostering innovation and efficiency in energy management. Below are some 
key achievements of the FEEM project: 
(i)	
A total of 1,120 experts from 75 financial institutions and 750 energy audit professionals were trained to 
develop energy audit reports based on which commercial finance could be sought.
(ii)	
Around 1,257 investment grade detailed project reports were prepared exceeding the initial target of 730.
(iii)	 A total of $41 million direct energy efficiency investments emerged from the project. 
(iv)	 Performance-linked grants were given to 67 early adopters. 
(v)	
The project supported SIDBI’s end to end energy efficiency (4E) scheme. The World Bank-supported 
revolving fund provided a maximum interest subsidy of 2.50% (increased to 3.58%). 


Appendixes
83
Technical Assistance Schemes
Promoting Market Transformation for Energy Efficiency in Micro, Small, and Medium-Sized Enterprises: UNIDO–
GEF (Energy Efficiency Services Limited, Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises)
(Source: EESL Scheme document)
Scheme Duration: February 2010–Ongoing
Promoting market transformation for energy efficiency in MSMEs is a GEF-funded project aimed to promote  
the implementation of energy efficiency in the MSME sector, create and sustain a revolving fund mechanism to 
ensure replication of energy efficiency measures in the sector, and address the identified barriers for scaling-up 
energy efficiency measures and consequently promote a cleaner and more competitive MSME industry in India. 
The project is jointly conceptualized by the Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MoMSME),  
GEF implementing agency (United Nations Industrial Development Organization [UNIDO]), and is being executed 
by EESL. The project budget is $31.3 million. 
The project focuses on three components: 
(i)	
Program to identify energy-intensive clusters and replicable technologies, 
(ii)	
Demonstration projects and aggregation of demand for demonstrated technologies in the clusters, and 
(iii)	 Financial models to support replication of energy efficiency projects in MSME.
The project focuses on both the demand-side and supply-side barriers. The project aims to create demand 
by undertaking demonstration projects and developing detailed project reports in identified clusters as well as 
developing a revolving fund that can be used to undertake energy efficiency projects in MSMEs.
The project is still in its early stage of implementation. Before the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, the 
project was able to conduct scoping studies, energy audits, and identification of technologies. The conceptualization 
of the revolving fund has been done and the operationalization is expected soon. 
Promoting Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy in Selected Micro, Small, 
and Medium-Sized Enterprise Clusters in India
(Source: BEE UNIDO GEF initiative)
Scheme Duration: April 2011–Ongoing
Promoting energy efficiency and renewable energy in MSMEs in India is a GEF-funded project aimed at  
introducing energy efficiency technologies and enhancing the use of renewable energy technologies in process 
applications in energy-intensive MSMEs in five sectors (brass, ceramics, dairy, foundries, and hand tools). The GEF 
executing partner is UNIDO and other executing partners are the BEE, MoMSME, and the Ministry of New and 
Renewable Energy. 
The project has four main components: 
(i)	
Increased capacity of energy efficiency and renewable energy product suppliers, service providers, and 
finance providers to support the expansion of energy efficiency and renewable energy in the clusters.


Appendixes
84
(ii)	
Increasing the level of end-use demand and implementation of energy efficiency and renewable energy 
technologies and practices by MSMEs.
(iii)	 Scaling up of the project to a national level.
(iv)	 Strengthening policy, institutional, and decision-making frameworks.
A few important achievements of the scheme are the following: 
Table A5: Achievements of the Project
21 Pilot projects implemented, 300 DPRs developed
20,000+ tons of oil equivalent annual energy savings
600+ energy efficiency and renewable energy 
measures implemented
$6.62 million in monetary savings
95 Workshops organized with 
$7.19 million cofinancing
300+ case studies prepared
122,838 tons of annual carbon emissions avoided
DPR = detailed project report.
Source: BEE EE financing initiatives.
Financing Energy Efficiency Programme (Bureau of Energy Efficiency)
(Source: BEE EE financing initiatives)
Scheme Duration: 2015–Ongoing 
The Energy Efficiency Financing Platform (EEFP) and Framework for Energy Efficient Economic Development are 
two major components of the financing energy efficiency program under the National Mission for Enhanced Energy 
Efficiency (NMEEE) to strengthen the financing framework for energy efficiency, which is being executed by BEE.
The EEFP component aims to establish a platform to interact with financial institutions, project developers, and 
other stakeholders for the implementation of energy efficiency projects and accelerating energy efficiency financing. 
The broader objective of the scheme is to build greater knowledge and confidence through a training program within 
the financial sector on energy efficiency financing. 
The Framework for Energy Efficient Economic Development component is envisioned with the objective of 
developing fiscal instruments to promote energy efficiency. It is also designed to provide comfort to lenders with the 
provisions of risk guarantee for performance contracts.
A few important activities initiated by BEE under EEFP are as follows: 
(i)	
Grading energy efficiency projects will increase the confidence of financial institutions toward the 
bankability of projects and techno-economics. Financial institutions will be able to identify, assess, 
and financially evaluate energy efficiency loan applications better as the overall assessment would be 
executed by empaneled grading agencies and the project would be given grading. BEE has planned 
multiple activities under this initiative to foster energy efficiency financing:  
(a)	 
Under this component, BEE shall reimburse the actual cost of grading (presently not exceeding 
$3,700 per project, for 100 projects). 
(b)	 
BEE has empaneled two financial institutions—Yes Bank and the Indian Renewable Energy 
Development Agency (IREDA)—for promoting this initiative. 
(c)	 
BEE is in the process of empaneling independent grading agencies (e.g., CRISIL, ICRA, etc.) as well 
as financial institutions for this activity. 


Appendixes
85
(iv)	 BEE is supporting the development of the facilitation center, which will assist financial institutions 
in confirming whether loans are energy efficiency loans and will also create a pipeline of energy efficiency 
projects through marketing and promotion activities. The center will also facilitate identifying energy 
efficiency technologies for financial institutions and will develop digital platforms to connect with 
financial institutions and get regular energy efficiency financing-related inputs. 
(v)	
BEE has been working on developing a special purpose vehicle with the support of the Power 
Finance Corporation/Rural Electrification Corporation to roll out different financing programs such as 
interest subsidy, capital subsidy, and risk guarantee. Once the special purpose vehicle is operationalized, 
it will support the wider spectrum of energy efficiency financing in MSMEs. The energy efficiency 
financing including incentive schemes, credit guarantee facilities, etc. can be availed by eligible 
energy efficiency projects including the project pipeline created through other initiatives under this 
programmatic intervention. 
(vi)	 BEE supports multiple initiatives for promoting energy efficiency finance through various activities such 
as investment bazaars, and energy efficiency project pipeline creation for financial institutions. 
(vii)	 BEE, along with nationalized banks and a few public financial institutions, has started the initiative 
where BEE is supporting the banks and financial institutions s with the required personnel (one financial 
expert and one technical expert) for energy efficiency financing activities. These initiatives will foster 
the strengthening of the energy efficiency portfolio of financial institutions such as SBI Global Factors 
Limited energy efficiency portfolio for housing, and Yes Bank sustainable finance interventions for the 
MSME sector.
Other Programs on Energy Efficiency  
and Technology Upgradation Supported by Ministries 
(Source: Schemes from MoMSME)
Technology Upgradation Funding Scheme 
Scheme Duration: 1999–Ongoing 
The Technology Upgradation Funding Scheme (TUFS) was launched to upgrade and modernize the Indian 
Textile Industry by encouraging it to undertake and adopt modern technological processes or undertake capacity 
expansion. Since its inception, TUFS has propelled investment of more than $30 billion.
The nodal agencies under the scheme are (i) the textile industry (excluding MSMEs)−IDBI Bank, (ii) MSME textile 
sectors–SIDBI, and (iii) the jute industry (Industrial Finance Corporation of India [IFCI]). A listing of nodal agencies, 
nodal banks, and co-opted private sector commercial banks of SIDBI that were participants in the scheme is 
provided in Appendix 9.
Key observations of TUFS are the following: 
(i)	
Due to the simplistic list-based approach of the scheme, the earlier schemes observed significant uptake, 
but the amended scheme has not seen similar results. 
(ii)	
TUFS was revised and upgraded to incorporate large players and encourage them to bring in new 
investments in the sector.
(iii)	 During the stakeholder consultations, it was pointed out that the elaborate verification process adopted 
by the revised versions to curb discrepancies has led to a decrease in the uptake of the scheme. 


Appendixes
86
Technology Upgradation Scheme for Micro, Small,  
and Medium-Sized Enterprises 
Scheme Duration: 2010–2017
The Technology Upgradation Scheme for Micro, Small, and Medium-Sized Enterprises (TEQUP) scheme was 
launched as one of the components of the National Manufacturing Competitiveness Programme. The objective 
of the scheme is to sensitize and encourage the manufacturing MSME sector in India to use energy efficient 
technologies and manufacturing processes to reduce costs of production and GHG emissions. The second 
objective of the scheme is to create awareness and encourage MSMEs to acquire product certification and licenses 
from national and international bodies. 
The  Program (TEQUP) plays a crucial role in incentivizing the adoption of energy efficiency technologies and 
promoting quality standards in India. Through its subsidy programs, TEQUP supports businesses by covering up to 
25% of project costs for implementing energy efficiency technologies. Additionally, it facilitates substantial subsidies 
for obtaining national and international product certifications, encouraging businesses to meet rigorous quality 
standards. These initiatives aim to enhance competitiveness, foster innovation, and drive sustainable practices 
across industries.
(i)	
TEQUP provides a subsidy of up to 25% (maximum $12,500) of the project cost for the implementation 
of energy efficiency technology. 
(ii)	
It also provides a subsidy of up to 75% ($1,875 for national certification and $2,500 for international 
certification) of the actual expenditure incurred for obtaining product certification licenses. 
SIDBI is the nodal implementing agency for this scheme, and Canara Bank, Bank of Baroda, Punjab National Bank, 
Bank of India, and State Bank of India are the nodal banks. As of 2019−20 (no new applications after 2017), around 
1,188 MSMEs had been beneficiaries of the scheme availing a subsidy of $11 million. 
The TEQUP scheme has since been subsumed by the Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Technology Upgradation 
Scheme.1 Overall, the TEQUP scheme has seen a low uptake. The key observations are as follows: 
(i)	
As per discussion with convened stakeholders and based on long-term interactions with MSME units, 
it has been observed that the low uptake of the scheme could be attributed to primarily the lack of 
promotion and awareness of the scheme among MSMEs and bankers; and
(ii)	
Scheme requirements such as an energy audit report (DPR) increase the transaction cost and lead time 
for the project.
Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme 
Scheme Duration: October 2000–March 2021 (under revision as of 2023) 
The Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme (CLCSS) facilitates subsidies to 51 subsectors and products including 
Khadi and Village Industries. The CLCSS provides a capital subsidy of 15% on actual term loans sanctioned and 
disbursed, with a maximum limit of an eligible loan of $125,000 (maximum of 1 subsidy).
1	
SIDBI. 2020. Annual Report 2019–2020. Uttar Pradesh.  


Appendixes
87
All scheduled commercial banks, scheduled cooperative banks (including the urban cooperative banks co-opted by 
the SIDBI), regional rural banks, state financial corporations, and Northeastern Development Financial Institution 
are eligible as primary lending institutions under this scheme after they execute a general agreement with any of the 
nodal agencies. 
Key observations of the CLCSS are as follows: 
(i)	
The CLCSS has been a long-standing and popular scheme. The scheme is not exclusive to energy 
efficiency and targets modernization and technology upgradation. It has been widely disseminated 
through a comprehensive list of primary lending institutions. The scheme is well known among the 
MSMEs, and many have availed benefits. The list-based approach simplifies the loan appraisal process. 
MSME units can only avail of a maximum 1,500,000 of subsidy, which is utilized by most of the MSMEs.
(ii)	
These observations and broad applicability are the major reasons for the excellent uptake. All allocated 
funds were disbursed under the scheme covering 65,000 beneficiaries with a disbursement of  
500 million in funds.


88
APPENDIX 6
OBSERVATIONS FROM EXISTING 
SCHEMES TO EXPAND LENDING  
FOR LOW-CARBON TECHNOLOGIES 
Energy efficiency in small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) has been a difficult segment on account of 
inherent issues with energy efficiency projects and the intrinsic issues associated with the SME sector. A study 
performed by the Reserve Bank of India in 2019 identified the main weakness of the SME sector in the areas of 
access to credit, reliable capital, payment cycles, access to market, infrastructure, adoption of new technologies, and 
skill level of the workforce.1 
Access to finance is one of the main barriers for the micro, small, and medium-sized enterprise (MSME) sector. 
The reasons for limited access to finance can be attributed to the requirement of collateral and/or guaranteeing high 
interest rates due to high perceived risks, rigid lending policies, complex procedures, and limited knowledge. 
Energy efficiency has traditionally struggled in India due to the complexities associated with energy efficiency 
projects. The challenges of energy efficiency in SMEs include a limited awareness and technical knowledge of 
MSMEs, limited in-house technical capacities of financial institutions to evaluate energy efficiency proposals, small 
ticket size and high transaction cost, technology performance risk, complexities associated with energy baseline, and 
limited ecosystem for energy service companies (ESCOs) in India.
Moreover, energy efficiency is lower on the priority list of MSMEs compared to large industries or other businesses. 
The various initiatives detailed above have attempted to proliferate energy efficiency in MSMEs through different 
mechanisms. It is understood that there cannot be one solution for a sector of this magnitude and spread. There 
have been improvements because of the efforts made by the government and various overseas development 
agencies; however, market transformation is yet to be seen. 
1	
Reserve Bank of India. 2019. Expert Committee on Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises. Press release. 18 March. 


Appendixes
89
continued on next page
State-Led Schemes and Incentives for E-mobility
In addition to the central-level schemes and policies, several states have formulated their electric vehicle-related 
policies and regulations as detailed below:
Table A6.1: State-Led Initiatives for E-mobility
S. No.
State Name
Policy objectives
1
Andhra Pradesh 
Electric Vehicle 
Policy (2018) 
•	 Aim to have 1 million electric vehicles on the road by 2024
•	 Allocate 200–400 hectares of land to develop electric vehicle parks
•	 100% reimbursement on stamp duty on the purchase of land for electric vehicle 
production
•	 Make Andhra Pradesh a global hub for electric mobility development and manufacturing
•	 Active investment through grants and venture funds to fund research, start-ups, 
incubators, etc.
•	 Active investment in green technologies such as charging infrastructure, battery-
swapping, hydrogen generation, etc.
•	 Develop a skilled labor force well-versed in the electric vehicle ecosystem
•	 Enable the transition to more environment-friendly cities
2
Bihar Draft Electric 
Vehicle Policy 
(2019)
•	 Aim to convert all paddle-run rickshaws to e-rickshaws by 2022
•	 Aim to make Bihar a preferred destination for electric vehicle-related investments
•	 Create a manufacturing hub within the state
•	 Aim to create fast charging stations at every 50 kilometers on state and national 
highways within the state
3
Delhi Electric 
Vehicle Policy 
(2020)
•	 For electric two-wheelers, a purchase incentive of $62.50 per kilowatt-hour (kWh) of 
battery capacity will be provided per vehicle to the registered owner and subject to a 
maximum incentive of $375 per vehicle
•	 For electric autos, a purchase incentive of $375 per vehicle will be provided by 
Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi to the registered owner
•	 For electric buses, a purchase incentive of $375 to the first 10,000 e-carriers to be 
registered in Delhi after the issue of the policy
•	 For electric four-wheelers, a purchase incentive of $62.50/kWh of battery capacity will 
be provided (to a maximum of $1,875 per vehicle) to the registered owners of the first 
1,000 e-cars to be registered in Delhi after the issue of the policy
•	 Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi will provide a 100% grant for the 
purchase of charging equipment up to $75 per charging point for the first 30,000 
charging points
4
Karnataka Electric 
Vehicle Policy 
(2017)
•	 Aim to make Karnataka a preferred destination for electric vehicle manufacturing
•	 Aim to attract investments worth more than$3.75 billion in the electric vehicle 
ecosystem and to create employment opportunities for more than 55,000 people
•	 Incentives and concessions to be provided to all charging infrastructure providers
•	 Aim to establish a venture capital fund to encourage e-mobility-related start-ups
5
Kerala Electric 
Vehicle Policy 
(2019)
•	 Aim to target 1 million electric vehicles on the road by 2022
•	 Create a special fund to support local manufacturing of electric vehicles
•	 Priority allotment of land and speedy execution of land allotment for local 
manufacturers of electric vehicles
•	 Promote shared e-mobility and clean transportation practices within the state
6
Maharashtra 
Electric Vehicle 
Policy (2021)
•	 Under this policy, the state aims to incentivize the following number of vehicles under 
each vehicle category:
•	 Electric two-wheeler: 100,000
•	 Electric three-wheeler auto: 15,000
•	 Electric four-wheeler cars: 10,000
•	 Electric four-wheeler carrier: 10,000
•	 Electric buses: 1,000


Appendixes
90
Table A6.1 continued
S. No.
State Name
Policy objectives
7
Tamil Nadu Electric 
Vehicle Policy 
(2019)
•	 Aim to attract investments worth $6.25 billion
•	 Aim to create infrastructure for electric vehicle charging
•	 The state offers 100% reimbursement of goods and services tax paid on the sale of 
electric vehicles manufactured in the state
•	 In addition to that, there is a 15% capital subsidy on intermediate products used for 
manufacturing, a 100% electricity tax exemption for manufacturing industries, a 100% 
stamp duty exemption for transactions related to electric vehicle manufacturing, a 50% 
land subsidy, etc.  
Sources: Andhra Pradesh State’s EV policy; Bihar State’s EV policy; Delhi State’s EV policy; Karnataka State’s EV policy; Kerala State’s EV Policy; 
Maharashtra State’s EV policy; and Tamil Nadu State’s EV policy.
Schemes by Different Financial Institutions  
for Promoting Women Entrepreneurs
While such reforms and policy interventions are required in the long and short term, few banks and financial 
institutions have tailored lending products that are aligned with the needs of women-owned businesses (Table A6.2). 
Table A6.2: List of Schemes by Financial Institutions for Women Entrepreneurs
S. No
Bank
Scheme
Description
1
Bank of India
Priyadarshini 
Yojana
This scheme was announced in 2006 by the Bank of India to provide 
loans to women entrepreneurs without any collateral for an amount of 
up to $6,250. The scheme also allowed women to avail of loans at highly 
subsidized rates of interest. 
2
Central Bank of 
India
Cent Kalyani
This scheme was launched by the Central Bank of India for existing and 
new women entrepreneurs who are operating in the MSME space. It aims 
to provide financial assistance to women-owned businesses by providing 
loans for capital expenditure as well as for working capital. To avail of this 
loan, no collateral or guarantors are required. 
3
Dena Bank
Dena Shakti
Under this scheme, women entrepreneurs can avail of loans of up to 
$25,000 at a concession of 0.25% on the interest rate. Under this, both 
working capital and term loans can be availed with a flexible repayment 
tenure that can last up to 10 years.  
4
Oriental Bank of 
Commerce
Orient Mahila 
Vikas Yojana
This scheme allows women with ownership of 51% share capital either 
individually or jointly in a proprietary concern to avail loans. The scheme 
provides concession on the rate of interest of up to 2%. 
5
State Bank of 
India
Stree Shakti 
Package
Under this scheme, women entrepreneurs can avail of loans of up to 
2,500,000 at low rates of interest. Under the scheme, no collateral is 
required for a loan of up to $12,500.
6
Small Industries 
Development 
Bank of India
Mahila Udyam 
Nidhi
This scheme allows women entrepreneurs to avail of loans for project 
costs not exceeding $12,500. Under this scheme, a soft loan limit of up 
to 25% of the project cost, subject to a maximum of $3,175 per project, is 
provided to women entrepreneurs.  
$ = United States dollar;  = Indian rupee; MSME = micro, small, and medium-sized enterprises.
Source:  PwC project experience.


91
APPENDIX 7
DISCUSSION GUIDE FOR 
TECHNOLOGY PROVIDERS
The study circulated discussion guides and questionnaires to the stakeholders well in advance to seek inputs. 
The questionnaire was designed to cover the following details concerning financial institutions to understand their 
outlook toward the clean energy financing domain particularly for small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) 
in India:
(i)	
types of targeted customers (large businesses, manufacturing SMEs, commercial buildings, etc.);
(ii)	
breakdown of the portfolio within the SME category (i.e., the share of SMEs within the total loan 
portfolio);
(iii)	 understanding the average ticket size of loans availed; 
(iv)	 understanding the category of loans offered (business loans, working capital loans, asset financing 
loans, etc.);
(v)	
challenges of financing clean energy projects; and 
(vi)	 understanding whether the financial institution has prepared any strategies specific to climate finance, 
whether any additional support is required to boost clean energy financing, and the financial institution’s 
willingness to collaborate with the Asian Development Bank over the same.


Appendixes
92
Figure  A7.1: Discussion Guide for Technology Providers and Energy Service Companies
continued on next page


Appendixes
93
Figure A7.1 continued
capex = capital expenditure, EE = energy efficiency, ESCO = energy service company, EV = electric vehicle, FI = financial institution, 
GHG = greenhouse gases, IRR = internal rate of return, JICA = Japan International Cooperation Agency, NBFC = nonbanking financial 
company, NPV net present value, opex = operating expenses, PV = photovoltaic, RE = renewable energy, SI = smart infrastructure,  
SIDBI = Small Industries Development Bank of India, SMEs = small and medium-sized enterprises.
Source: Prepared by PwC.


Appendixes
94
Figure A7.2: Technology Provider Recipients of the Discussion Guide 
Name
Type
Consultation 
Conducted
Discussion Guide 
Shared
75f
OEM
P
P
ABB
OEM
P
Ankur Scientific
OEM
P
Balsotra Pneumatic
LSP
P
P
Battery smart
OEM
P
Bosch
Vendor ESCO
P
Bounce
OEM
P
Cosmoright Consultancy Services Pvt. Ltd
ESCO
P
P
Design X
OEM
P
P
Desire Energy
ESCO
P
P
Electronics and Engineering Company Pvt Ltd
OEM
P
Electrotherm/Interpower/Megatherm
OEM
P
EnEFF
LSP
P
Eto motors
OEM
P
P
Etrio
OEM
P
Exicom
OEM
P
Gardner Denver / Others
OEM
P
Grundfos
OEM
P
ISCT
LSP
P
P
Jyoti CNC
OEM
P
Kaeser
OEM
P
P
Magenta Group
OEM
P
P
Milacron
OEM
P
MoEVing
OEM
P
P
NCON Turbines
OEM
P
P
P2P
OEM
P
P
Parker Legris
LSP
P
Plasma Induction
OEM
P
P
Pranat Energy
Vendor ESCO
P
Promethean energy
Vendor ESCO
P
P
Rrdye
OEM
P
P
Saven
ESCO
P
Schneider Electric
OEM
P
P
Servotech Power Systems Pvt Ltd.
Vendor ESCO
P
Smart Joules
ESCO
P
P
SPG Prints
OEM
P
Thermax
OEM
P
Voltas limited
OEM
P
Yantra Harvest
ESCO
P
P
ESCO = energy service company, LSP = local service provider, OEM = original equipment manufacturer.
Source: PwC project experience.


95
The discussion guide (questionnaire) for financial institutions is provided in Figure A8.1.
APPENDIX 8
DISCUSSION GUIDE FOR FINANCIAL 
INSTITUTIONS 
Figure A8.1: Discussion Guide for Financial Institutions
continued on next page


Appendixes
96
Figure A8.1 continued 
capex = capital expenditure, EE = energy efficiency, ESCO = energy service company, EV = electric vehicle, FI = financial institution, 
GHG = greenhouse gases, IRR = internal rate of return, JICA = Japan International Cooperation Agency,  
NBFC = nonbanking financial company, NPV net present value, opex = operating expenses, PV = photovoltaic, RE = renewable energy, 
SI = smart infrastructure, SIDBI = Small Industries Development Bank of India, SMEs = small and medium-sized enterprises.
Source: Prepared by PwC.


Appendixes
97
Figure A8.2: Financial Institution Recipients of the Discussion Guide 
Name
Type
Consultation conducted
Discussion guide shared
Akasa Financial Services 
NBFC
P
P
Axis Bank
FI
P
Caspian Impact Investments
NBFC
P
P
Ckers Finance
NBFC
P
P
Edelweiss Financial Services
NBFC
P
Electronica Finance
NBFC
P
P
Federal Bank
FI
P
P
HDFC Bank
FI
P
ICICI Bank Limited
FI
P
IDFC First Bank
FI
P
IndusInd Bank
FI
P
Indostar Capital Finance Limited
NBFC
P
IREDA
NBFC
P
P
Citi Union Bank
FI
P
Northern Arc
NBFC
P
P
PTC Financial Services Limited
FI
P
Rev Fin
Fintech
P
P
Siemens Financial Services
NBFC
P
P
TATA Cleantech
NBFC
P
P
Yes Bank
FI
P
P
FI = financial institution, Fintech = financial technology, NBFC = nonbanking financial company.
Source: Primary consultation.


98
Private Sector Financial Institutions under the Partial Risk 
Sharing Facility
Participating Financial Institutions
Electronica Finance Limited
HDFC Bank Limited
IndusInd Bank Ltd
Tata Cleantech Capital Limited
The Federal Bank Limited
Yes Bank Limited
Member Lending Institutions under the Credit Guarantee 
Fund Trust for Micro and Small Enterprises (CGTMSE)
Private Sector Banks 
Axis Bank Ltd.
Catholic Syrian Bank
City Union Bank
Development Credit Bank Ltd.
HDFC Bank Ltd.
ICICI Bank Ltd.
IDBC Bank Ltd.
IDFC First Bank Ltd.
IndusInd Bank Ltd.
Karnataka Bank Ltd.
Kotak Mahindra Bank Ltd.
Lakshmi Vilas Bank
Tamilnad Mercantile Bank Ltd.
The Dhanalakshmi Bank Ltd.
The Nainital Bank Ltd.
The Ratnakar Bank Ltd.
APPENDIX 9
PARTICIPATING FINANCIAL 
INSTITUTIONS UNDER EXISTING 
AND PREVIOUS FINANCING SCHEMES
continued on next page


Appendixes
99
Foreign Banks 
Bank of Bahrain and Kuwait
Barclays Bank PLC
DBS Bank
Deutsche Bank
Standard Chartered Bank
Small Finance Banks 
AU Small Finance Bank
Equitas Small Finance Bank Ltd.
ESAF Small Finance Bank Ltd.
Northeast Small Finance Bank
Ujjivan Small Finance Bank Ltd.
Scheduled Commercial Banks 
Andhra Pradesh Mahesh Co-operative Urban Bank Ltd
Bombay Mercantile Co-operative Bank Ltd
Citizen Credit Co-operative Bank Ltd
Jalgaon Peoples Co-op Bank Ltd
New India Co-operative Bank Ltd
NKGSB Co-Operative Bank Ltd.
Nutan Nagarik Sahakari Bank Ltd.
Saraswat Co-operative Bank Ltd.
Surat Peoples Coop Bank Ltd
SVC Co-operative Bank Ltd
The Ahmedabad Mercantile Co-op Bank Ltd
The Kalupur Commercial Co-op Bank Ltd
TJSB Sahakari Bank Ltd.
Private Financial Institutions under the Partial Risk 
Guarantee Fund for Energy Efficiency (PRGFEE)
Participating Financial Institutions
IDFC Bank
South Indian Bank
Tata Cleantech Capital 
YES Bank Limited
Table continued


Appendixes
100
Financial Institutions under the Technology Upgradation 
Funding Scheme (TUFS) for the Textile Sector
Financial Institutions Under the TUF Scheme
AXIS Bank
Catholic Syrian Bank
City Union Bank
Development Credit Bank Ltd., Mumbai 
Dhanalakshmi Bank Ltd.
EXIM Bank
Federal Bank
HDFC Bank 
ICICI Bank
IDBI Bank 
IFCI
Laxmi Vilas Bank
Nainital Bank Ltd
Ratnakar Bank Ltd. 
South Indian Bank
Yes Bank Ltd.
Sources: Government of India, Ministry of Textiles. Technology Upgradation Fund Scheme.  


101
There were 21 financial institutions short-listed based on their prior financing history, sectors of focus, and overall 
expertise in the energy efficiency and climate smart infrastructure financing domain (Table A10). 
Table A10: List of Financial Institutions with Experience
S. No.
Name
Type
Experience in Climate, Energy Efficiency, 
 Climate-Smart Infrastructure, E-mobility,  
Climate Change Mitigation 
1
Axis Bank 
Private Bank
Sustainable lending
2
Akasa Finance
NBFC
Electric mobility
3
Caspian Impact Investments
NBFC
Clean energy, energy efficiency
4
Ckers Finance
NBFC
Clean energy, resource efficiency
5
Edelweiss Financial Services
NBFC
Clean energy and SME lending
6
Electronica Finance
NBFC
Energy efficiency in MSME, rooftop solar, climate finance
7
HSBC Bank
Private Bank
ESCO financing and demand-side management initiatives
8
ICICI Bank Limited
Private Bank
Energy efficiency, sustainable financing (renewable energy)
9
IDFC First Bank
Private Bank
PRSF/PRGFEE
10
IndoStar Capital Finance Limited
NBFC
Commercial vehicles and electric mobility
11
IndusInd Bank
Private Bank
PRSF/PRGFEE
12
Investment and Finance Company 
Limited
NBFC
Commercial vehicles and electric mobility
13
IREDA
NBFC
Renewable energy, energy efficiency
14
Kotak Mahindra Bank
Private Bank
Energy efficiency, renewable purchase obligation
15
L&T Infrastructure Finance
NBFC
Solar and wind energy projects
16
Northern Arc
NBFC
Electric mobility
17
PTC Financial Services Limited
Private Bank
PRSF/PRGFEE
18
Siemens Financial Services
NBFC
Energy transition
19
Stride Ventures
NBFC
Electric mobility
20
TATA Cleantech
NBFC
Clean-tech solutions, sustainable strategy development
21
Yes Bank
Private Bank
ESCO financing
ESCO = energy service company; MSME = micro, small, and medium-sized enterprise; NBFC = nonbanking financial company;  
PRGFEE = Partial Risk Guarantee Fund for Energy Efficiency; PRSF = partial risk sharing facility; SME = small and medium-sized enterprise.
Source: From consultation carried out by PwC. 
APPENDIX 10
FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS  
SHORT-LISTED FOR CONSULTATIONS  


Driving Energy-Efficient and Low-Carbon Investments for Small  
and Medium-Sized Enterprises through the Finance Sector
This report presents a comprehensive review of the investment landscape in energy efficiency and  
climate-smart infrastructure (CSI) technologies, maps the supplier environment, and lists barriers to 
investments. It gives recommendations on viable investment opportunities for private sector financial 
institutions and for improving the adoption of energy efficiency and CSI technologies.
About the Asian Development Bank
ADB is committed to achieving a prosperous, inclusive, resilient, and sustainable Asia and the Pacific,  
while sustaining its efforts to eradicate extreme poverty. Established in 1966, it is owned by 68 members  
—49 from the region. Its main instruments for helping its developing member countries are policy dialogue,
loans, equity investments, guarantees, grants, and technical assistance.