CONTENTS 
General Editor’s Preface 
Acknowledgements 
Introduction 
Note on the Text 
Select Bibliography 
A Chronology of 
Joseph Conrad 
Map: The River Congo 
AN OUTPOST OF PROGRESS 
KARAIN: 
A MEMORY 
YOUTH: A NARRATIVE 
HEART OF DARKNESS 
Extract from the ‘Author’s Note’ (1917) 
Explanatory Notes 
Glossary 
Vil 
X1 
XXIX 
XXXIl 
XXXVI 
xlv 


2c 
Ges SUdeUT TOUR 
: 
S 
- OME ae 
et 
— 
1 1 
Ein Ardea TION 
oy 
th 
_ ORR 
| 
Tela LF iit 
abi 
S 


GENERA) ORS PREFACE 
Conrad is acknowledged as one of the great writers of the twentieth 
century, but neither in his lifetime nor after have his works been 
available in authoritative texts. This was partly because Conrad him- 
self revised his writings at several stages (in manuscript, typescript, 
and proofs), partly because many of his works appeared in different 
versions (slightly so in the English and American editions, signifi- 
cantly so in serial and book form), and partly because he himself 
continued to revise them for subsequent publication. Moreover he 
was involved in still further revision of the texts when his works were 
issued in the collected editions of Doubleday and Heinemann in 
1921, though the extent of his involvement varied considerably 
from work to work. Like many authors, he also suffered from the 
well-meant, but often misguided, editorial efforts of his publishers 
who not only imposed their own house styling but sometimes 
changed his grammar, spelling, and punctuation, and even altered 
whole phrases. The textual history of Conrad’s works—the revisions 
they underwent and their transmission and publication—is therefore 
an intricate and complicated one. A scholarly edition of the Letters 
and Works is currently being prepared by Cambridge University 
Press and six volumes of the Letters as well as two novels have been 
published to date. 
In the absence of authoritative texts which accurately incorporate 
Conrad’s corrections and revisions and which remove the editorial 
interference, house styling, and printing errors of his publishers, the 
base-texts for this new Oxford World’s Classics edition must be the 
English first editions. These editions are important because they are 
° 
what Conrad originally expected to be published, because they were 
the texts which first shaped his reputation as a writer, and because 
they are free of later layers of editorial interference. As late as 1919, 
when Conrad was correcting copy for a limited Collected Edition, he 
still affirmed their importance: ‘I devote particular care to the text of 
the English Edition always and it is to be considered the standard 
one’ (letter to Fisher Unwin, 27 May 1919). At the same time, how- 
ever, they are themselves flawed by numerous misprints and some 
idiosyncratic house styling. The present edition therefore aims to 


Vili 
General Editor's Preface 
correct such errors in order to restore Conrad’s idiom and distinctive 
prose style. 
In this edition the following emendations have been made silently 
throughout: (a) obvious spelling errors and typesetter’s mistakes 
have been corrected; (4) inadvertent omissions have been supplied in 
the case of incomplete quotation marks, final stops, apostrophes in 
colloquial contractions (e.g. ‘o’clock’) and the stop following a ttle 
(e.g. ‘Mr.’); (c) the convention of hyphenating words such as ‘to- 
day’, ‘to-night’, ‘good-bye’ has been dropped in accordance with 
modern usage; (¢) inconsistencies in punctuation inside or outside 
quotation marks have been standardized and other inconsistencies 
— 
such as hyphenated words—have been regularized in accordance 
with Conrad’s most frequent practice in each work; (e) paragraphs 
have been indented throughout in accordance with modern con- 
ventions and a few typographical details—such as display capitals, 
chapter numbers and headings, and running titles—have been 
regularized. However, where 
the sense 
of a phrase has been 
occluded or where there is a controversial reading or some specific 
textual 
difficulty, 
the editor 
of each volume 
will record 
the 
editorial emendation and explain the adopted reading briefly in the 
Note on the Text or in an explanatory note where the reader may 
also be directed to further reading on the issue. 
Each volume has an Introduction which seeks to relate the work to 
Conrad’s life and other writings, to place it in its literary and cultural 
context, and to offer a cogent argument for its relevance both to his 
time and ours. Although Conrad is a modern writer, his specialized 
terminology is not always familiar to contemporary readers nor are 
the literary, historical, and political allusions always clear. Explana- 
tory notes are therefore supplied but it is assumed that words or 
expressions found in a good dictionary will not need to be glossed. 
Appendixes in each volume will also provide material useful to the 
reader, such as a glossary of nautical or foreign terms, maps, or 
important additional texts. Conrad’s own series of prefaces and 
Author’s Notes (the latter written between 1917 and 1920) are 
reprinted as an appendix to each volume. 
Finally, any work on so major a figure as Conrad must be deeply 
indebted to the research of many scholars and critics, but I would 
like to express my gratitude especially to Jacques Berthoud, Jim 
Boulton, Andrew Brown, Laurence Davies, George Donaldson, 


General Editor’s Preface 
ix 
Donald Rude, J. H. Stape and Cedric Watts for sharing their 
expertise, and to Judith Luna of Oxford University Press for her 
unfailing encouragement and advice. 
Mara Kalnins 
Corpus Christi, Cambridge 


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
Cedric Watts wishes to express his gratitude to the staff of Sussex 
University Library and to numerous Conradians, including Mario 
Curreli, Laurence Davies, Anthony Fothergill, Hans Lippe, Seiji 
Minamida, Gene Moore, S. W. Reid, and Norman Sherry. The late 
Hans van Marle made many shrewd contributions; Brian Nicholas 
provided astute guidance on Gallicisms; and Robert Hampson was 
unfailingly helpful. The endnotes to this volume have been aug- 
mented by reference to the following works: Youth: A Narrative | 
Heart of 
Darkness | 
The End of 
the Tether, with an introduction by 
C. B. Cox and notes by Norman Sherry (London: Dent; Vermont: 
Tuttle, 1974); Anthony Fothergill (ed.), Tales of Unrest (London: 
Everyman, Dent; Vermont: Tuttle, 2000), Robert Hampson (ed.), 
Heart of 
Darkness (London: Penguin, 1995), and Gene M. Moore 
(ed.), ‘Heart of Darkness’ and Other Stories (Ware: Wordsworth 
Editions, 1999). 


INTRODUCTION 
I 
The four tales in this volume were written between June 1896 and 
March 1899, a period during which Conrad matured rapidly in styl- 
istic virtuosity and conceptual boldness. With ‘Heart of Darkness’ 
(first published in Blackwood’s Edinburgh Magazine, February to 
April 1899) he reached the height of his powers as a writer of 
consummate eloquence, verve, subtlety, and originality. The tales 
chosen to accompany ‘Heart of Darkness’ here have various the- 
matic and technical relationships to it. The earliest, ‘An Outpost of 
Progress’ (which appeared in Cosmopolis, June and July 1897), is 
also set in central Africa and offers a ruthlessly ironic view of 
European colonialism and the pretensions of civilization. ‘Karain’ 
(Blackwood’s, November 1897), with locations in the Malay Archi- 
pelago, again depicts confrontations between European traders and 
the indigenous inhabitants of the exotic region. In this case, how- 
ever, the ironies are relatively mild and benign. The narrative 
structure is that of ‘the tale within the tale’, 
a mode which was 
widely employed in nineteenth-century 
fiction and whose 
full 
potential was to be demonstrated in ‘Heart of Darkness’. ‘Youth’ 
(Blackwood’s, September 1898) is another experiment in oblique 
narration. It, too, appraises imperial adventure, though a stronger 
preoccupation is the partly nostalgic rendering of a bizarrely ill- 
fated voyage. All these works are concerned with illusions (vari- 
ously sustaining, 
tantalizing, 
or corrupting), 
with the tension 
between romanticism and scepticism, and with a cluster of human 
qualities which are gnomically suggested by Stein in Conrad’s Lord 
jim: 
‘This magnificent butterfly finds a 
little heap of dirt and sits still on it; but 
man he will never on his heap of mud keep still. He want to be so, and 
again he want to be so [. 
. .] He wants to be a saint, and he wants to bea 
devil—and every time he shuts his eyes he sees himself as a very fine 
fellow —so fine as he can never be... 
. Ina dream. ...”' 
' Conrad, Lord fim: A Tale (Edinburgh: Blackwood, 1900), 215. 


Xi 
Introduction 
II 
During the twentieth century, the word ‘imperialism’ gained increas- 
ingly pejorative associations. Today, so many people (for sound 
reasons) regard the history of imperialism as a predominantly sordid 
saga of imposition and exploitation that, in order to appreciate the 
bold panache of ‘An Outpost of Progress’, we need to recall the tale’s 
date. The year of Queen Victoria’s Diamond Jubilee, 1897, was a 
time of imperialistic fervour in Britain. England’s power extended 
round the world; a quarter of the human race was subject to the 
Queen. The June issue of Cosmopolis included, with the first part of 
‘An Outpost of Progress’, an article by Sir Richard Temple entitled 
‘The Reign of Queen Victoria’, which extolled the growth of British 
economic power, military strength, and territory. In ‘The Globe and 
the Island’, the regular political commentator, Henry Norman, 
praised British gunboat diplomacy in Africa. The July number of the 
magazine, in which Conrad’s Kayerts shoots the unarmed Carlier 
and hangs himself from a cross, contained a commentary on the 
Jubilee celebrations in which Norman remarked: 
Britain is imperialistic now. The ‘Little Englander’ has wisely decided to 
efface himself. The political party which should talk of reducing the navy 
or snubbing the Colonies would have a short shrift. We are Imperialists 
first, and Liberals or Tories afterwards. I 
said this, for my own part, years 
ago, when the sentiment was not quite so popular. Now it has happily 
become a commonplace. The Jubilee is its culminating expression [. 
. .]’ 
This context emphasizes by contrast the sardonic radicalism of 
Conrad’s 
tale, in which the European emissaries of ‘progress’ 
become demoralized and deranged by their isolation in Africa, and 
in which the ‘civilizing mission’ is depicted as primarily an avidity 
for commercial profit. 
If we ask why Conrad should have been so exceptional in his 
scepticism about imperial expansion, one answer lies in his Polish 
upbringing. Having been born into a nation which had vanished 
from the map of Europe after its annexation by Russia from the east, 
Prussia from the west, and Austria from the south-west, Conrad had 
good reason to question the right of great powers to impose their 
wills on weaker nations. His many years of travels and voyages had 
> Cosmopolis, 7 (July 1897), 8r. 


Introduction 
xii 
culminated in his African venture of 1890, when, travelling through 
the heart of the Congo (which the Belgian King, Leopold II, had 
claimed as his personal property), he observed the rapacity and bru- 
tality of Europeans in the ‘dark continent’. Conrad would prove 
capable of enthusiastic tribute to British traditions; and certainly, of 
the various kinds of imperialism, he regarded British imperialism as 
the least malign. Nevertheless, all forms of imperialism were to him 
deeply suspect, and his abhorrence for the Russian, German, and 
Belgian forms remained lifelong. 
‘An Outpost of Progress’ provides various clues to enable the 
reader to identify Kayerts and Carlier as Belgian and the country of 
their outpost as “The Congo Free State’ (as it was hypocritically 
designated); but, characteristically, Conrad does not explicitly name 
their nationality or that location. As we infer them, the tale becomes 
in part an indictment of Belgian colonialism, but that degree of 
reticence encourages us to consider how far the tale’s criticism may 
apply to colonialism in general. Indeed, the tale assails the presump- 
tions of civilization by both implying and alleging that civilization is 
hollow at the core, being a deceptive system of conventions, institu- 
tions, and sustaining illusions. Isolate individuals from that system, 
and the hollowness is revealed: 
Few men realise that their life, the very essence of their character, their 
capabilities and their audacities, are only the expression of their belief in 
the safety of their surroundings. The courage, the composure, the con- 
fidence; the emotions and principles; every great and every insignificant 
thought belongs not to the individual but to the crowd: to the crowd that 
believes blindly in the irresistible force of its institutions and of its morals, 
in the power of its police and of its opinion. But the contact with pure 
unmitigated savagery, with primitive nature and primitive man, brings 
sudden and profound trouble into the heart. 
The most quotably explanatory part of a text is, however, seldom its 
best part. This passage is readily isolable and solicits quotation 
because it epitomizes some of the sceptical themes of ‘An Outpost’ 
and of numerous other Conradian works. The force of the tale lies 
rather in its graphic accumulation of ironies, and these culminate in 
the final scene when Kayerts is discovered: 
He had evidently climbed the grave, which was high and narrow, and after 
tying the end of the strap to the arm, had swung himself off. His toes were 


XIV 
Introduction 
only a couple of inches above the ground; his arms hung stiffly down; he 
seemed to be standing rigidly at attention, but with one purple cheek 
playfully posed on the shoulder. And, irreverently, he was putting out a 
swollen tongue at his Managing Director. 
A dangling man suspended from a cross, with a ‘purple cheek 
playfully posed’ as he extends his ‘swollen tongue’. It is a ferociously 
sardonic 
image. 
Here 
Conrad, 
writing 
in 
1897, is—by 
his 
unflinchingly bold scepticism—generating the technical and moral 
shock-tactics of Modernism. 
The symbolic, cinematic ironies are already distinctively Con- 
radian; but, like virtually every author, he had begun by learning 
from others. ‘An Outpost of Progress’ is indebted in various ways to 
Maupassant and Flaubert. From both, Conrad had learned the art of 
literary connoisseurship of the base and wretched. What is described 
may be sordid or horrifying, yet the manner of description implies a 
highly civilized concern with linguistic precision and tonal control. 
In this tale (which he later declared his best),*’ Conrad showed that 
he was capable of surpassing his French mentors. Among the literary 
progenitors of Kayerts and Carlier are the eponymous heroes of 
Flaubert’s Bouvard et Pécuchet, who, like the Conradian characters, 
are ingenuous incompetents in an unfamiliar region; but, whereas 
Flaubert’s narrative is long, repetitive, and diffuse, Conrad’s is a 
masterpiece of compression which, in its brief span, proves to be far 
more incisive and far wider in its implications. 
Ill 
‘Karain’ is a gentler, slower-paced tale, coloured by those abundant 
descriptions of the exotic locality which characterize Conrad’s works 
with Malaysian settings. Conrad called it ‘magazine’ish’,* and its 
handling of the patronizing relationship between the British traders 
and their Malay friend does bring to mind both the magazine fiction 
of that day (particularly that in Blackwood’s, where the tale was first 
published) and an early reviewer’s claim that Conrad might become 
‘the Kipling 
of the Malay Archipelago’.» 
Conrad 
distrusted 
‘ 
“My Best Story and Why I 
Think So’, Grand Magazine, 3 (Mar. 1906), 87. 
C.T. Watts (ed.), Joseph Conrad’s Letters to R. B. Cunninghame Graham (London: 
Cambridge University Press, 1969), p. 82. 
> “Spectator, 19 Oct. 1895, p. 530. 


Introduction 
XV 
Kipling’s outlook but admired his technical skill; and certainly 
‘Karain’, though descriptively more luxuriant, resembles a Kipling 
tale in its reminiscential form, its sympathetic presentation of the 
group of British friends, its treatment of oriental superstition, the 
apparently knowledgeable detail in the account of local politics, and 
the half-ironic, half-serious tribute to the exorcistic power of Queen 
Victoria’s image on a coin—a silver coin which (being gilded) may be 
doubly fraudulent. 
The inner narrative, Karain’s confession of his lethal treachery to 
his friend, derives from a Polish ballad, Adam Mickiewicz’s ‘Czaty’ 
(‘The Ambush’).° In ‘Czaty’, a Polish governor finds that his wife has 
taken a lover. The governor and his henchman (a Cossack) prepare 
an ambush for the couple; but the Cossack, pitying the wife, then 
shoots his master. Thus both ‘Karain’ and ‘Czaty’ feature a double 
betrayal: the woman is wayward, and her charms subvert the bond of 
loyalty between two men, so that a determined avenger perishes at 
the hand of his trusted companion. Knowledge of the source extends 
the resonance of ‘Karain’, for such recognition emphasizes a familiar 
Conradian theme, that human nature varies little from region to 
region: different races are united in their capacity for infatuation, 
treachery, and subjection to illusions. Indeed, the conditions of trop- 
ical life may reveal more nakedly the vices and follies which the 
trappings of northerly civilization contrive to conceal. The ending of 
the tale effects an appropriately ironic connection between the outer 
narrative and the inner. Hollis’s sense that Karain’s haunting may 
hold more reality than the familiar world of urban London is chal- 
lenged by the narrator, but the description of the city’s crowded 
streets with their confused turmoil sustains the possibility that Kar- 
ain’s intense experience may be more significant than the hubbub of 
life in a European metropolis. 
IV 
‘Youth’ introduces Captain Charles Marlow as narrator: he will 
reappear in ‘Heart of Darkness’, Lord Jim, and Chance. Being a 
civilized, philosophically-minded, and much-travelled Englishman 
who recounts his past experiences, he proved to be an ideal ‘surro- 
gate author’. ‘Of all my people’, said Conrad, ‘he’s the one that has 
6 The derivation was first noted by Andrzej Busza in Antemurale, 10 (1966), 209-1. 


ae 
Introduction 
never been a vexation to my spirit. A most discreet, understanding 
man... .’” Conrad could now enjoy an exceptional freedom in com- 
mentary, since cynical or sceptical ideas could thus be ascribed (how- 
ever nominally) to the narrating character rather than to the author; 
so Marlow served, in part, as a mask through which Conrad could 
speak more fluently and diversely. Cumulatively, Marlow was to 
become the fullest, most sophisticated, and most convincing char- 
acter in the whole of Conrad’s literary work, and one implying a 
generous tribute from the Polish-born author to the value of British 
civilization at its best—as he then saw it. 
This generosity of response to his adoptive country can be seen in 
Conrad’s transformation of the facts which provided the basis for 
‘Youth’. To a large extent, the story of the ill-fated voyage of the 
Judea is based on the Palestine’s attempted voyage, between 1881 and 
1883, from England to Bangkok. The storms which threatened to 
sink the ship, the months of repairs at Falmouth, the burning coal in 
the hold, the explosion and conflagration which destroyed the vessel, 
the landfall in open boats: all these incidents really occurred. Natur- 
ally, various changes have been made for literary and political pur- 
poses. When the Palestine sank, the boats took fewer than fourteen 
hours to reach land;* in the tale, they take ‘many days’, a change 
which accentuates the thematic emphasis on the crew’s courageous 
persistence in the face of all setbacks. Again, the description of the 
landfall stresses 
the aromatically exotic glamour of the orient 
(‘strange odours of blossoms, of aromatic wood,’ . 
. 
. ‘impalpable and 
enslaving, like a charm, like a whispered promise of mysterious 
delight’); whereas in reality, as Conrad told Richard Curle, the land- 
fall had been made at Muntok—‘a damned hole without any beach 
and without any glamour’.’ A particularly significant modification 
concerns the crew’s origins. In the Palestine, the hard-working crew 
consisted of a black seaman from St Kitts, a Belgian, an Irishman, 
two men and a boy from Devon, three men from Cornwall, and a 
Norwegian; the officers were an Englishman, an Irishman, and (of 
7 “Nuthor’s Note? [1917] to Youth | 
A Narrative | 
and Two Other Stories (London: 
J. 
M. Dent and Sons, 1917), p. viii. 
* Report of the Court of Inquiry, repr. in Norman Sherry, Conrad’s Eastern World 
(London: Cambridge University Press, 1966), 298. 
2 Letter of 24 Apr. 1922, quoted in Zdzistaw Najder, Joseph Conrad: A Chronicle 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1983), 77- 


Introduction 
XVil 
course) a Pole.’ In the fictional Judea, the men are depicted as dis- 
tinctively and courageously English: ‘That crew of Liverpool hard 
cases had in them the right stuff. It’s my experience they always 
have.’ 
; 
‘Youth’ illustrates, thereby, the process of patriotic myth-making. 
It is also a tale concerned to memorialize, with vividness, lyrical 
romanticism, wry humour, and an eye for local absurdities, the trials 
and dour heroism of life under sail in the merchant navy. The nos- 
talgia is frank and unashamed: a middle-aged Marlow looks back 
indulgently on the ardent optimism of his younger self, and, licensed 
by the claret bottle, veers finally towards a sentimentality which 
the anonymous narrator endorses in a concluding paragraph of 
rhythmic vigour and logical vapidity. 
V 
In 1876, Leopold I, King of the Belgians, had declared: 
To open to civilisation the sole part of the globe which it has not yet 
penetrated, to pierce the darkness which envelops the entire population: 
this, I 
venture to say, is a crusade worthy of this century of progress.” 
Fourteen years later, Conrad travelled through that ‘part of the 
globe’: the hypocritically named Congo Free State. There he wit- 
nessed the brutality with which, in the quest for ivory, the Belgians 
were exploiting the indigenous population and the imported African 
labourers. Among the entries in his ‘Congo Diary’ are these: 
Met an offfice|r of the State inspecting. A few minutes afterwards saw at a 
camp[ing] place the dead body of a Backongo. Shot? Horrid smell [. 
. .] 
Saw another dead body lying by the path in an attitude of meditative 
repose [. 
. .] 
On the road to day passed a skeleton tied-up to a post. Also 
white man’s grave—No name [. 
. .| Row between the carriers and a man 
stating himself in gov[ernment] employ, about a mat.—Blows with sticks 
raining hard—Stopped it. Chief came with a youth about 13 suffering 
from gunshot wound in the head [. 
. .] 
Gave him a 
little glycerine to put 
on the wound [. 
. .]'” 
Jerry Allen, The Sea Years of 
Joseph Conrad (London: Methuen, 1987), 319. 
Quoted in Maurice H. Hennessy’s Congo: A Brief 
History and Appraisal (London: 
Pall Mall Press, 1961), 13. 
2 Robert Hampson (ed.), Joseph Conrad: ‘Heart of 
Darkness’ with ‘The Congo Diary’ 
(London: Penguin, 1995), 152, 153, 158, 160-1. 


XVill 
Introduction 
Conrad’s travels in the Congo lasted approximately six months. 
Eventually, having been afflicted with dysentery and fever, he 
returned to London via Brussels. He never forgot the horrors of 
the African journey. In 1903, when writing to a 
socialist friend, he 
compared the Belgian colonialists to the Spanish conquistadores: 
Their achievement is monstrous enough in all conscience—but not as a 
great human force let loose, but rather like that of a gigantic and obscene 
beast. Leopold is their Pizarro, Thys their Cortez and their ‘lances’ are 
recruited amongst 
the souteneurs, 
sous-offs, maquereaux, 
fruit-secs 
[ponces, N.C.O.s, pimps, and losers] of all sorts on the pavements of 
Brussels and Antwerp." 
From Conrad’s embittering African experience emerged ‘Heart of 
Darkness’: a work supreme among his novelle or longer tales. It is 
exciting and profound, lucid and bewildering; highly compressed, 
immensely rich in texture and implication; and it has a recessive 
adroitness, for its paradoxes repeatedly ambush the conceptualizing 
reader or critic. Thematically, it holds a remarkably wide range of 
reference to problems of politics and psychology, morality and 
religion, social order and evolution. In a 
critical interplay, the narra- 
tive dextrously embodies literary theories and techniques which 
were yet to be formulated and labelled. ‘Heart of. Darkness’ can be 
related to a diversity of traditions, generic and technical, including 
political satire, protest literature, traveller’s tale, psychological odys- 
sey, symbolic novel, and mediated autobiography; while, to those 
readers who seek prophecies, it speaks eloquently of the brutalities 
and follies of subsequent history. The tale’s influence extends to 
works as diverse as John Powell’s Rhapsodie négre, Malinowski’s 
Diary,'* T. S. Eliot’s ‘The Hollow Men’, Chinua Achebe’s Things 
Fall Apart, Graham Greene’s ‘The Third Man’ and A Burnt-out 
'’ Frederick R. Karl and Laurence Davies (ed.), The Collected Letters of 
Joseph 
Conrad, iii (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1988), 101. (This series will 
subsequently be cited as Letters.) 
'* Bronislaw Malinowski, the eminent Polish anthropologist, declared when he was 
young: ‘[W. H. R.] Rivers is the Rider Haggard of anthropology; I 
shall be the Conrad.’ 
See Raymond Firth (ed.), Man and Culture: An Evaluation of 
the Work of 
Bronislaw 
Malinowski (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1957), 6. While working in New 
Guinea, Malinowski read the Youth volume, which contained ‘Heart of Darkness’. On 
21 Jan. 1915, he confided to his journal: ‘On the whole my feelings toward the natives 
are decidedly tending to “Exterminate the brutes.” (The italicized words were in Eng- 
lish, while the other words were originally in Polish.) See his A Diary in the Strict Sense 
of 
the Term (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1967), 60. 


Introduction 
XIX 
Case, William Golding’s The Inheritors, Ngugi wa Thiong’o’s A 
Grain of 
Wheat, Robert Stone’s Dog Soldiers, George Steiner’s The 
Portage to San Cristobal of 
A. H., and Robert Edric’s The Book of 
the 
Heathen. Films, videos, and adaptations for radio and the theatre 
have further extended its range. The second of Orson Welles’s two 
radio versions (1938 and 1945) depicted Kurtz explicitly as a fore- 
runner of Adolf Hitler, while Coppola’s film Apocalypse Now (1979) 
demonstrated that this tale about Africa in 1890 entailed, among 
many other possibilities, a sardonic commentary on the Vietnam War 
of the 1970s. A documentary about Coppola’s work, Hearts of 
Dark- 
ness: A Film-Maker’s Apocalypse (1991) suggested that the film- 
makers embodied and extended the corruption described in the tale. 
Other films included Nicolas Roeg’s version for television and video 
(1994) and Jonathan Lawton’s spoof entitled Cannibal Women in the 
Avocado Jungle of 
Death. One test of literary merit is fecundity, the 
ability to generate offspring; and this test has been amply passed by 
the story that appeared in the closing years of the Victorian Age. 
As in ‘Youth’, ‘Heart of Darkness’ employs doubly oblique narra- 
tion: an anonymous character reports the story told by Marlow. This 
time, however, the oblique narrative technique is used much more 
searchingly, so that one of the main co-ordinators of the story is a 
linguistic theme, which emphasizes not only the difficulty of com- 
municating what is obscure or profound but also the attractions and 
perils of charismatic eloquence. Indeed, one of the many paradoxes 
of ‘Heart of Darkness’ is that this narrative offers eloquent warnings 
about eloquence, while effectively communicating the difficulty of 
effective communication. An important political aspect of this theme 
is displayed by the tale’s demonstration that there is an imperialism 
of discourse which both licenses and conceals the excesses of eco- 
nomic exploitation. The generative and transformative relationship 
of language to the world is made problematically evident. 
The sophistication, compression, and obliquities of the tale are 
such that, in order to be adequately comprehended, it needs to be 
read at least twice. At a first reading, many ironies are likely to pass 
unnoticed. We may not see, for instance, that Marlow’s initial 
descriptions of the Roman trireme-commander and the ‘decent 
young citizen in a toga’ offer ironic counterparts to Marlow himself 
and Kurtz in Africa; nor may we see that the tale has a covert 
murder-plot, in which the manager schemes to destroy the ailing 


XX 
Introduction 
Kurtz by delaying the steamer which is supposed to relieve Kurtz’s 
outpost. Certainly, the satiric indictment of colonialism in Africa is 
graphically clear at a first reading, as is the mockery of the myopic 
arrogance of Europeans in daring to impose themselves on alien 
territory. Many of the ‘pilgrims’ function as mere avaricious auto- 
mata; and as for Kurtz himself, who has brought idealistic ambitions 
to the wilderness, he proves to be depraved and deranged. In its 
accumulation of images of absurdity, of savage farce, of wanton 
destruction and demented energy, ‘Heart of Darkness’ can be seen as 
a fiercely pessimistic narrative. Its positive values lie partly in the 
quality of civilization represented by Marlow, who, though flawed, 
usually preserves a vigilant humanity; they lie largely in the authorial 
indignation at man’s inhumanity to man and, indeed, at the despoli- 
ation of the earth in the name of ‘progress’; and they are richly 
implicit in the articulate intelligence, sensitivity, and exuberance of 
the text. 
The general critical consensus, which met some fierce challenges 
in the late twentieth century, is that the strengths of the tale greatly 
outweigh its flaws. One apparent flaw, postulated long ago by E R. 
Leavis, Jocelyn Baines, and other commentators, is a tendency to 
vapidly portentous phrasing, ‘an adjectival and worse than super- 
erogatory insistence on “unspeakable rites”, “unspeakable secrets”, 
“monstrous passions”, “inconceivable mystery”, and so on’.!? This 
criticism has some force, but the force is reduced by the following 
considerations. The speaker who offers such ‘adjectival insistence’ is 
ostensibly not Conrad but Marlow, a narrator who, by his dry com- 
ments on Kurtz’s inflated prose style, himself invites us to beware of 
waffle. In any case, Marlow emphasizes that during the journey (on 
which he was stricken with fever), he frequently encountered experi- 
ences which, in their baffling, bewildering, or disorientating nature, 
were hard to capture in words. The marked use of polysyllabic 
privative adjectives (‘inconceivable’, ‘unspeakable’, etc.) may have 
thematic justification, if not vindication, in a liminal text which 
explores, and looks beyond, limits: limits of experience, of morality, 
and of language. The ‘darkness’ of the work’s title has numerous 
referents: 
moral corruption, 
night, death, ignorance, and that 
' E.R. Leavis, The Great Tradition [1948] (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1962), 198— 
200; quoted, p. 198; Jocelyn Baines, Joseph Conrad: A Critical Biography (London: 
Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 1960), 225. 


Introduction 
XXi 
encompassing obscurity of the pre-rational and pre-verbal which 
words seek to illuminate. An important co-ordinator of the tale is a 
sequence of literal and symbolic images of light shining briefly amid 
obscurity; and one of the searchingly experimental features is the 
incorporation of conspicuous opacities—opacities in characteriza- 
tion, plot, and situation which are made conspicuous by the frus- 
trated questioning that surrounds them. Indeed, commentators may 
too readily fall into the trap of postulating specific and partial 
answers, when the text is often determined to maintain ambiguity, 
doubt, uncertainty, and symbolic multiplicity. Its images shimmer 
and 
shift 
on 
the borders 
between 
realism, 
symbolism, 
and 
expressionism. 
A second, and far graver, objection to ‘Heart of Darkness’ was 
that offered most forcefully by the Nigerian novelist, Chinua 
Achebe, who asserted that the tale reveals Conrad as ‘a bloody 
racist’. He argued that Conrad dramatizes Africa as ‘a place of 
negations [...] in comparison with which Europe’s own state of 
spiritual grace will be manifest’. The blacks, Achebe alleged, are 
dehumanized and degraded, seen as grotesques or as a howling mob; 
they are denied speech, or are granted speech only to condemn 
themselves out of their own mouths. In short, ‘Heart of Darkness’ is 
‘an offensive and totally deplorable book’ in which Conrad has 
adopted ‘the role of purveyor of comforting myths’. The tale, 
Achebe insists, promotes racial intolerance and is therefore to be 
condemned. (It may, however, have helped to prompt Achebe’s 
fine novel, Things Fall Apart, which depicts imperialism from the 
indigenes’ point of view.) 
Achebe’s criticism became widely influential and drew attention 
to ways in which ‘Heart of Darkness’, though so proleptic, bears 
signs of its Victorian origins. Within Marlow’s credibly mixed range 
of responses to the Africans, there are certainly some attitudes which 
can seem patronizing or misguided. His use of the term ‘niggers’ has 
given offence, though it was historically realistic: the obnoxious term 
was widely and casually used by whites in the 18gos and long after- 
wards; indeed, it could be heard in American films more than a 
'6 «An Image of Africa’ (originally a lecture given in 1975) in Massachusetts Review, 18 
(Winter 1977), 782-04. The phrase ‘a bloody racist’ is on p. 788. In the subsequent, 
revised version of this article, the phrase became ‘a thoroughgoing racist’, and a passage 
linking Conrad with Nazism was cut. 


XXIi 
Introduction 
century later. In one respect, Achebe’s criticisms could have gone 
further. Marlow notes that Kurtz is drawn to a nocturnal ritual in the 
jungle which is attended by 
a 
sinister figure: 
a black figure stood up, strode on long black legs, waving long black arms, 
across the glow. It had horns—antelope horns, I 
think—on its head. Some 
sorcerer, some witch-man, no doubt: it looked fiend-like enough. 
Achebe objected to the tautological iteration of the adjective ‘black’; 
but another objection might be that here we encounter—in a dramat- 
ically visual form—‘demonization of the other’. Details of phrasing 
(‘I think’, ‘no doubt’) indicate the faint but distinct suspicion that 
the figure observed might be truly Satanic, so that for a while there is 
a fleeting fusion of an African and a 
diabolic entity. Nevertheless, the 
speaker there is not Joseph Conrad but Charles Marlow, the char- 
acter. Achebe says that he sees no difference between Marlow and 
Conrad, to which one response is that Conrad has deliberately 
chosen to use the convention of doubly oblique narration, which 
tends to generate ambiguities. 
Achebe’s attack was fierce, sweeping, and polemically influential; 
later, he moderated its ferocity. Other ‘postcolonial’ writers, includ- 
ing Ngugi wa Thiong’o, Wilson Harris, Frances B. Singh, and C-. P. 
Sarvan, argued that while Conrad was ambivalent on racial matters, 
‘Heart of Darkness’ was progressive in its satiric accounts of the 
colonialists.'’ Singh noted that though the tale was vulnerable in 
several respects, including that association of Africans with super- 
natural evil, the story should remain in ‘the canon of works indicting 
colonialism’. Sarvan concluded: ‘Conrad [...] was. not entirely 
immune to the infection of the beliefs and attitudes of his age, but he 
was ahead of most in trying to break free’. To be fair to ‘Heart of 
Darkness’, as to any literary text, we need to take account of its date: 
1899. As Sarvan indicates, relative to the standards prevailing in the 
1890s, the heyday of Victorian imperialism, the tale was indeed pro- 
gressive in its criticism of imperialist activities in Africa, and, 
indeed, 
of imperialist 
activities 
generally. Marlow 
says: 
‘The 
conquest of the earth [...] mostly means the taking it away from 
those who have a different complexion or slightly flatter noses than 
" Ngugi wa Thiong’o is quoted in Robert Kimbrough (ed.), Heart of 
Darkness (New 
York: Norton, 1988), 285, within C. P. Sarvan’s essay (pp. 280-5); Wilson Harris’s piece 
is on pp. 262-8, and Frances B. Singh’s is on pp. 268-80. 


Introduction 
XX1ll 
ourselves’; and, though he attempts to postulate some redemptive 
factor, his own narrative shows that in Africa, at any rate, ‘the con- 
quest of the earth’ is predominantly ‘robbery with violence, aggra- 
vated murder on a great scale’. Achebe claimed that Africa was 
depicted by Conrad as ‘a place of negations’ so as to emphasize by 
contrast ‘Europe’s own state of spiritual grace’; but in a variety of 
ways the tale challenges such a contrast. As Africa is to present-day 
Europeans, so, Marlow suggests, England was to Roman colonists. 
When he describes depopulated regions of Africa, Marlow reflects 
that the Kentish countryside would also become rapidly depopulated 
if it were invaded by heavily armed strangers. The sound of drums 
in the jungle has ‘perhaps [. 
. .] 
as profound a meaning as the sound 
of bells in a Christian country’. The whites of the Eldorado Expe- 
dition ride their donkeys into the jungle, and Marlow comments: 
‘Long afterwards the news came that all the donkeys were dead. I 
know nothing as to the fate of the less valuable animals.’ (If he had 
referred to blacks rather than whites as ‘less valuable animals’, critics 
would have cited this as evidence of racism.) Kurtz, we are told, is 
not worth ‘the life we lost in getting to him’: the life of the black 
helmsman. The cannibal crew evinces remarkable restraint; it is 
Kurtz, the European, who ‘lacked restraint in the gratification of his 
various lusts’, and who, it is implied, may have drunk blood and 
consumed human flesh. A particularly bold attempt to subvert con- 
ventional prejudice is made near the end of the tale, when Marlow 
notes the kinship between the idealistic fiancée and the black con- 
sort: their similarity in gesture, stretching out their arms towards the 
Kurtz of memory, shows that both are alike in unavailing fidelity to 
the egotist who attracted their devotion. 
In a late essay, Conrad referred to the Belgian exploitation of 
Africa as ‘the vilest scramble for loot that ever disfigured the history 
of human conscience’.'* Generally, the satiric animus which ‘Heart 
of Darkness’ directs against the European ‘pilgrims’ is so intense as 
to be, in one respect, unhistorical; for the tale’s depiction of their 
senselessly chaotic attempts at construction can make us briefly for- 
get the enduring technological achievements (the railways, the roads, 
the establishment of new townships) which, for all the depredations, 
changed the face of Africa. Marlow says nothing about the atrocities 
'8 “Geography and Some Explorers’, in Last Essays (London: Dent, 1926), 25. 


XXIV 
Introduction 
committed by black imperialists such as the ruling dynasty of the 
kingdom of Benin; nor does he mention the slave-trading conducted 
on a 
large scale by Arabs and their local accomplices. In the tale, 
there is only group of people which seems to be vital, happy, and 
in harmony with the environment, and that group is not Euro- 
pean: it is the singing blacks who, with ‘wild vitality’ and ‘intense 
energy of movement’, paddle their boat through the coastal surf. 
‘They’—unlike the whites—‘wanted no excuse for being there.’ 
These energetic boatmen make a 
stark contrast to the enslaved and 
dying men of the chain gang and the grove of death. In many 
respects the tale is ambiguous, but it seems unambiguous when it 
stresses, by means of such graphically effective scenes, the hypo- 
critical and callous cruelty which, in the name of progress and for 
the sake of profit, the European invaders have inflicted on their 
fellow human beings. 
In practice, ‘Heart of Darkness’ contributed to the international 
campaign of protest which eventually curbed the Belgian excesses in 
the Congo. E. D. Morel, leader of the Congo Reform Association, 
stated that ‘Heart of Darkness’ was ‘the most powerful thing ever 
written on the subject’;”” and Conrad sent encouraging letters to his 
acquaintance (and Morel’s collaborator in the campaign), Roger 
Casement, who in 1904 published a parliamentary report document- 
ing the atrocities committed by the Belgian administrators. On 
21 December 1903, Conrad wrote to Casement: 
You cannot doubt that I form the warmest wishes for your success. A 
King, wealthy and unscrupulous, is certainly no mean adversary [. 
. .] 
And the fact remains that [. 
. .] there exists in Africa a Congo State, 
created by the act of European Powers[,] where ruthless, systematic 
cruelty towards the blacks is the basis of administration [. 
. .] 
{MJake any use you like of what I 
write to you.” 
The material supplied by Conrad was quoted in Morel’s book, 
King Leopold’s Rule in Africa (1904); and the London Morning 
e 
Letter of 7 Oct. 1909, quoted in W. R. Louis and Jean Stengers, E. D. Morel’s 
Tsay of 
the 
Congo Reform Movement (London: Oxford University Press, 1968), 205. 
Letters, iii. 95, 97. In 1913, Morel declared that most of the campaign’s goals had 
been achieved: “The native of the Congo is once more a free man [. . .] The rubber- 
tax—the “blood tax”—has been abolished.’ (E. D. Morel’s History, 208.) The Congo 
gained independence in 1960. A century after Conrad’s journey there, corruption, 
disorder, and poverty were widespread. 


Introduction 
XXV 
Post, in a laudatory review, gave prominence to Conrad’s ‘heavy 
indictment’.”’ Meanwhile, Conrad and F. M. Hueffer, in their novel 
The Inheritors (1901), satirized Leopold II as the grasping and 
unscrupulous Duc de Mersch. In ‘Heart of Darkness’, Conrad 
makes sure that the indictment is not of Belgian imperialism alone. 
Neither Brussels nor the Congo Free State is named, and ‘all Europe 
contributed to the making of Kurtz’: furthermore, that Europe 
includes England, for Kurtz was ‘educated partly in England’, and, 
while his father was half-French, ‘[his] mother was half-English’. 
Such details erode Marlow’s early attempt to distinguish the British 
Empire as a place where ‘real work’ is done; and they ambush 
unwary commentators who underestimate Conrad’s resourcefulness. 
As Peter Nazareth has said, ‘Conrad was a mental liberator.’” 
Predictably, Conrad was assailed as a male chauvinist. Nina 
Pelikan Straus, Bette London, Johanna M. Smith, and Elaine 
Showalter were among those feminists who argued that ‘Heart of 
Darkness’ was both imperialist and sexist.”’ Straus, for instance, 
declared: ‘The woman reader [. 
. .] is in the position to insist that 
Marlow’s cowardice consists of his inability to face the dangerous 
self that is the form of his own masculinist vulnerability: his own 
complicity in the racist, sexist, imperialistic, and finally libidinally 
satisfying world he has inhabited with Kurtz.’ In the tale, a man 
(Marlow) tells a group of men a story about ‘men’s work’ in Africa; 
women are subordinated. He says, notoriously: ‘It’s queer how out of 
touch with truth women are. They live in a world of their own [. 
. 
.] 
It is too beautiful altogether [...]’. Eventually he lies to the 
Intended, denying her (mercifully enough) access to the truth about 
Kurtz. Nevertheless, in the later work Chance (1914), Marlow says 
that women know the whole truth but mercifully conceal it from 
men, who live in ‘fool’s paradise’. In ‘Heart of Darkness’, females are 
depicted in diverse and contrasting ways. The African consort 
71 Morning Post, 12 Oct. 1904, p. 8. 
22 Peter Nazareth, ‘Out of Darkness: Conrad and Other Third World Writers’, 
Conradiana, 14 (1982), 173-87; quotation, p. 178. 
3 Straus, ‘The Exclusion of the Intended from Secret Sharing in Conrad’s Heart of 
Darkness’, Novel, 20 (1987), 123-37. (The subsequent quotation is from p. 135.) Lon- 
don, The Appropriated Voice (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1990). Smith, 
““Too Beautiful Altogether”: Patriarchal Ideology in Heart of 
Darkness’, in Ross C. 
Murfin (ed.), Joseph Conrad, ‘Heart of 
Darkness’: A Case Study in Contemporary Criticism 
(New 
York: 
St. 
Martin’s 
Press, 
1989). 
Showalter, 
Sexual Anarchy 
(London: 
Bloomsbury, 1991). 


XXV1 
Introduction 
knows what the Intended does not. At the company’s offices in the 
city, the two mysterious females who meet the applicants are appar- 
ently prescient, even fateful. Marlow’s aunt cannot be living entirely 
“in a world of her own’, for it is she whose influence with the com- 
pany gains employment for her nephew. Characteristically masculine 
activities (waging war, or trading in—and exploiting—territories 
abroad) are depicted satirically. Those feminist critics did not men- 
tion that Conrad was a postulant of female suffrage, although in 
1910 he signed an open letter to the Prime Minister, Herbert 
Asquith, advocating votes for women.” 
Critics who allege that Conrad is imperialistic may themselves be 
practising ideological and temporal imperialism. They assail the text 
for failing to endorse their own present-day beliefs or prejudices; and 
thereby they seek to subordinate the literary work to their own value 
systems. The novelist Julian Barnes once said: ‘[W]hat a curious 
vanity it is of the present to expect the past to suck up to it.’ Or, asa 
better-known story-teller put it, ‘He that is without sin among you, 
let him first cast a stone.” In 1907 Conrad wrote an essay (‘The 
Censor of Plays’) denouncing censorship as a contemptible weapon 
of tyranny. If we abolished all those past texts which, in our fallible 
understandings, failed to endorse today’s preferred notions, few 
works would survive, and every library would become merely a 
hall 
of mirrors. A literary work may have a 
diversity of political implica- 
tions and consequences, but it is not a political manifesto. It is an 
imaginative work which offers a voluntary and hypothetical experi- 
ence. Its linguistic texture may be progressive when its paraphras- 
able content may not. All its implications remain within the invisible 
quotation-marks of the fictional. Awareness of the tentacular com- 
plexity of ‘Heart of Darkness’ may alert to us to a current critical 
tendency: the reductive treatment of past texts in the attempt to 
vindicate the political gestures of the present. ‘Heart of Darkness’ 
reminds us that this tendency resembles an earlier one: the adoption 
of a demeaning attitude to colonized people in order to vindicate 
* The letter was reported and quoted in The Times, 15 June 1910, p. 7. The list of 
signatories included Cunninghame Graham, Sarah Grand, Bernard Shaw, and May 
Sinclair. See also Letters, iv (1990), 327. 
* Julian Barnes, Flaubert’s Parrot (London: Cape, 1984), 130; John 8: 7. J. 
W. Burrow 
adds: ‘To illustrate the racial prejudices of our ancestors [. 
. .] provides both an easy 
research strategy and a cheaply won moral superiority’ (Times Literary Supplement, 13 
June 1986, p. 653). 


Introduction 
XXVil 
the exploitative actions of the colonizer. Naturally, readers discuss 
political aspects of literary texts; but to use political criteria as a 
‘master-discourse’, as the final tribunal of judgement, is to commit 
an error of categorization. (An equivalent error would be to con- 
demn The Communist Manifesto for lacking the lyricism of Shelley’s 
“Ode to a Skylark’.) 
Conrad earned his living as an entertainer, not as a writer of 
religious or political tracts. We read fiction for pleasures of diverse 
kinds. The pleasures generated by ‘Heart of Darkness’ have many 
sources. They lie in part in its evocative vividness, its linguistic 
intelligence, its diverse modes of suspense, and its power to ques- 
tion and to provoke thought. Paraphrase is a necessary critical 
tool, but paraphrase is never an equivalent of the original, the 
vitality of which permeates its combinations of the particular and 
the general, the rational and the emotional. The tale’s paradoxical 
complexities expose by contrast the relatively limited and predict- 
able narratives offered by so much non-fictional critical and polit- 
ical writing. In 1895, Conrad wrote: ‘Theory is a cold and lying 
tombstone of departed 
truth.’ He thus anticipated, by about 
eighty-eight 
years, Edward 
Said’s 
anti-theoretical 
theory. 
Said 
declared: 
[I]t is the critic’s job to provide resistances to theory, to open it up toward 
historical reality, toward society, toward human needs and interests, to 
point up those concrete instances drawn from everyday reality that lie 
outside or just beyond the interpretive area necessarily designated in 
advance and thereafter circumscribed by every theory.” 
“The critic’s job’? Conrad knew that this had long been the creative 
writer’s job. In ‘Heart of Darkness’, various theories, clichés, and 
jargonic phrases are tested against the rich particularities of the 
work’s texture. The political is challenged by the aesthetic. The tale 
has sombre implications, and so does the story of its reception over 
the years, but the imaginative intelligence with which the narrative 
addressed its era was exemplary. To those English-speaking critics 
who have deemed the work racist, sexist, and imperialist, we may 
reply: “Try writing a better tale; and don’t forget to write it in Polish, 
in order to emulate Joseph Conrad’s ability to cross frontiers of 
* Conrad, Letters, i (1983), 205. Edward Said, The World, the Text, and the Critic 
[1983] (London: Faber & Faber, 1984), 242. 


XXVIll 
Introduction 
language, nationality, and culture.’ In the virtuosity of this Polish 
author’s command of English, he was profoundly anti-imperialistic, 
for he was liberating new possibilities of experience from the 
benighted empire of inarticulacy. 


NOUN tie LEX 
The four tales in this volume are arranged in chronological order of 
composition. ‘An Outpost of Progress’ was written in July 1896, and 
the manuscript is held at the Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript 
Library, Yale University. ‘Karain’ was mooted early in February 
1897 and completed by 14 April of that year. The manuscript, having 
been sold to John Quinn, the American collector, is believed to have 
sunk with the Titanic in 1912 on its way to New York. ‘Youth’ was 
begun early in 1898 and finished by 3 June. Its manuscript is at 
Colgate University, while a single handwritten leaf is in the National 
Library of Scotland. The writing of ‘Heart of Darkness’ (originally 
“The Heart of Darkness’) extended from December 1898 to Febru- 
ary 1899. Part of the original manuscript has survived and is in the 
Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript Library, while a fragment of 
the typescript is in the Berg Collection, New York Public Library. 
The first publication of ‘An Outpost of Progress’ was in the 
magazine Cosmopolis in June and July 1897, and ‘Karain: 
A 
Memory’ 
made its début in Blackwood’s Edinburgh Magazine in November of 
the same year. Both tales were next published in the volume Tales of 
Unrest (London: Fisher Unwin; New York: Scribner’s) in 1898. The 
first publication of ‘Youth: A Narrative’ was in Blackwood’s in Sep- 
tember 1898; that of ‘Heart of Darkness’ was in the issues of the 
same magazine for February, March, and April, 1899. These two 
works first appeared in book form in Youth: A Narrative | 
and | 
Two Other Stories (Edinburgh: Blackwood, 1902). The third item in 
that volume was the long story entitled ‘The End of the Tether’. The 
‘Author’s Note’ to Youth was written in 1917 for the second edition 
of that volume (London: Dent), and subsequently appeared in the 
Collected Editions issued by Doubleday and Heinemann. The base- 
text here is the 1917 (Dent) version. A discussion of “The End of the 
Tether’ has been deleted from it, as that tale is not part of the present 
collection. 
Important 
editions 
of ‘Heart 
of Darkness’ 
are by Robert 
Kimbrough (New York: Norton, 1963, 1971, 1988), D. C. R. A. 
Goonetilleke (Broadview: Peterborough, Ontario, 1995), and Robert 
Hampson (London: Penguin, 1995). I am variously and gratefully 


Xxx 
Note on the Text 
indebted to these editors. Hampson’s base-text is the first British 
edition of Youth. The serial is the base-text for the Everyman paper- 
back, The Heart of 
Darkness, ed. Cedric Watts (London: Dent; Ver- 
mont: Tuttle, 1995). Anthony Fothergill’s edition of Tales of 
Unrest 
(London: Everyman, Dent; Vermont: Tuttle, 2000) proved helpful 
for the annotations of ‘Karain’ and ‘An Outpost of Progress’. 
Another useful volume was Ross C. Murtfin (ed.), Heart ef 
Darkness 
(2nd edn.: Basingstoke: Macmillan; Boston: St Martin’s Press, 
1996). S. W. Reid kindly provided relevant documents. 
In the present volume, I 
have followed the procedures described in 
the ‘General Editor’s Preface’. The base-texts of the fictional works 
are those of the first British publications in book form, which I 
have 
compared with the British serial versions (where such versions 
exist). Various emendations are listed below. (The textual annota- 
tions towards the end of this volume include references to problem- 
atic or divergent phrasings.) In the textual apparatus which follows, 
the page and line numbers refer to emendations in this edition, and 
each reading after the square bracket is that of the first British book 
edition. With the exception of four entries, which are emended 
from the periodical version (Per.), all corrections are the editor’s. 
An Outpost of 
Progress 
. 
25: 13-14 
up, the fog Per.] up the fog 
Karain 
3:30 
~=should not die? Per.] should not die! 
6:24 
forest. Per.] forest.” 
58:1 
Sulu] Sula 
61:25 
that I] 
that “I 
61:25 
think so.] think so.” 
63: 33 
—shook] shook 
Youth 
71 
YOUTH: A NARRATIVE Per.] YOUTH 
Heart of 
Darkness 
106: 1 
say ‘knights’?] say Knights? 
108: 34-5 
Trading Society] Trading society 
116: 28 way of] way or 


122: 
124: 
124: 
126: 
128: 
138: 
I4I: 
145: 
152: 
166: 
170: 
170: 
Note on the Text 
32 You must] you must 
27 Kurtz!’, broke] Kurtz!’ broke 
31 I 
tell?] I 
tell, 
16 Anyway] Anyways 
6 
moonlight; the] moonlight, the 
15 word ‘ivory’] word ivory 
17 Towser,] Tower, 
1g good tuck-in] good tuck in 
37. shoes?] shoes. 
29-30 
means ‘short’| means short 
11 He suspected] ‘He suspected 
12 that—] that—’ 
XXX1 
I have preserved some spellings which, according to the Oxford 
English Dictionary, 
are correct but archaic or uncommon 
(e.g. 
‘lounged’ for ‘lunged’, ‘calipers’ for ‘callipers’, and ‘dumfounded’ 
for ‘dumbfounded’). I 
have also retained Conradian Gallicisms, such 
as ‘I heard all round me like a pent-up breath released’ and ‘I felt like 
a chill grip on my chest’. 


SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Biographies and Letters 
Baines, Jocelyn, Joseph Conrad: A Critical Biography (London: Weidenfeld 
& Nicolson, 1960). 
Batchelor, 
John, 
The 
Life of Joseph 
Conrad 
(Oxford: 
Blackwell, 
1994). 
Ford, Ford Madox, Joseph Conrad: A Personal Remembrance (Boston: 
Little, Brown, 1924; New York: Ecco, 1989). 
Jean-Aubry, G., Joseph Conrad: 
Life and Letters, 
2 vols. (London: 
Heinemann, 1927). 
Karl, Frederick R., Joseph Conrad: 
The Three Lives (London: Faber, 
1979). 
and Davies, Laurence (eds.), The Collected Letters of 
Foseph Conrad 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1983—_). 
Knowles, Owen, 4 Conrad Chronology (Basingstoke: Macmillan, 1989). 
Najder, Zdzistaw, Conrad’s Polish Background (Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 1964). 
Joseph Conrad: A Chronicle (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1983). 
Ray, Martin (ed.), Joseph Conrad: Interviews and Recollections (Basing- 
stoke: Macmillan, 1990). 
Sherry, Norman, Conrad’s Easiern World (London: Cambridge University 
Press, 1966). 
—— Conrad’s 
Western 
World (London: Cambridge University Press, 
1971). 
—— Conrad and His World (London: Thames & Hudson, 1972). 
Stape, J. H., and Knowles, Owen (eds.), 4 Portrait in Letters: Correspon- 
dence to and about Conrad (Amsterdam: Rodopi, 1996). 
Watts, Cedric, Joseph Conrad: A Literary Life (Basingstoke: Macmillan, 
1989). 
Criticism 
Berthoud, Jacques, Joseph 
Conrad: 
The Major Phase (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1978). 
Bradbrook, Muriel, Joseph Conrad: Poland’s English Genius (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1941). 
Daleski, Hillel M., Joseph Conrad: The Way of 
Dispossession (London: 
Faber, 1977). 


Select Bibliography 
XXXIll 
Erdinast-Vulcan, Daphna, Joseph Conrad and the Modern Temper (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 1991). 
Fogel, Aaron, Coercion to Speak: Conrad’s Poetics of 
Dialogue (Cambridge, 
Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1985). 
: 
Gordon, John Dozier, Joseph 
Conrad: 
The Making of a Novelist 
(Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1985). 
Guerard, Albert J., Conrad the Novelist (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard 
University Press, 1958). 
Hampson, Robert, Joseph Conrad: Betrayal and Identity (Basingstoke: 
Macmillan, 1992). 
Hawthorn, 
Jeremy, 
Joseph 
Conrad: 
Language 
and 
Fictional 
Self- 
Consciousness (London: Edward Arnold, 1979). 
—— Joseph Conrad: Narrative Technique and Ideological Commitment 
(London: Edward Arnold, 1990). 
Knowles, Owen, and Moore, Gene (eds.), The Oxford Reader’s Companion 
to Conrad (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000). 
Lothe, Jakob, Conrad’s Narrative Method (Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 1989). 
Morf, Gustav, The Polish Shades and Ghosts of 
Joseph Conrad (New York: 
Astra, 1976). 
Moser, Thomas, Joseph Conrad: Achievement and Decline (Cambridge, 
Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1957). 
Murfin, Ross (ed.), Conrad Revisited: Essays for the Eighties (Tuscaloosa, 
Ala.: University of Alabama Press, 1985). 
Said, Edward, Joseph Conrad and the Fiction of 
Autobiography (Cambridge, 
Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1966). 
Sherry, Norman (ed.), Conrad: The Critical Heritage (London: Routledge 
& Kegan Paul, 1973). 
Spittles, Brian, Joseph Conrad (Basingstoke: Macmillan, 1992). 
Stape, J. 
H. (ed.), The Cambridge Companion to Joseph Conrad (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1996). 
Watt, Ian, Conrad in the Nineteenth Century (London: Chatto & Windus, 
1980). 
—— Essays on Conrad (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000). 
Watts, Cedric, A Preface to Conrad (London: Longman, 1982). 
—— The Deceptive Text: An Introduction 
to Covert Plots (Brighton: 
Harvester, 1984). 
Chapters on Conrad in Critical Texts 
Armstrong, Paul B., The Challenge of 
Bewilderment: Understanding and 
Representation 
in James, 
Conrad and Ford (Ithaca, NY: 
Cornell 
University Press, 1987). 


XXXIV 
Select Bibliography 
Graham, Kenneth, Indirections of the Novel: James, Conrad and Ford 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1988). 
Leavis, 
E R., The Great Tradition: George Eliot, Henry James, Joseph 
Conrad (London: Chatto & Windus, 1948). 
Levenson, Michael, 4 Genealogy of 
Modernism (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1984). 
—— Modernism and the Fate of Individuality (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1991). 
White, Allon, The Uses of Obscurity: The Fiction of Early Modernism 
(London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1981). 
Whiteley, Patrick J., Knowledge and Experimental Realism in Conrad, 
Lawrence and Woolf (Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 
1987). 
Periodicals and Bibliographies 
There are two important journals devoted to Conrad— The Conradian and 
Conradiana—and several scholarly critical bibliographies, though to date 
there is no single comprehensive bibliography of Conrad’s entire oeuvre. 
The most helpful selective guide for the student and general reader is 
Owen Knowles’s An Annotated Critical Bibliography of 
Joseph Conrad 
(Hemel Hempstead: Harvester Wheatsheaf, 1992). Further details of 
recent scholarship can be found in the MLA International Bibliography 
which is also available on CD-Rom and on-line. 
Useful Web Sites 
http://lang.nagoya-u.ac.jp/~matsuoka/Conrad.html 
[offers 
a _ 
large 
number of hyperlinks to many other specialized Conrad web sites or 
relevant parts of other web sites] 
http://www.library.utoronto.ca/utel/authors/conradj.html 
[a 
sound 
academic complement to the above] 
http://members.tripod.com/~JTKNK/ [focuses mainly on the activities 
of the Joseph Conrad Foundation but also provides access to a number of 
e-texts| 
On the Stories in This Volume 
Achebe, Chinua, ‘An Image of Africa’, in The Chancellor’s Lecture 
Series: 
1974-75 
(Amherst: 
University 
of Massachusetts, 
1975), 
reprinted in Massachusetts Review, 18 (1977), and in Research in African 
Literatures, 9 (1978). A substantially revised 
version appears 
in 
Achebe’s Hopes and Impediments (London: Heinemann, 1988; New 
York: Doubleday, 1989) and in the 1988 volume edited by Kimbrough, 
cited below. 


Select Bibliography 
XXXV 
Adams, Richard, Joseph Conrad: ‘Heart of 
Darkness’ (London: Penguin, 
1QQr). 
Beerbohm, 
Max, ‘The 
Feast’, 
in A Christmas 
Garland (London: 
Heinemann, 1912). 
: 
Bender, Todd K. (ed.), A Concordance to Conrad’s ‘Heart of 
Darkness’ 
(New York: Garland, 1979). 
Bloom, Harold (ed.), Joseph Conrad’s ‘Heart of Darkness’ (New York: 
Chelsea House, 1987). 
Burden, Robert, Heart of 
Darkness (Basingstoke: Macmillan, 1991). 
Carlier, J. C., ‘Roland 
Barthes’s 
Resurrection 
of the Author 
and 
Redemption of Biography’, Cambridge Quarterly, 29 (Autumn 2000). 
Dean, 
L. F (ed.), Heart 
of Darkness: 
Backgrounds 
and Criticism 
(Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1960). 
Dryden, Linda, Joseph Conrad and the Imperial Romance (Basingstoke: 
Macmillan; New York: St Martin’s Press, 2000). 
Fothergill, Anthony, Heart of 
Darkness (Milton Keynes: Open University 
Press, 1989). 
(ed.), Tales of Unrest (London: Everyman, Dent; Vermont: Tuttle, 
2000). 
Hampson, Robert (ed.), Joseph Conrad: Heart of Darkness (London: 
Penguin, 1995). 
Harkness, Bruce (ed.), Conrad’s 
‘Heart of Darkness’ and the Critics 
(Belmont: Wadsworth, 1960). 
Hawkins, Hunt, ‘Conrad’s Critique of Imperialism in Heart of 
Darkness’, 
Publications of 
the Modern Language Association of 
America, 94 (Jan. 
1979). 
— ‘Joseph Conrad, Roger Casement, and the Congo Reform Move- 
ment’, Journal of 
Modern Literature, 9 (1981); repr. in Kimbrough, 
1988. 
—— ‘The Issue of Racism in Heart of 
Darkness’, Conradiana, 14 (1982). 
Kimbrough, Robert (ed.), Joseph Conrad: Heart of 
Darkness (New York: 
Norton, 1963, 1971, 1988). 
Lyon, John (ed.), Joseph Conrad: Youth | 
Heart of 
Darkness | 
The End of 
the Tether (London: Penguin, 1995). 
Mahood, M. M. The Colonial Encounter (London: Collings, 1977). 
Murfin, Ross C. (ed.), Joseph Conrad, ‘Heart of 
Darkness’: A Case Study in 
Contemporary Criticism (New York: St Martin’s Press, 1989; 2nd edn., 
1996). 
Ree. Peter, ‘Out of Darkness: Conrad and Other Third World 
Writers’, Conradiana, 14 (1982). 
Sarvan, C. P., ‘Racism and the Heart of 
Darkness’, International Fiction 
Review, 7 (1980); repr.in Kimbrough, 1988. 


XXXVI 
Select Bibliography 
Singh, Frances 
B., ‘The Colonialistic 
Bias of Heart of Darkness’, 
Conradiana, to (1978); repr. in Kimbrough, 1988. 
Straus, Nina Pelikan, ‘The Exclusion of the Intended from Secret Sharing 
in Conrad’s Heart of 
Darkness’, Novel, 20 (1980). 
Tallack, Douglas (ed.), Literary Theory at Work: Three Texts (London: 
Batsford; Totoya, NJ: Barnes and Noble, 1987). 
van 
de Vriesenaerde, Jetty, Conrad 
Criticism 
1965-1985: 
‘Heart of 
Darkness’ (Groningen: Phoenix Press, 1988). 
Watts, Cedric, Conrad’s ‘Heart of Darkness’: A Critical and Contextual 
Discussion (Milan: Mursia, 1977). 
—— ‘“A Bloody Racist”: About Achebe’s View of Conrad’, Yearbook of 
English Studies, 13 (1983). 
White, Andrea, Joseph Conrad and the Adventure Tradition (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1993). 
Further Reading in Oxford World’s Classics 
Conrad, Joseph, Chance, ed. Martin Ray. 
—— An Outcast of 
the Islands, ed. J. 
H. Stape. 
— The Lagoon and Other Stories, ed. William Atkinson. 
— Lord Jim, ed. Jacques Berthoud. 
— Nostromo, ed. Keith Carabine. 
—— The Secret Agent, ed. Roger Tennant. 
— The Shadow-Line, ed. Jeremy Hawthorn. 
— Typhoon and Other Tales, ed. Cedric Watts. 
— Under Western Eyes, ed. Jeremy Hawthorn. 
— Victory, ed. John Batchelor. 


Life 
The Polish Years: 1857-1873 
1857 
1861 
1862 
1863 
1865 
1868 
1869 
3 December: Jozef Teodor 
Konrad Korzeniowski born to 
Apollo Korzeniowski and 
Ewa (née Bobrowska) 
Korzeniowska in Berdyczow 
(Berdichev), Polish Ukraine 
October: Conrad’s father 
arrested and imprisoned in 
Warsaw by the Russian 
authorities for anti-Russian 
conspiracy 
May: Conrad’s parents 
convicted of ‘political 
activities’ and exiled to 
Vologda, Russia; Conrad goes 
with them 
Exile continues in Chernikhov 
18 April: death of Ewa 
Korzeniowska 
Korzeniowski permitted to 
leave Russia; settles with his 
son in Lwow, Austrian Poland 
February: Conrad and his 
father move to Cracow; 
23 May: death of Apollo 
Korzeniowski; Conrad’s uncle 
Tadeusz Bobrowski becomes 
his unofficial guardian 
1870-3 Lives in Cracow with his 
1873 
maternal grandmother, 
Teofila Bobrowska; studies 
with his tutor, Adam Pulman 
Goes to school in Lwow; 
May-June: tours Switzerland 
and N. Italy with his tutor 
A CHRONOLOGY OF JOSEPH CONRAD 
Historical and Cultural Background 
Indian Mutiny; Flaubert, Madame Bovary 
1859: Darwin, On the Origin of 
Species 
1860: Turgenev, On the Eve 
American Civil War begins; emancipation 
of the serfs in Russia; Dickens, Great 
Expectations 
Rise of Bismarck in Prussia; Turgenevy, 
Fathers and Sons; Victor Hugo, Les 
Misérables 
Polish insurrection; death of Thackeray 
American Civil War ends; Tolstoy, War and 
Peace (1865-72) 
1866: Dostoevsky, Crime and Punishment 
1867: Karl Marx, Das Kapital 
Dostoevsky, The Idiot 
Suez Canal opens; Flaubert, L’Education 
sentimentale; Matthew Arnold, Culture and 
Anarchy; 
J. 
S. Mill, The Subjection of 
Women 
Franco-Prussian War; Education Act; 
death of Dickens 
1871: Darwin, The Descent of Man 
1872: George Eliot, Middlemarch 
Death of 
J. S. Mill, publication of his 
Autobiography 


XXXVIIl 
Life 
The Years at Sea: 1874-1893 
1874 
1875 
September: leaves for 
Marseille and takes a position 
with Delestang et Fils, 
bankers and shippers; 
December: Conrad’s sea-life 
begins; sails as passenger in 
the Mont-Blanc to Martinique 
June—December: sails across 
the Atlantic as apprentice in 
the Mont-Blanc 
1876-7 July—February: steward in 
1877 
1878 
the Saint-Antoine sailing from 
Marseille to South America 
March—December: possibly 
involved in Carlist arms- 
smuggling to Spain 
March: apparent suicide 
attempt; 
April: sails in British steamer 
Mavts; 
June: lands in England for first 
time; 
July: joins British coastal ship 
Skimmer of 
the Sea as ordinary 
seaman; 
October: departs from 
London in the Duke of 
Sutherland bound for 
Australia 
1879-80 October: arrives back in 
1880 
1881 
London; 
December—January: sails in 
the Europa bound for 
Australia 
Takes lodgings in London; 
May: passes second-mate’s 
examination; 
August: joins the Loch Etive 
bound for Australia as third 
mate 
September: signs on as second 
mate in the Palestine bound 
for Bangkok 
Chronology 
Historical and Cultural Background 
First Impressionist Exhibition in Paris; 
Britain extends influence in Malaya 
Tolstoy, Anna Karenina (1875-6) 
Alexander Graham Bell demonstrates the 
telephone; Wagner’s “The Ring Cycle’ 
performed in Bayreuth; death of George 
Sand 
Russia declares war on Turkey; Britain 
annexes Transvaal 
The Congress of Berlin; James, The 
Europeans 
British Zulu War; Ibsen, A Doll’s House; 
James, Daisy Miller; Meredith, The Egoist 
Edison develops electric lighting; deaths of 
George Eliot and Flaubert; Dostoevsky, 
The Brothers Karamazov 
Tsar Alexander II assassinated; deaths of 
Dostoevsky and Carlyle 


Chronology 
Life 
1882~—3 The Palestine repaired in 
Falmouth but sinks off 
Sumatra 
1883 July: reunited with his uncle 
Tadeusz Bobrowski at 
Marienbad; 
September: signs on as second 
mate in the Riversdale bound 
for South Africa and Madras, 
India 
1884 June: sails in the Narcissus 
from Bombay, India, to 
Dunkirk as second mate; 
December: passes 
examination as first mate 
1885 April: sails for Calcutta and 
Singapore aboard the 
Tilkhurst as second mate 
1886 August: becomes a naturalized 
British subject; 
November: gains his Master’s 
Certificate; briefly signs on as 
second mate in the Falconhurst 
1887-8 Makes four voyages to the 
Malay Archipelago as first 
mate; 
February (1887): sails for Java 
in the Highland Forest but is 
injured and hospitalized in 
Singapore; 
August: joins the Vidar in 
Singapore bound for Borneo; 
January (1888): appointed 
Master of the Otago at 
Bangkok and sails for 
Australia 
1889 Resigns from the Otago; 
March: released from his 
status as a Russian subject; 
June: settles briefly in London 
and in the autumn begins 
writing Almayer’s Folly 
XXXIX 
Historical and Cultural Background 
Married Women’s Property Act in Britain; 
deaths of Darwin and Garibaldi 
Nietzsche, Also Sprach Zarathustra; deaths 
of Turgenev, Wagner, and Marx 
Berlin Conference (14 nations), ‘The 
Scramble for Africa’; the Fabian Society 
founded; Mark Twain, Huckleberry Finn 
Death of General Gordon at Khartoum; 
Zola, Germinal 
Stevenson, Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde; 
Nietzsche, Beyond Good and Evil 
Queen Victoria’s Golden Jubilee; Verdi, 
Otello 
1888: Wilhelm II becomes Kaiser; 
British ‘protectorate’ over Matabeleland, 
Sarawak, North Borneo, and Brunei; death 
of Matthew Arnold 
London Dock Strike; Cecil Rhodes founds 
the British South Africa Co.; death of 
Robert Browning 


xl 
Chronology 
Life 
1890 February: returns to Polish 
Ukraine for the first time in 16 
years and visits his uncle 
Tadeusz Bobrowski; 
April: in Brussels; appointed 
by the Société Anonyme Belge 
pour le Commerce du 
Haut-Congo; 
Mid-May: sails for the Congo; 
August-September: 
commands the Roi des Belges 
from Stanley Falls to Kinshasa 
but falls ill with dysentery and 
malaria; sails for Europe in 
November 
1891-3 January (1891): back in 
England; 
February—March: 
hospitalized in London; 
April-May: travels to 
Champel-les-Bains near 
Geneva for a cure and returns 
to London in June, to be 
temporarily employed by 
Barr, Moering & Co.; 
November: joins the Torrens, 
his last sailing ship, and makes 
four voyages as first mate; 
meets John Galsworthy and 
Edward (Ted) Sanderson on 
one return passage; 
July (1893): resigns from the 
Torrens but remains on the 
payroll till mid-October; 
August-September: visits 
his uncle in Ukraine; 
November: briefly joins 
the Adowa at Rouen, 
France 
Historical and Cultural Background 
The Partition of Africa; Ibsen, Hedda 
Gabler; William Morris, News from 
Nowhere; J. G. Frazer, The Golden Bough 
(1890-1914) 
1891: Hardy, Tess of 
the D'Urbervilles; 
Wilde, The Picture of 
Dorian Gray 
1892: Death of Tennyson 
1893: Dvorak, ‘New World’ Symphony, 
Verdi, Falstaff 


Chronology 
Life 
Conrad the Writer: 1894-1924 
1894 
1895 
1896 
1897 
1898 
1899 
1900 
IQOI 
January: leaves the Adowa and 
returns to London; 
10 February: Tadeusz 
Bobrowski dies; 
April—May: finishes and 
revises Almayer’s Folly; 
August: again at 
Champel-les-Bains for 
hydrotherapy; 
October: meets Edward 
Garnett; 
November: meets Jessie 
George, his future wife 
April: Almayer’s Folly 
published 
March: An Outcast of 
the 
Islands; marries Jessie George; 
they live in Stanford-le-Hope, 
Essex 
Meets R. B. Cunninghame 
. 
Graham, Henry James and 
Stephen Crane; 
March: moves to Ivy Walls, 
Essex; 
December: The Nigger of 
the 
‘Narcissus’ 
Meets Ford Madox (Hueffer) 
Ford and H. G. Wells; 
15 January: Alfred Borys 
Conrad born; 
April: Tales of 
Unrest; 
October: leases Pent Farm, 
Postling, Kent 
February: finishes ‘Heart of 
Darkness’ 
September: J. B. Pinker 
becomes Conrad’s literary 
agent; 
October: Lord Fim 
June: The Inheritors (with 
Ford) 
xhi 
Historical and Cultural Background 
Greenwich bomb outrage; Nicholas II 
becomes Tsar; ‘Dreyfus case’ in France; 
death of Robert Louis Stevenson 
Crane, The Red Badge of 
Courage; H. G. 
Wells, The Time Machine; death of Engels; 
Hardy, Jude the Obscure 
Puccini, La Bohéme; death of William 
Morris 
Queen Victoria’s Diamond Jubilee; 
H. G. Wells, The Invisible Man 
Curies discover radium; Wilde, The Ballad 
of 
Reading Gaol; H. G. Wells, The War of 
the Worlds 
Boer War begins 
Russia occupies Manchuria; Freud, The 
Interpretation of 
Dreams; deaths of Oscar 
Wilde, Ruskin, Nietzsche, Crane 
Death of Queen Victoria; Marconi 
transmits first transatlantic Morse Code 
signal; Kipling, Kim 


xlii 
1902 
1903 
1904 
1905 
1906 
1907 
1908 
1909 
IQII 
1912 
Chronology 
Life 
November: Youth: A 
Narrative and Two Other 
Stories (Heart of Darkness’ 
and ‘The End of the Tether’) 
April: Typhoon and Other 
Stories 
October: Romance (with Ford) 
October: Nostromo 
January—May: resides in 
Capri, Italy; 
June: One Day More staged in 
London 
Meets Arthur Marwood, who 
becomes a 
close friend; 
2 August: John Conrad born; 
October: The Mirror of 
the 
Sea: Memories and Impressions 
May—August: at 
Champel-les-Bains for the 
children’s health; 
September: The Secret Agent; 
moves to Someries, Luton 
Hoo, Bedfordshire 
August: A Set of 
Six 
February: moves to rented 
rooms in Aldington, near 
Hythe, Kent; 
July: deteriorating relations 
with Ford culminate in a 
break 
January: quarrels with Pinker; 
physical and mental 
breakdown for three months; 
June: moves to new home, 
Capel House, Orlestone, Kent 
October: Under Western Eyes 
January: Some Reminiscences 
(later retitled A Personal 
Record); 
October: 'Tmixt Land and Sea 
Historical and Cultural Background 
Balfour’s Education Act; death of Zola; 
Gorky, The Lower Depths 
Wright brothers’ first flight; Shaw, Man 
and Superman; James, The Ambassadors; 
Butler, The Way of 
All Flesh 
Russo-Japanese War; Anglo-French 
Entente Cordiale; Chekhov, The Cherry 
Orchard; James, The Golden Bowl; death of 
Chekhov 
Abortive revolution in Russia; beginning 
of the Women’s Suffrage Movement; 
Freud, Three Essays on the Theory of 
Sexuality; Debussy, La Mer 
Anglo-Russian Entente; death of Ibsen; 
Galsworthy, The Man of 
Property 
Cubist Exhibition in Paris; Shaw, Major 
Barbara 
Bennett, The Old Wives’ Tale 
Peary reaches the North Pole; Blériot flies 
across the Channel; Marinetti launches the 
Futurist movement 
The Union of South Africa created; death 
of Tolstoy; Post-Impressionist Exhibition, 
London; E. M. Forster, Howards End; 
Yeats, The Green Helmet 
Amundsen reaches the South Pole; the 
Blaue Reiter group formed, Munich 
Titanic sinks; Schoenberg, Pierrot Lunaire; 
Pound, Ripostes; Mann, Death in Venice 


1913 
IQI4 
1915 
1916 
1917 
1918 
1919 
1920 
1921 
Chronology 
Life 
March: meets F. N. Doubleday 
to discuss a collected edition 
of his work; 
September: first meets 
Bertrand Russell 
January: Chance; 
July—November: visits Poland 
with his family and is detained 
for several weeks by the 
outbreak of the war 
February: Within the Tides; 
March: Victory (USA; 
September in UK) 
March: sits for a bust by the 
sculptor Jo Davidson; 
August: visits Foreign Office 
and Admiralty to discuss 
propaganda articles 
March: The Shadow-Line; 
November: London for a 
three-month stay 
May: first meets G. 
Jean-Aubry; 
October: his son Borys 
hospitalized in Rouen, 
suffering from shell-shock 
March: stage version of 
Victory in London; 
April: The Arrow of 
Gold; 
May: sells film rights to four 
of his novels; 
October: moves to his last 
home—Oswalds, 
Bishopsbourne, near 
Canterbury, Kent 
May: The Rescue (USA; June 
in UK) 
February: Notes on Life and 
Letters; 
the Collected Edition begins 
publication in England 
(Heinemann) and the USA 
(Doubleday) 
xliii 
Historical and Cultural Background 
D. H. Lawrence, Sons and Lovers; Proust, 
A la recherche du temps perdu (1913-27); 
Stravinsky, The Rite of 
Spring 
Outbreak of First World War; Polish 
Legion fights Russians; Joyce, Dubliners 
Germans sink the Lusitania; Einstein, 
General Theory of 
Relativity; Pound, 
Cathay; D. H. Lawrence, The Rainbow; 
Ford, The Good Soldier 
Battles of Verdun and Somme; Joyce, A 
Portrait of 
the Artist as a Young Man; death 
of Henry James 
The Russian Revolution; USA enters war; 
Jung, The Psychology of 
the Unconscious; 
T. S. Eliot, Prufrock and Other 
Observations; Shaw, Heartbreak House 
Spengler, The Decline of 
the West; death of 
Wilfred Owen; November, Armistice 
signed; Polish Republic restored 
Treaty of Versailles; Keynes, The Economic 
Consequences of 
the Peace; 
Walter Gropius founds the Bauhaus 
League of Nations founded; Poles rout 
Russian invaders; D. H. Lawrence, Women 
in Love 
Irish Free State created; Rutherford and 
Chadwick work on splitting the atom 


xliv 
1922 
1923 
1924 
Chronology 
Life 
November: stage version of 
The Secret Agent, London 
May-June: visits USA; 
December: The Rover 
11 January: birth of first 
grandson, Philip James; 
March: sits for sculptor Jacob 
Epstein; 
May: declines knighthood; 
3 August: dies of a heart 
attack; buried in Canterbury 
Cemetery; 
September: The Nature of 
a 
Crime (with Ford); 
October: Laughing Anne & 
One Day More: Two Plays; 
November: Ford, Joseph 
Conrad: A Personal 
Remembrance 
1925 January: Tales of 
Hearsay; 
1926 
September: Suspense 
(unfinished) 
March: Last Essays 
1928 June: The Sisters 
Historical and Cultural Background 
Mussolini forms fascist government in 
Italy; BBC founded; T. S. Eliot, The Waste 
Land; Joyce, Ulysses; Woolf, facob’s Room 
Yeats wins Nobel Prize for Literature 
Death of Lenin; E. M. Forster, A 
Passage 
to India; Mann, The Magic Mountain; 
Shaw, St. Foan 
Fall of Trotsky, rise of Stalin; Shaw wins 
the Nobel Prize for Literature; Hitler, 
Mein Kampf, Woolf, Mrs. Dalloway 
General Strike; Kafka, The Castle 
Death of Thomas Hardy; D. H. Lawrence, 
Lady Chatterley’s Lover 


OSU0’) 
JOATY 
9U,L, 
psuvduryy 
4 
Py 
(uoneis 
10j}enb77) 
aqpeAveyyinbor) 
Soy 
Majunis 
(I1uesuvsry) 
aqEAAaqurag 
S|! 
QZ 
[IB] UBARIRT) -------- 


_ 
pk” 
‘a 
hed! pore 
hy 
- 
olor 
cainsl 
4 
(rie ts A) 
eva 2 
iad 
0 
~. 
. 
, 
; 
\ 
Ay 
i 
; 
- 
anita 
™, 
j 
- 
os 
— 
. 
- 
et 
} 
He 
5 
ot 
on 
7 
yr: 
a 
. 
r 
ei 
re 
=< 
iz 
o* 
— 
— 
™—~, 
® 
’. 
> 


AN OUTPOST OF PROGRESS 




AN OUTPOST OF PROGRESS 
I 
THERE were two white men in charge of the trading station. 
Kayerts, the chief, was short and fat; Carlier, the assistant, was tall, 
with a large head and a 
very broad trunk perched upon a 
long pair of 
thin legs.* The third man on the staff was a Sierra Leone nigger, 
who maintained that his name was Henry Price.* However, for some 
reason or other, the natives down the river had given him the name 
of Makola, and it stuck to him through all his wanderings about the 
country. He spoke English and French with a warbling accent, wrote 
a beautiful hand, understood book-keeping, and cherished in his 
innermost heart the worship of evil spirits. His wife was a negress 
from Loanda, very large and very noisy. Three children rolled about 
in sunshine before the door of his low, shed-like dwelling. Makola, 
taciturn and impenetrable, despised the two white men. He had 
charge of a small clay storehouse with a dried-grass roof, and pre- 
tended to keep a correct account of beads, cotton cloth, red ker- 
chiefs, brass wire, and other trade goods it contained. Besides the 
storehouse and Makola’s hut, there was only one large building in 
the cleared ground of the station. It was built neatly of reeds, with a 
verandah on all the four sides. There were three rooms in it. The one 
in the middle was the living-room, and had two rough tables and a 
few stools in it. The other two were the bedrooms for the white men. 
Each had a bedstead and a mosquito net for all furniture.* The plank 
floor was littered with the belongings of the white men; open half- 
empty boxes, torn wearing apparel,* old boots; all the things dirty, 
and all the things broken, that accumulate mysteriously round 
untidy men. There was also another dwelling-place some distance 
away from the buildings. In it, under a 
tall cross much out of the 
perpendicular, slept the man who had seen the beginning of all this; 
who had planned and had watched the construction of this outpost 
of progress. He had been, at home, an unsuccessful painter who, 
weary of pursuing fame on an empty stomach, had gone out there 
through high protections. He had been the first chief of that station. 
Makola had watched the energetic artist die of fever in the just 


4 
An Outpost of 
Progress 
finished house with his usual kind of “I told you so” indifference. 
Then, for a time, he dwelt alone with his family, his account books, 
and the Evil Spirit that rules the lands under the equator. He got on 
very well with his god. Perhaps he had propitiated him by a promise 
of more white men to play with, by and by. At any rate the director of 
the Great Trading Company, coming up in a steamer that resembled 
an enormous sardine box with a flat-roofed shed erected on it, 
found the station in good order, and Makola as usual quietly diligent. 
The director had the cross put up over the first agent’s grave, and 
appointed Kayerts to the post. Carlier was told off as second in 
charge. The director was a man ruthless and efficient, who at times, 
but very imperceptibly, indulged in grim humour. He made a speech 
to Kayerts and Carlier, pointing out to them the promising aspect of 
their station.* The nearest trading-post was about three hundred 
miles away. It was an exceptional opportunity for them to distinguish 
themselves and to earn percentages on the trade. This appointment 
was a favour done to beginners. Kayerts was moved almost to tears 
by his director’s kindness. He would, he said, by doing his best, try 
to justify the flattering confidence, &c., &c. Kayerts had been in the 
Administration of the Telegraphs, and knew how to express himself 
correctly. Carlier, an ex-non-commissioned officer of cavalry in an 
army guaranteed from harm by several European Powers,* was less 
impressed. If there were commissions to get, so much the better; 
and, trailing a sulky glance over the river, the forests, the impene- 
trable bush that seemed to cut off the station from the rest of the 
world, he muttered between his teeth, “We shall see, very soon.” 
Next day, some bales of cotton goods and a few cases of provisions 
having been thrown on shore, the sardine-box steamer went off, not 
to return for another six months. On the deck the director touched 
his cap to the two agents, who stood on the bank waving their hats, 
and turning to an old servant of the Company on his passage to 
headquarters, said, “Look at those two imbeciles. They must be mad 
at home to send me such specimens. I told those fellows to plant a 
vegetable garden, build new storehouses and fences, and construct a 
landing-stage. I 
bet nothing will be done! They won’t know how to 
begin.* L 
always thought the station on this river useless, and they just 
fit the station!” 
“They will form themselves there,” said the old stager with a 
quiet smile. 


An Outpost of 
Progress 
5 
“At any rate, I am rid of them for six months,” retorted the 
director. 
The two men watched the steamer round the bend, then, ascend- 
ing arm in arm the slope of the bank, returned to the station. They 
had been in this vast and dark country only a very short time, and as 
yet always in the midst of other white men, under the eye and guid- 
ance of their superiors. And now, dull as they were to the subtle 
influences of surroundings, they felt themselves very much alone, 
when suddenly left unassisted to face the wilderness; a wilderness 
rendered more strange, more incomprehensible by the mysterious 
glimpses of the vigorous life it contained. They were two perfectly 
insignificant and incapable individuals, whose existence is only ren- 
dered possible through the high organisation of civilised crowds. 
Few men realise that their life, the very essence of their character, 
their capabilities and their audacities, are only the expression of their 
belief in the safety of their surroundings. The courage, the com- 
posure, the confidence; the emotions and principles; every great and 
every insignificant thought belongs not to the individual but to the 
crowd: to the crowd that believes blindly in the irresistible force of 
its institutions and of its morals, in the power of its police and of its 
opinion.* But the contact with pure unmitigated savagery, with 
primitive nature and primitive man, brings sudden and profound 
trouble into the heart. To the sentiment of being alone of one’s kind, 
to the clear perception of the loneliness of one’s thoughts, of one’s 
sensations—to the negation of the habitual, which is safe, there is 
added the affirmation of the unusual, which is dangerous; a sugges- 
tion of things vague, uncontrollable, and repulsive, whose dis- 
composing intrusion excites the imagination and tries the civilised 
nerves of the foolish and the wise alike. 
Kayerts and Carlier walked arm in arm, drawing close to one 
another as children do in the dark; and they had the same, not 
altogether unpleasant, sense of danger which one half suspects to be 
imaginary. They chatted persistently in familiar tones. “Our station 
is prettily situated,” said one. The other assented with enthusiasm, 
enlarging volubly on the beauties of the situation. Then they passed 
near the grave. “Poor devil!” said Kayerts. “He died of fever, didn’t 
he?” muttered Carlier, stopping short. “Why,” retorted Kayerts, 
with indignation, “I’ve been told that the fellow exposed himself 
recklessly to the sun. The climate here, everybody says, is not at all 


6 
An Outpost of 
Progress 
worse than at home, as long as you keep out of the sun. Do you hear 
that, Carlier? I 
am chief here, and my orders are that you should not 
expose yourself to the sun!” He assumed his superiority jocularly, 
but his meaning was serious. The idea that he would, perhaps, have 
to bury Carlier and remain alone, gave him an inward shiver. He felt 
suddenly that this Carlier was more precious to him here, in the 
centre of Africa, than a brother could be anywhere else. Carlier, 
entering into the spirit of the thing, made a military salute and 
answered in a brisk tone, “Your orders shall be attended to, chief!” 
Then he burst out laughing, slapped Kayerts on the back, and 
shouted, “We shall let life run easily here! Just sit still and gather in 
the ivory those savages will bring. This country has its good points, 
after all!” They both laughed loudly while Carlier thought: That 
poor Kayerts; he is so fat and unhealthy. It would be awful if 
I 
had to 
bury him here. He is a man I 
respect. .. 
. Before they reached the 
verandah of their house they called one another “my dear fellow.” 
The first day they were very active, pottering about with hammers 
and nails and red calico, to put up curtains, make their house habit- 
able and pretty; resolved to settle down comfortably to their new life. 
For them an impossible task. To grapple effectually with even purely 
material problems requires more serenity of mind and more lofty 
courage than people generally imagine. No two beings could have 
been more unfitted for such a struggle. Society, not from any tender- 
ness, but because of its strange needs, had taken care of those two 
men, forbidding them all independent thought, all initiative, all 
departure from routine; and forbidding it under pain of death. They 
could only live on condition of being machines. And now, released 
from the fostering care of men with pens behind the ears, or of men 
with gold lace on the sleeves, they were like those lifelong prisoners 
who, liberated after many years, do not know what use to make of 
their freedom. They did not know what use to make of their facul- 
ties, being both, through want of practice, incapable of independent 
thought. 
At the end of two months Kayerts often would say, “If it was not 
for my Melie, you wouldn’t catch me here.” Melie was his daughter. 
He had thrown up his post in the Administration of the Telegraphs, 
though he had been for seventeen years perfectly happy there, to 
earn a dowry for his girl. His wife was dead, and the child was being 
brought up by his sisters. He regretted the streets, the pavements, 


An Outpost of 
Progress 
7 
the cafés, his friends of many years; all the things he used to see, day 
after day; all the thoughts suggested by familiar things—the 
thoughts effortless, monotonous, and soothing of a Government 
clerk; he regretted all the gossip, the small enmities, the mild venom, 
and the little jokes of Government offices. “If I had had a decent 
brother-in-law,” Carlier would remark, ‘a fellow with a heart, I 
would not be here.” He had left the army and had made himself so 
obnoxious to his family by his laziness and impudence, that an 
exasperated brother-in-law had made superhuman efforts to procure 
him an appointment in the Company as a second-class agent. Having 
not a penny in the world, he was compelled to accept this means of 
livelihood as soon as it became quite clear to him that there was 
nothing more to squeeze out of his relations. He, like Kayerts, 
regretted his old life. He regretted the clink of sabre and spurs on a 
fine afternoon, the barrack-room witticisms, the girls of garrison 
towns; but, besides, he had also a sense of grievance. He was evi- 
dently a much ill-used man. This made him moody, at times. But the 
two men got on well together in the fellowship of their stupidity and 
laziness. Together they did nothing, absolutely nothing, and enjoyed 
the sense of the idleness for which they were paid. And in time they 
came to feel something resembling affection for one another. 
They lived like blind men in a 
large room, aware only of what 
came in contact with them (and of that only imperfectly), but unable 
to see the general aspect of things. The river, the forest, all the great 
land throbbing with life, were like a great emptiness. Even the bril- 
liant sunshine disclosed nothing intelligible. Things appeared and 
disappeared before their eyes in an unconnected and aimless kind of 
way. The river seemed to come from nowhere and flow nowhither. It 
flowed through a void. Out of that void, at times, came canoes, and 
men with spears in their hands would suddenly crowd the yard of 
the station. They were naked, glossy black, ornamented with snowy 
shells and glistening brass wire, perfect of limb. They made an 
uncouth babbling noise when they spoke, moved in a stately manner, 
and sent quick, wild glances out of their startled, never-resting eyes. 
Those warriors would squat in long rows, four or more deep, before 
the verandah, while their chiefs bargained for hours with Makola 
over an elephant tusk. Kayerts sat on his chair and looked down on 
the proceedings, understanding nothing. He stared at them with his 
round blue eyes, called out to Carlier, “Here, look! look at that fellow 


8 
An Outpost of 
Progress 
there—and that other one, to the left. Did you ever see such a 
face? 
Oh, the funny brute!” 
Carlier, smoking native tobacco in a short wooden pipe, would 
swagger up twirling his moustaches, and, surveying the warriors 
with haughty indulgence, would say 
— 
“Fine animals. Brought any bone? Yes? It’s not any too soon. Look 
at the muscles of that fellow—third from the end. I 
wouldn’t care to 
get a punch on the nose from him. Fine arms, but legs no good below 
the knee. Couldn’t make cavalry men of them.” And after glancing 
down complacently at his own shanks, he always concluded: “Pah! 
Don’t they stink! You, Makola! Take that herd over to the fetish” 
(the storehouse was in every station called the fetish, perhaps 
because of the spirit of civilisation it contained) “and give them up 
some of the rubbish you keep there. Id rather see it full of bone than 
full of rags.” 
Kayerts approved. 
“Yes, yes! Go and finish that palaver over there, Mr. Makola. I 
will 
come round when you are ready, to weigh the tusk. We must be 
careful.” Then, turning to his companion: “This is the tribe that 
lives down the river; they are rather aromatic. I remember, they had 
been once before here. D’ye hear that row? What a 
fellow has got to 
put up with in this dog of a country! My head is split.” 
Such profitable visits were rare. For days the two pioneers of trade 
and progress would look on their empty courtyard in the vibrating 
brilliance of vertical sunshine. Below the high bank, the silent river 
flowed on glittering and steady. On the sands in the middle of the 
stream, hippos and alligators sunned themselves side by side.* And 
stretching away in all directions, surrounding the insignificant 
cleared spot of the trading post, immense forests, hiding fateful 
complications of fantastic life, lay in the eloquent silence of mute 
greatness. The two men understood nothing, cared for nothing but 
for the passage of days that separated them from the steamer’s 
return. Their predecessor had left some torn books. They took up 
these wrecks of novels, and, as they had never read anything of the 
kind before, they were surprised and amused. Then during long days 
there were interminable and silly discussions about plots and per- 
sonages. In the centre of Africa they made the acquaintance of 
Richelieu and of d’Artagnan, of Hawk’s Eye and of Father Goriot, 
and of many other people.* All these imaginary personages became 


An Outpost of 
Progress 
9 
subjects for gossip as if they had been living friends. They dis- 
counted 
their 
virtues, 
suspected 
their 
motives, 
decried 
their 
successes; were scandalised at their duplicity or were doubtful about 
their courage. The accounts of crimes filled them with indignation, 
while tender or pathetic passages moved them deeply. Carlier cleared 
his throat and said in a 
soldierly voice, “What nonsense!” Kayerts, 
his round eyes suffused with tears, his fat cheeks quivering, rubbed 
his bald head, and declared, “This is a splendid book. I had no idea 
there were such clever fellows in the world.” They also found some 
old copies of a home paper. That print discussed what it was pleased 
to call “Our Colonial Expansion” in high-flown language. It spoke 
much of the rights and duties of civilisation, of the sacredness of the 
civilising work, and extolled the merits of those who went about 
bringing light, and faith, and commerce to the dark places of the 
earth.* Carlier and Kayerts read, wondered, and began to think 
better of themselves. Carlier said one evening, waving his hand 
about, “In a hundred years, there will be perhaps a town here. Quays, 
and warehouses, and barracks, and—and—billiard-rooms. Civilisa- 
tion, my boy, and virtue—and all. And then, chaps will read that two 
good fellows, Kayerts and Carlier, were the first civilised men to live 
in this very spot!” Kayerts nodded, “Yes, it is a consolation to think 
of that.” They seemed to forget their dead predecessor; but, early 
one day, Carlier went out and replanted the cross firmly. “It used 
to make me squint whenever I walked that way,” he explained to 
Kayerts over the morning coffee. “It made me squint, leaning over 
so much. So I 
just planted it upright. And solid, I promise you! I 
suspended myself with both hands to the cross-piece. Not a move. 
Oh, I 
did that properly.” 
At times Gobila came to see them. Gobila was the chief of the 
neighbouring villages. He was a grey-headed savage, thin and black, 
with a white cloth round his loins and a mangy panther skin hanging 
over his back. He came up with long strides of his skeleton legs, 
swinging a 
staff as tall as himself, and, entering the common room of 
the station, would squat on his heels to the left of the door. There he 
sat, watching Kayerts, and now and then making a speech which the 
other did not understand. Kayerts, without interrupting his occupa- 
tion, would from time to time say in a friendly manner: “How goes 
it, you old image?” and they would smile at one another. ‘The two 
whites had a 
liking for that old and incomprehensible creature, and 


10 
An Outpost of 
Progress 
called him Father Gobila.* Gobila’s manner was paternal, and he 
seemed really to love all white men. They all appeared to him very 
young, indistinguishably alike (except for stature), and he knew that 
they were all brothers, and also immortal. The death of the artist, 
who was the first white man whom he knew intimately, did not 
disturb this belief, because he was firmly convinced that the white 
stranger had pretended to die and got himself buried for some mys- 
terious purpose of his own, into which it was useless to inquire. 
Perhaps it was his way of going home to his own country? At any 
rate, these were his brothers, and he transferred his absurd affection 
to them. They returned it in a way. Carlier slapped him on the back, 
and recklessly struck off matches for his amusement. Kayerts was 
always ready to let him have a 
sniff at the ammonia bottle. In short, 
they behaved just like that other white creature that had hidden itself 
in a hole in the ground. Gobila considered them attentively. Perhaps 
they were the same being with the other—or one of them was. He 
couldn’t decide—clear up that mystery; but he remained always very 
friendly. In consequence of that friendship the women of Gobila’s 
village walked in single file through the reedy grass, bringing every 
morning to the station, fowls, and sweet potatoes, and palm wine, 
and sometimes a goat. The Company never provisions the stations 
fully, and the agents required those local supplies to live. They had 
them through the good-will of Gobila, and lived well. Now and then 
one of them had a bout of fever, and the other nursed him with 
gentle devotion. They did not think much of it. It left them weaker, 
and their appearance changed for the worse. Carlier was hollow- 
eyed and irritable. Kayerts showed a drawn, flabby face above the 
rotundity of his stomach, which gave him a weird aspect. But 
being constantly together, they did not notice the change that took 
place gradually in their appearance, and also in their dispositions. 
Five months passed in that way. 
Then, one morning, as Kayerts and Carlier, lounging in their 
chairs under the verandah, talked about the approaching visit of the 
steamer, a knot of armed men came out of the forest and advanced 
towards the station. They were strangers to that part of the country. 
They were tall, slight, draped classically from neck to heel in blue 
fringed cloths, and carried percussion muskets over their bare right 
shoulders. Makola showed signs of excitement, and ran out of the 
storehouse (where he spent all his days) to meet these visitors. They 


An Outpost of 
Progress 
II 
came into the courtyard and looked about them with steady, scornful 
glances. Their leader, a powerful and determined-looking negro with 
bloodshot eyes, stood in front of the verandah and made a long 
speech. He gesticulated much, and ceased very suddenly. 
There was something in his intonation, in the sounds of the 
long sentences he used, that startled the two whites. It was like a 
reminiscence of something not exactly familiar, and yet resembling 
the speech of civilised men. It sounded like one of those impossible 
languages which sometimes we hear in our dreams. 
“What lingo is that?” said the amazed Carlier. “In the first 
moment I 
fancied the fellow was going to speak French. Anyway, it is 
a different kind of gibberish to what we ever heard.” 
“Yes,” replied Kayerts. “Hey, Makola, what does he say? Where 
do they come from? Who are they?” 
But Makola, who seemed to be standing on hot bricks, answered 
hurriedly, “I don’t know. They come from very far. Perhaps Mrs. 
Price will understand. They are perhaps bad men.” 
The leader, after waiting for a while, said something sharply to 
Makola, who shook his head. Then the man, after looking round, 
noticed Makola’s hut and walked over there. The next moment Mrs. 
Makola was 
heard speaking with great volubility. The other 
strangers—they were six in all—strolled about with an air of ease, 
put their heads through the door of the store-room, congregated 
round the grave, pointed understandingly at the cross, and generally 
made themselves at home. 
“I don’t like those chaps—and, I 
say, Kayerts, they must be from 
the coast; they’ve got firearms,” observed the sagacious Carlier. 
Kayerts also did not like those chaps. They both, for the first time, 
became aware that they lived in conditions where the unusual may be 
dangerous, and that there was no power on earth outside of them- 
selves to stand between them and the unusual. They became uneasy, 
went in and loaded their revolvers. Kayerts said, “We must order 
Makola to tell them to go away before dark.” 
The strangers left in the afternoon, after eating a meal prepared 
for them by Mrs. Makola. The immense woman was excited, and 
talked much with the visitors. She rattled away shrilly, pointing here 
and pointing there at the forests and at the river. Makola sat apart 
and watched. At times he got up and whispered to his wife. He 
accompanied the strangers across the ravine at the back of the 


F2 
An Outpost of 
Progress 
station-ground, and returned slowly looking very thoughtful. When 
questioned by the white men he was very strange, seemed not to 
understand, seemed to have forgotten French—seemed to have for- 
gotten how to speak altogether. Kayerts and Carlier agreed that the 
nigger had had too much palm wine. 
There was some talk about keeping a watch in turn, but in the 
evening everything seemed so quiet and peaceful that they retired as 
usual. All night they were disturbed by a lot of drumming in the 
villages. A deep, rapid roll near by would be followed by another far 
off—then all ceased. Soon short appeals would rattle out here and 
there, then all mingle together, increase, become vigorous and sus- 
tained, would spread out over the forest, roll through the night, 
unbroken and ceaseless, near and far, as if the whole land had been 
one immense drum booming out steadily an appeal to heaven. And 
through the deep and tremendous noise sudden yells that resembled 
snatches of songs from a madhouse darted shrill and high in dis- 
cordant jets of sound which seemed to rush far above the earth and 
drive all peace from under the stars. 
Carlier and Kayerts slept badly. They both thought they had 
heard shots fired during the night—but they could not agree as to 
the direction. In the morning Makola was gone somewhere. He 
returned about noon with one of yesterday’s strangers, and eluded 
all Kayerts’ attempts to close with him: had become deaf apparently. 
Kayerts wondered. Carlier, who had been fishing off the bank, came 
back and remarked while he showed his catch, “The niggers seem to 
be in a deuce of a stir; I 
wonder what’s up. I 
saw about fifteen canoes 
cross the river during the two hours I was there fishing.” Kayerts, 
worried, said, “Isn’t this Makola very queer today?” Carlier advised, 
“Keep all our men together in case of some trouble.” 


II 
THERE were ten station men who had been left by the Director. 
Those fellows, having engaged themselves to the Company for six 
months (without having any idea of a month in particular and only a 
very faint notion of time in general), had been serving the cause of 
progress for upwards of two years. Belonging to a tribe from a very 
distant part of this land of darkness and sorrow, they did not run 
away, naturally supposing that as wandering strangers they would be 
killed by the inhabitants of the country; in which they were right. 
They lived in straw huts on the slope of a ravine overgrown with 
reedy grass, just behind the station buildings. They were not happy, 
regretting the festive incantations, the sorceries, the human sacri- 
fices of their own land; where they also had parents, brothers, sis- 
ters, admired chiefs, respected magicians, loved friends, and other 
ties supposed generally to be human. Besides, the rice rations 
served out by the Company did not agree with them, being a food 
unknown to their land, and to which they could not get used. 
Consequently they were unhealthy and miserable. Had they been of 
any other tribe they would have made up their minds to die—for 
nothing is easier to certain savages than suicide—and so have 
escaped from the puzzling difficulties of existence. But belonging, 
as they did, to a warlike tribe with filed teeth, they had more grit, 
and went on stupidly living through disease and sorrow. They did 
very little work, and had lost their splendid physique. Carlier and 
Kayerts doctored them assiduously without being able to bring 
them back into condition again. They were mustered every morn- 
ing and told off to different tasks—grass-cutting, fence-building, 
tree-felling, &c., &c., which no power on earth could induce them 
to execute efficiently. The two whites had practically very little 
control over them. 
In the afternoon Makola came over to the big house and found 
Kayerts watching three heavy columns of smoke rising above the 
forests. “What is that?” asked Kayerts. “Some villages burn,” 
answered Makola, who seemed to have regained his wits. Then he 
said abruptly: “We have got very little ivory; bad six months’ trading. 
Do you like get a little more ivory?” 


14 
An Outpost of 
Progress 
“Yes” said Kayerts eagerly. He thought of percentages which 
were low. 
“Those men who came yesterday are traders from Loanda who 
have got more ivory than they can carry home. Shall I buy? I know 
their camp.” 
“Certainly,” said Kayerts, “What are those traders?” 
“Bad 
fellows,” 
said Makola 
indifferently. 
“They fight with 
people, and catch women and children. They are bad men, and got 
guns. There is a great disturbance in the country. Do you want 
ivory?” 
“Yes,” said Kayerts. Makola said nothing for a while. Then: 
“Those workmen of ours are no good at all,” he muttered, looking 
round. “Station in very bad order, sir. Director will growl. Better get 
a fine lot of ivory, then he say nothing.” 
“T can’t help it; the men won’t work,” said Kayerts. “When will 
you get that ivory?” 
“Very soon,” said Makola. “Perhaps tonight. You leave it to me, 
and keep indoors, sir. I think you had better give some palm wine to 
our men to make a dance this evening. Enjoy themselves. Work 
better tomorrow. There’s plenty palm wine—gone a 
little sour.” 
Kayerts said yes, and Makola, with his own hands, carried the big 
calabashes to the door of his hut. They stood there till the evening, 
and Mrs. Makola looked into every one. The men got them at sunset. 
When Kayerts and Carlier retired, a big bonfire was flaring before 
the men’s huts. They could hear their shouts and drumming. Some 
men from Gobila’s village had joined the station hands, and the 
entertainment was a great success. 
In the middle of the night, Carlier waking suddenly, heard a man 
shout loudly; then a shot was fired. Only one. Carlier ran out and 
met Kayerts on the verandah. They were both startled. As they went 
across the yard to call Makola, they saw shadows moving in the 
night. One of them cried, “Don’t shoot! It’s me, Price.” Then 
Makola appeared close to them. “Go back, go back, please,” he 
urged, “you spoil all.” “There are strange men about,” said Carlier. 
“Never mind; I 
know,” said Makola. Then he whispered, “All right. 
Bring ivory. Say nothing! I know my business.” The two white men 
reluctantly went back to the house, but did not sleep. They heard 
footsteps, whispers, some groans. It seemed as if a lot of men came 
in, dumped heavy things on the ground, squabbled a long time, then 


An Outpost of 
Progress 
15 
went away. They lay on their hard beds and thought: “This Makola 
is invaluable.” In the morning Carlier came out, very sleepy, and 
pulled at the cord of the big bell. The station hands mustered every 
morning to the sound of the bell. That morning nobody came. 
Kayerts turned out also, yawning. Across the yard they saw Makola 
come out of his hut, a tin basin of soapy water in his hand. Makola, a 
civilised nigger, was very neat in his person. He threw the soapsuds 
skilfully over a wretched little yellow cur he had, then turning his 
face to the agent’s house, he shouted from the distance, “All the men 
gone last night!” 
They heard him plainly, but in their surprise they both yelled out 
together: “What!” Then they stared at one another. “We are in a 
proper fix now,” growled Carlier. “It’s incredible!” muttered Kayerts. 
“I will go to the huts and see,” said Carlier, striding off. Makola 
coming up found Kayerts standing alone. 
“T can hardly believe it,” said Kayerts tearfully. “We took care of 
them as if they had been our children.” 
“They went with the coast people,” said Makola after a moment of 
hesitation. 
“What do I care with whom they went—the ungrateful brutes!” 
exclaimed the other. Then with sudden suspicion, and looking hard 
at Makola, he added: “What do you know about it?” 
Makola moved his shoulders, looking down on the ground. “What 
do I 
know? I 
think only. Will you come and look at the ivory I’ve got 
there? It is a fine lot. You never saw such.” 
He moved towards the store. Kayerts followed him mechanically, 
thinking about the incredible desertion of the men. On the ground 
before the door of the fetish lay six splendid tusks. 
“What did you give for it?” asked Kayerts, after surveying the lot 
with satisfaction. 
“No regular trade,” said Makola. “They brought the ivory and 
gave it to me. I told them to take what they most wanted in the 
station. It is a beautiful lot. No station can show such tusks. Those 
traders wanted carriers badly, and our men were no good here. No 
trade, no entry in books; all correct.” 
Kayerts nearly burst with indignation. “Why!” he shouted, “I 
believe you have sold our men for these tusks!” Makola stood impas- 
sive and silent. “I—I—will—I,” stuttered Kayerts. “You fiend!” he 
yelled out. 


16 
An Outpost of 
Progress 
“I did the best for you and the Company,” 
said Makola 
imperturbably. “Why you shout so much? Look at this tusk.” 
“I dismiss you! I 
will report you—I won’t look at the tusk. I 
forbid 
you to touch them. I order you to throw them into the river. You— 
you!” 
“You very red, Mr. Kayerts. If you are so irritable in the sun, you 
will get fever and die—like the first chief!” pronounced Makola 
impressively. 
They stood still, contemplating one another with intense eyes, as 
if they had been looking with effort across immense distances. 
Kayerts shivered. Makola had meant no more than he said, but his 
words seemed to Kayerts full of ominous menace! He turned sharply 
and went away to the house. Makola retired into the bosom of his 
family; and the tusks, left lying before the store, looked very large 
and valuable in the sunshine. 
Carlier came back on the verandah. “They’re all gone, hey?” asked 
Kayerts from the far end of the common room in a muffled voice. 
“You did not find anybody?” 
“Oh, yes,” said Carlier, “I found one of Gobila’s people lying dead 
before the huts—shot through the body. We heard that shot last 
night.” 
Kayerts came out quickly. He found his companion staring grimly 
over the yard at the tusks, away by the store. They both sat in silerrce 
for a while. Then Kayerts related his conversation with Makola. 
Carlier said nothing. At the mid-day meal they ate very little. They 
hardly exchanged a word that day. A great silence seemed to lie 
heavily over the station and press on their lips. Makola did not open 
the store; he spent the day playing with his children. He lay full- 
length on a mat outside his door, and the youngsters sat on his chest 
and clambered all over him. It was a touching picture. Mrs. Makola 
was busy cooking all day as usual. The white men made a somewhat 
better meal in the evening. Afterwards, Carlier smoking his pipe 
strolled over to the store; he stood for a long time over the tusks, 
touched one or two with his foot, even tried to lift the largest one by 
its small end. He came back to his chief, who had not stirred from 
the verandah, threw himself in the chair and said— 
“I can see it! They were pounced upon while they slept heavily 
after drinking all that palm wine you’ve allowed Makola to give 
them. A put-up job! See? The worst is, some of Gobila’s people were 


An Outpost of 
Progress 
17 
there, and got carried off too, no doubt. The least drunk woke up, 
and got shot for his sobriety. This is a funny country. What will you 
do now?” 
“We can’t touch it, of course,” said Kayerts. 
“Of course not,” assented Carlier. 
“Slavery is an awful thing,” stammered 
out Kayerts in an 
unsteady voice. 
“Frightful—the sufferings,” grunted Carlier, with conviction. 
They believed their words. Everybody shows a 
respectful defer- 
ence to certain sounds that he and his fellows can make. But about 
feelings people really know nothing. We talk with indignation or 
enthusiasm; we talk about oppression, cruelty, crime, devotion, self- 
sacrifice, virtue, and we know nothing real beyond the words. 
Nobody knows what suffering or sacrifice mean—except, perhaps, 
the victims of the mysterious purpose of these illusions. 
Next morning they saw Makola very busy setting up in the yard 
the big scales used for weighing ivory. By and by Carlier said: 
“What’s that filthy scoundrel up to?” and lounged out into the yard. 
Kayerts followed. They stood by watching. Makola took no notice. 
When the balance was swung true, he tried to lift a tusk into the 
scale. It was too heavy. He looked up helplessly without a word, and 
for a minute they stood round that balance as mute and still as three 
statues. Suddenly Carlier said: “Catch hold of the other end, 
Makola—you beast!” and together they swung the tusk up. Kayerts 
trembled in every limb. He muttered, “I say! O! I say!” and putting 
his hand in his pocket found there a dirty bit of paper and the stump 
of a pencil. He turned his back on the others, as if about to do 
something tricky, and noted stealthily the weights which Carlier 
shouted out to him with unnecessary loudness. When all was over 
Makola whispered to himself: “The sun’s very strong here for the 
tusks.” Carlier said to Kayerts in a careless tone: “I say, chief, I 
might 
just as well give him a 
lift with this lot into the store.” 
As they were going back to the house Kayerts observed with a 
sigh: “It had to be done.” And Carlier said: “It’s deplorable, but, the 
men being Company’s men, the ivory is Company’s ivory. We must 
look after it.” “I will report to the Director, of course,” said Kayerts. 
“Of course; let him decide,” approved Carlier. 
At mid-day they made a 
hearty meal. Kayerts sighed from time to 
time. Whenever they mentioned Makola’s name they always added 


18 
An Outpost of 
Progress 
to it an opprobrious epithet. It eased their conscience. Makola gave 
himself a half-holiday, and bathed his children in the river. No one 
from Gobila’s villages came near the station that day. No one came 
the next day, and the next, nor for a whole week. Gobila’s people 
might have all been dead and buried for any sign of life they gave. 
But they were only mourning for those they had lost by the witch- 
craft of white men, who had brought wicked people into their coun- 
try. The wicked people were gone, but fear remained. Fear always 
remains. A man may destroy everything within himself, love and 
hate and belief, and even doubt; but as long as he clings to life he 
cannot destroy fear: the fear, subtle, indestructible, and terrible, that 
pervades his being; that tinges his thoughts; that lurks in his heart; 
that watches on his lips the struggle of his last breath. In his fear, the 
mild old Gobila offered extra human sacrifices to all the Evil Spirits 
that had taken possession of his white friends. His heart was heavy, 
Some warriors spoke about burning and killing, but the cautious old 
savage dissuaded them. Who could foresee the woe those mysterious 
creatures, if irritated, might bring? They should be left alone. Per- 
haps in time they would disappear into the earth as the first one had 
disappeared. His people must keep away from them, and hope for 
the best. 
Kayerts and Carlier did not disappear, but remained above on this 
earth, that, somehow, they fancied had become bigger and very 
empty. It was not the absolute and dumb solitude of the post that 
impressed them so much as an inarticulate feeling that something 
from within them was gone, something that worked for their safety, 
and had kept the wilderness from interfering with their hearts. The 
images of home; the memory of people like them, of men that 
thought and felt as they used to think and feel, receded into distances 
made indistinct by the glare of unclouded sunshine. And out of the 
great silence of the surrounding wilderness, its very hopelessness 
and savagery seemed to approach them nearer, to draw them gently, 
to look upon them, to envelop them with a solicitude irresistible, 
familiar, and disgusting. 
Days lengthened into weeks, then into months. Gobila’s people 
drummed and yelled to every new moon, as of yore, but Kept away 
from the station. Makola and Carlier tried once in a canoe to open 
communications, but were received with a shower of arrows, and had 
to fly back to the station for dear life. That attempt set the country 


An Outpost of 
Progress 
19 
up and down the river into an uproar that could be very distinctly 
heard for days. The steamer was late. At first they spoke of delay 
jauntily, then anxiously, then gloomily. The matter was becoming 
serious. Stores were running short. Carlier cast his lines off the bank, 
but the river was low, and the fish kept out in the stream. They dared 
not stroll far away from the station to shoot. Moreover, there was no 
game in the impenetrable forest. Once Carlier shot a hippo in the 
river. They had no boat to secure it, and it sank. When it floated up it 
drifted away, and Gobila’s people secured the carcase. It was the 
occasion for a national holiday, but Carlier had a 
fit of rage over it, 
and talked about the necessity of exterminating all the niggers before 
the country could be made habitable.* Kayerts mooned about silently; 
spent hours looking at the portrait of his Melie. It represented a 
little 
girl with long bleached tresses and a 
rather sour face. His legs were 
much swollen, and he could hardly walk. Carlier, undermined by 
fever, could not swagger any more, but kept tottering about, still with 
a devil-may-care air, as became a man who remembered his crack 
regiment. He had become hoarse, sarcastic, and inclined to say 
unpleasant things. He called it “being frank with you.” They had 
long ago reckoned their percentages on trade, including in them that 
last deal of “this infamous Makola.” They had also concluded not to 
say anything about it. Kayerts hesitated at first—was afraid of the 
Director. 
“He has seen worse things done on the quiet,” maintained Carlier, 
with a hoarse laugh. “Trust him! He won’t thank you if 
you blab. He 
is no better than you or me. Who will talk if we hold our tongues? 
There is nobody here.” 
That was the root of the trouble! There was nobody there; and 
being left there alone with their weakness, they became daily more 
like a pair of accomplices than like a couple of devoted friends. They 
had heard nothing from home for eight months. Every evening they 
said, “Tomorrow we shall see the steamer.” But one of the Com- 
pany’s steamers had been wrecked, and the Director was busy with 
the other, relieving very distant and important stations on the main 
river. He thought that the useless station, and the useless men, could 
wait. Meantime Kayerts and Carlier lived on rice boiled without salt, 
and cursed the Company, all Africa, and the day they were born. One 
must have lived on such diet to discover what ghastly trouble the 
necessity of swallowing one’s food may become. There was literally 


20 
An Outpost of 
Progress 
nothing else in the station but rice and coffee; they drank the coffee 
without sugar. The last fifteen lumps Kayerts had solemnly locked 
away in his box, together with a half-bottle of Cognac, “in case of 
sickness,” he explained. Carlier approved. “When one is sick,” he 
said, “any little extra like that is cheering.” 
They waited. Rank grass began to sprout over the courtyard. The 
bell never rang now. Days passed, silent, exasperating, and slow. 
When the two men spoke, they snarled; and their silences were 
bitter, as if tinged by the bitterness of their thoughts. 
One day after a lunch of boiled rice, Carlier put down his cup 
untasted, and said: “Hang it all! Let’s have a decent cup of coffee for 
once. Bring out that sugar, Kayerts!”* 
“For the sick,” muttered Kayerts, without looking up. 
“For the sick,” mocked Carlier. “Bosh! 
. 
. 
. Well! I am sick.” 
“You are no more sick than I am, and I go without,” said Kayerts 
in a peaceful tone. 
“Come! out with that sugar, you stingy old slave-dealer.” 
Kayerts looked up quickly. Carlier was smiling with marked inso- 
lence. And suddenly it seemed to Kayerts that he had never seen that 
man before. Who was he? He knew nothing about him. What was he 
capable of? There was a surprising flash of violent emotion within 
him, as if 
in the presence of something undreamt-of, dangerous, and 
final. But he managed to pronounce with composure— 
“That joke is in very bad taste. Don’t repeat it.” 
“Joke!” said Carlier, hitching himself forward on his seat. “I am 
hungry—I am sick—I don’t joke! I hate hypocrites. You are a hypo- 
crite. You are a slave-dealer. I 
am a slave-dealer. There’s nothing but 
slave-dealers in this cursed country. I mean to have sugar in my 
coffee today, anyhow!” 
“I forbid you to speak to me in that way,” said Kayerts with a 
fair 
show of resolution. 
“You! 
— 
What?” shouted Carlier, jumping up. 
Kayerts stood up also. “I am your chief,” he began, trying to 
master the shakiness of his voice. 
“What?” yelled the other. “Who’s chief? There’s no chief here. 
There’s nothing here: there’s nothing but you and I. Fetch the 
sugar—you pot-bellied ass.” 
“Hold your tongue. Go out of this room,” screamed Kayerts. “I 
dismiss you—you scoundrel!” 


An Outpost of 
Progress 
21 
Carlier swung a stool. All at once he looked dangerously in 
earnest. 
“You flabby, good-for-nothing civilian—take 
that!” he 
howled. 
Kayerts dropped under the table, and the stool struck the grass 
inner wall of the room. Then, as Carlier was trying to upset the table, 
Kayerts in desperation made a 
blind rush, head low, like a cornered 
pig would do, and overturning his friend, bolted along the verandah, 
and into his room. He locked the door, snatched his revolver, and 
stood panting. In less than a minute Carlier was kicking at the door 
furiously, howling, “If you don’t bring out that sugar, I will shoot 
you at sight, like a dog. Now then—one—two—three. You won’t? I 
will show you who’s the master.” 
Kayerts thought the door would fall in, and scrambled through 
the square hole that served for a window in his room. There was then 
the whole breadth of the house between them. But the other was 
apparently not strong enough to break in the door, and Kayerts 
heard him running round. Then he also began to run laboriously on 
his swollen legs. He ran as quickly as he could, grasping the revolver, 
and unable yet to understand what was happening to him. He saw in 
succession Makola’s house, the store, the river, the ravine, and the 
low bushes; and he saw all those things again as he ran for the second 
time round the house. Then again they flashed past him. That 
morning he could not have walked a yard without a groan. 
And now he ran. He ran fast enough to keep out of sight of the 
other man. 
Then as, weak and desperate, he thought, “Before I 
finish the next 
round I 
shall die,” he heard the other man stumble heavily, then stop. 
He stopped also. He had the back and Carlier the front of the house, 
as before. He heard him drop into a chair cursing, and suddenly his 
own legs gave way, and he slid down into a 
sitting posture with his 
back to the wall. His mouth was as dry as a cinder, and his face was 
wet with perspiration—and tears. What was it all about? He thought 
it must be a horrible illusion; he thought he was dreaming; he 
thought he was going mad! After a while he collected his senses. 
What did they quarrel about? That sugar! How absurd! He would 
give it to him—didn’t want it himself. And he began scrambling to 
his feet with a sudden feeling of security. But before he had fairly 
stood upright, a common-sense reflection occurred to him and drove 
him back into despair. He thought: If I 
give way now to that brute of 


22 
An Outpost of 
Progress 
a soldier, he will begin this horror again tomorrow—and the day 
after—every day—raise other pretensions, trample on me, torture 
me, make me his slave—and I will be lost! Lost! The steamer may 
not come for days—may never come. He shook so that he had to sit 
down on the floor again. He shivered forlornly. He felt he could 
not, would not move any more. He was completely distracted by 
the sudden perception that the position was without issue—that 
death and life had in a moment become equally difficult and 
terrible. 
All at once he heard the other push his chair back; and he leaped 
to his feet with extreme facility. He listened and got confused. Must 
run again! Right or left? He heard footsteps. He darted to the left, 
grasping his revolver, and at the very same instant, as it seemed to 
him, they came into violent collision. Both shouted with surprise. A 
loud explosion took place between them; a roar of red fire, thick 
smoke; and Kayerts, deafened and blinded, rushed back thinking: I 
am hit—it’s all over. He expected the other to come round—to gloat 
over his agony. He caught hold of an upright of the roof—“All over!” 
Then he heard a crashing fall on the other side of the house, as if 
somebody had tumbled headlong over a chair—then silence. Noth- 
ing more happened. He did not die. Only his shoulder felt as if 
it had 
been badly wrenched, and he had lost his revolver. He was disarmed 
and helpless! He waited for his fate. The other man made no sound. 
It was a stratagem. He was stalking him now! Along what side? 
Perhaps he was taking aim this very minute! 
After a few moments of an agony frightful and absurd, he decided 
to go and meet his doom. He was prepared for every surrender. He 
turned the corner, steadying himself with one hand on the wall; 
made a few paces, and nearly swooned. He had seen on the floor, 
protruding past the other corner, a pair of turned-up feet. A pair of 
white naked feet in red slippers. He felt deadly sick, and stood for a 
time in profound darkness. Then Makola appeared before him, say- 
ing quietly: “Come along, Mr. Kayerts. He is dead.” He burst into 
tears of gratitude; a loud, sobbing fit of crying. After a time he found 
himself sitting in a chair and looking at Carlier, who lay stretched on 
his back. Makola was kneeling over the body. 
“Is this your revolver?” asked Makola, getting up. 
“Yes,” said Kayerts; then he added very quickly, “He ran after me 
to shoot me—you saw!” 


An Outpost of 
Progress 
23 
“Yes, I saw,” said Makola. “There is only one revolver; where’s 
his?” 
“Don’t know,” whispered Kayerts in a voice that had become 
suddenly very faint. 
: 
“T will go and look for it,” said the other gently. He made the 
round along the verandah, while Kayerts sat still and looked at the 
corpse. Makola came back empty-handed, stood in deep thought, 
then stepped quietly into the dead man’s room, and came out 
directly with a revolver, which he held up before Kayerts. Kayerts 
shut his eyes. Everything was going round. He found life more 
terrible and difficult than death. He had shot an unarmed man. 
After meditating for a while, Makola said softly, pointing at the 
dead man who lay there with his right eye blown out—* 
“He died of fever.” Kayerts looked at him with a stony stare. 
“Yes,” repeated Makola thoughtfully, stepping over the corpse, “I 
think he died of fever. Bury him tomorrow.” 
And he went away slowly to his expectant wife, leaving the two 
white men alone on the verandah. 
Night came, and Kayerts sat unmoving on his chair. He sat quiet 
as if he had taken a dose of opium. The violence of the emotions he 
had passed through produced a 
feeling of exhausted serenity. He had 
plumbed in one short afternoon the depths of horror and despair, 
and now found repose in the conviction that life had no more secrets 
for him: neither had death! He sat by the corpse thinking; thinking 
very actively, thinking very new thoughts. He seemed to have broken 
loose from himself altogether. His old thoughts, convictions, likes 
and dislikes, things he respected and things he abhorred, appeared in 
their true light at last! Appeared contemptible and childish, false and 
ridiculous. He revelled in his new wisdom while he sat by the man he 
had killed. He argued with himself about all things under heaven 
with that kind of wrong-headed lucidity which may be observed in 
some lunatics. Incidentally he reflected that the fellow dead there 
had been a noxious beast anyway; that men died every day in thou- 
sands; perhaps in hundreds of thousands—who could tell?—and 
that in the number, that one death could not possibly make any 
difference; couldn’t have any importance, at least to a thinking crea- 
ture. He, Kayerts, was a thinking creature. He had been all his life, 
till that moment, a believer in a lot of nonsense like the rest of 
mankind—who are fools; but now he thought! He knew! He was at 


24 
An Outpost of 
Progress 
peace; he was familiar with the highest wisdom! Then he tried to 
imagine himself dead, and Carlier sitting in his chair watching him, 
and his attempt met with such unexpected success, that in a very few 
moments he became not at all sure who was dead and who was alive. 
This extraordinary achievement of his fancy startled him, however, 
and by a clever and timely effort of mind he saved himself just in 
time from becoming Carlier. His heart thumped, and he felt hot all 
over at the thought of that danger. Carlier! What a beastly thing! To 
compose his now disturbed nerves—and no wonder!—he tried to 
whistle a little. Then, suddenly, he fell asleep, or thought he had 
slept; but at any rate there was a fog, and somebody had whistled in 
the fog. 
He stood up. The day had come, and a heavy mist had descended 
upon the land: the mist penetrating, enveloping, and silent; the 
morning mist of tropical lands; the mist that clings and kills; the mist 
white and deadly, immaculate and poisonous. He stood up, saw the 
body, and threw his arms above his head with a 
cry like that of a man 
who, waking from a 
trance, finds himself immured for ever in a tomb. 
“Help!... My God!” 
A shriek inhuman, vibrating and sudden, pierced like a sharp dart 
the white shroud of that land of sorrow. Three short, impatient 
screeches followed, and then, for a time, the fog-wreaths rolled on, 
undisturbed, through a formidable silence. Then many more shrieks, 
rapid and piercing, like the yells of some exasperated and ruthless 
creature, rent the air. Progress was calling to Kayerts from the river. 
Progress and civilisation and all the virtues. Society was calling to its 
accomplished child to come, to be taken care of, to be instructed, to 
be judged, to be condemned; it called him to return to that rubbish 
heap from which he had wandered away, so that justice could be 
done. 
Kayerts heard and understood. He stumbled out of the verandah, 
leaving the other man quite alone for the first time since they had 
been thrown there together. He groped his way through the fog, 
calling in his ignorance upon the invisible heaven to undo its work. 
Makola flitted by in the mist, shouting as he ran— 
“Steamer! Steamer! They can’t see. They whistle for the station. I 
go ring the bell. Go down to the landing, sir. I 
ring.” 
He disappeared. Kayerts stood still. He looked upwards; the fog 
rolled low over his head. He looked round like a man who has lost his 


An Outpost of 
Progress 
25 
way; and he saw a dark smudge, a cross-shaped stain, upon the 
shifting purity of the mist. As he began to stumble towards it, the 
station bell rang in a tumultuous peal its answer to the impatient 
clamour of the steamer. 
The Managing Director of the Great Civilising Company (since 
we know that civilisation follows trade) landed first, and incontin- 
ently lost sight of the steamer. The fog down by the river was exceed- 
ingly dense; above, at the station, the bell rang unceasing and brazen. 
The Director shouted loudly to the steamer. 
“There is nobody down to meet us; there may be something 
wrong, though they are ringing. You had better come, too!” 
And he began to toil up the steep bank. The captain and the 
engine-driver of the boat followed behind. As they scrambled up, the 
fog thinned, and they could see their Director a good way ahead. 
Suddenly they saw him start forward, calling to them over his 
shoulder:—“Run! Run to the house! ve found one of them. Run, 
look for the other!” 
He had found one of them! And even he, the man of varied and 
startling experience, was somewhat discomposed by the manner of 
this finding. He stood and fumbled in his pockets (for a knife) while 
he faced Kayerts, who was hanging by 
a 
leather strap from the cross. 
He had evidently climbed the grave, which was high and narrow, and 
after tying the end of the strap to the arm, had swung himself off. 
His toes were only a couple of inches above the ground; his arms 
hung stiffly down; he seemed to be standing rigidly at attention, but 
with one purple cheek playfully posed on the shoulder. And, irrever- 
ently, he was putting out a swollen tongue at his Managing Director. 


66 es 
mer Maga: 
» 
Saha oe 
@tir ee 
a a 
ae 
haat a8 
nett cule 
o ny 
ait 
ea aaa 
et eT ineibeant eee 
a 
+m 
2 
eee 
ran 
a 
ba | 
—: 
+ i+ 
2a 
i 
—. 
a 
a 
era 
a 
ee eee 
a 
ee 
ee eee 
excites bee 
em, cabo teticer 
ee ences) 
el ede 
Saree #cagpectt! 
Maes gah HO 
Les ree 
laos 
tee 
“ 
j 
a. 
Geiger Maser scaer tes beet cbs. otra?” 
Mg ieee: shea 
mine 
@¥ om Pateehdutinets woe 
waite 
ate 
Se ee ee 
© Dee dato dip’ 
” 
= 
© 
» 
jnpe=iee 
venue! Need! ared 
zzibeets 
oval 
peachy abaieell 
gp 
ai; 
ve) 
Yate 
2! 
oer tee > 
Gi 
lan) a wee 
hve Wellite:: 
owe <* 
att bownilat 
wire! yn; 
ren 
Sipe imeeyva& ne 
< Govertl! 
» eh cea Mane yal. dee 
eat are seca) weewndilad \ 
iret, weane ore Yeti Cpe 
eel 
1 
A corals nse tei. ve 
T 
Neiretie’? asl vohlin 
faves ome 
rpe.don 
119.8 Wits 
eh) 
Ach oceee Serf 
licwtals Te Gre dpe) tng SR 
rayne 
wh.«l peep e@ 
enti. @ 
Aaa eee corer 
gral 
LW Fidied « Wel otaeG) Goh 
0 
Witenes Renta hI 
RIT REPS 23% 
preter s of pgs fner tub 
rec 
emeee ah 
& 
Lage: 4/18 a heh 
send 
Ss 2 Meshal 
nyte ead DPleed 
al 
perkgay 
a id 00 Stic 
Ur 
al 
Ot Qeete 7) yd 
wile 
MY? Sa 
2 6 SAO 
Octet 4° 
Ape 
6 
le Sow 
Leal 
pu ia 
te! 
arertr peal A lamps weak itew 
ysa ves 
niger: 
a) gohwo, Ggehyeembiciqn 
a 
Bett bares P0164 
woglcret 
melas a. :80 
yertn] 
» 
2a? 
ite 
eee 
ean 
~ 
= 
- 
7 


KARAIN: 
A MEMORY 


— 
120i40N 
A ALARA 


KARAIN: 
A MEMORY 
WE knew him in those unprotected days when we were content to 
hold in our hands our lives and our property. None of us, I believe, 
has any property now, and I 
hear that many, negligently, have lost 
their lives; but I 
am sure that the few who survive are not yet so dim- 
eyed as to miss in the befogged respectability of their newspapers the 
intelligence of various native risings in the Eastern Archipelago. 
Sunshine gleams between the lines of those short paragraphs— 
sunshine and the glitter of the sea. A strange name wakes up memor- 
ies; the printed words scent the smoky atmosphere of today faintly, 
with the subtle and penetrating perfume as of land breezes breathing 
through the starlight of bygone nights; a signal fire gleams like a 
jewel on the high brow of a sombre cliff; great trees, the advanced 
sentries of immense forests, stand watchful and still over sleeping 
stretches of open water; a line of white surf thunders on an empty 
beach, the shallow water foams on the reefs; and green islets scat- 
tered through the calm of noonday lie upon the level of a polished 
sea, like a handful of emeralds on a buckler of steel. 
There are faces too—faces dark, truculent, and smiling; the frank 
audacious faces of men barefooted, well armed and noiseless. They 
thronged the narrow length of our schooner’s decks with their 
ornamented and barbarous crowd, with the variegated colours of 
checkered sarongs, red turbans, white jackets, embroideries; with the 
gleam of scabbards, gold rings, charms, armlets, lance blades, and 
jewelled handles of their weapons. They had an independent bear- 
ing, resolute eyes, a restrained manner; and we seem yet to hear their 
soft voices speaking of battles, travels, and escapes; boasting with 
composure, joking quietly; sometimes in well-bred murmurs extol- 
ling their own valour, our generosity; or celebrating with loyal 
enthusiasm the virtues of their ruler. We remember the faces, the 
eyes, the voices, we see again the gleam of silk and metal; the mur- 
muring stir of that crowd, brilliant, festive, and martial; and we seem 
to feel the touch of friendly brown hands that, after one short grasp, 
return to rest on a chased hilt. They were Karain’s people—a 


30 
Karain: 
A 
Memory 
devoted following. Their movements hung on his lips; they read 
their thoughts in his eyes; he murmured to them nonchalantly of life 
and death, and they accepted his words humbly, like gifts of fate. 
They were all free men, and when speaking to him said, “Your 
slave.” On his passage voices died out as though he had walked 
guarded by silence; awed whispers followed him. They called him 
their war-chief. He was the ruler of three villages on a narrow plain; 
the master of an insignificant foothold on the earth—of a conquered 
foothold that, shaped like a young moon, lay ignored between the 
hills and the sea. 
From the deck of our schooner, anchored in the middle of the bay, 
he indicated by a theatrical sweep of his arm along the jagged outline 
of the hills the whole of his domain; and the ample movement 
seemed to drive back its limits, augmenting it suddenly into some- 
thing so immense and vague that for a moment it appeared to be 
bounded only by the sky. And really, looking at that place, landlocked 
from the sea and shut off from the land by the precipitous slopes 
of mountains, it was difficult to believe in the existence of any neigh- 
bourhood. It was still, complete, unknown, and full of a life that 
went on stealthily with a troubling effect of solitude; of a life 
that seemed unaccountably empty of anything that would stir the 
thought, touch the heart, give a hint of the ominous sequence of 
days. It appeared to us a land without memories, regrets, and hopes; 
a land where nothing could survive the coming of the night, and 
where each sunrise, like a dazzling act of special creation, was 
disconnected from the eve and the morrow. 
Karain* swept his hand over it. “All mine!” He struck the deck 
with his long staff; the gold head flashed like a 
falling star; very close 
behind him a 
silent old fellow in a richly embroidered black jacket 
alone of all the Malays around did not follow the masterful gesture 
with a look. He did not even lift his eyelids. He bowed his head 
behind his master, and without stirring held hilt up over his right 
shoulder a long blade in a 
silver scabbard. He was there on duty, but 
without curiosity, and seemed weary, not with age, but with the 
possession of a burdensome secret of existence. Karain, heavy and 
proud, had a 
lofty pose and breathed calmly. It was our first visit, and 
we looked about curiously. 
The bay was like a bottomless pit of intense light. The circular 
sheet of water reflected a luminous sky, and the shores enclosing it 


Karain: 
A 
Memory 
31 
made an opaque ring of earth floating in an emptiness of transparent 
blue. The hills, purple and arid, stood out heavily on the sky: their 
summits seemed to fade into a coloured tremble as of ascending 
vapour; their steep sides were streaked with the green of narrow 
ravines; at their foot lay rice-fields, plantain-patches, yellow sands. A 
torrent wound about like a dropped thread. Clumps of fruit-trees 
marked the villages; slim palms put their nodding heads together 
above the low houses; dried palm-leaf roofs shone afar, like roofs of 
gold, behind the dark colonnades of tree-trunks; figures passed vivid 
and vanishing; the smoke of fires stood upright above the masses of 
flowering bushes; bamboo fences glittered, running away in broken 
lines between the fields. A 
sudden cry on the shore sounded plaintive 
in the distance, and ceased abruptly, as if stifled in the downpour of 
sunshine; a puff of breeze made a 
flash of darkness on the smooth 
water, touched our faces, and became forgotten. Nothing moved. 
The sun blazed down into a shadowless hollow of colours and 
stillness. 
It was the stage where, dressed splendidly for his part, he strutted, 
incomparably dignified, made important by the power he had to 
awaken an absurd expectation of something heroic going to take 
place—a burst of action or song—upon the vibrating tone of a won- 
derful sunshine. He was ornate and disturbing, for one could not 
imagine what depth of horrible void such an elaborate front could be 
worthy to hide. He was not masked—there was too much life in him, 
and a mask is only a lifeless thing; but he presented himself 
essentially as an actor, as a human being aggressively disguised. His 
smallest acts were prepared and unexpected, his speeches grave, his 
sentences ominous like hints and complicated like arabesques. He 
was treated with a solemn respect accorded in the irreverent West 
only to the monarchs of the stage, and he accepted the profound 
homage with a sustained dignity seen nowhere else but behind the 
footlights and in the condensed falseness of some grossly tragic situ- 
ation. It was almost impossible to remember who he was—only a 
petty chief of a conveniently isolated corner of Mindanao, where we 
could in comparative safety break the law against the traffic in fire- 
arms and ammunition with the natives. What would happen should 
one of the moribund Spanish gun-boats be suddenly galvanised into 
a flicker of active life did not trouble us, once we were inside the 
bay—so completely did it appear out of the reach of a meddling 


32 
Karain: 
A 
Memory 
world; and besides, in those days we were imaginative enough to look 
with a kind of joyous equanimity on any chance there was of being 
quietly hanged somewhere out of the way of diplomatic remon- 
strance. As to Karain, nothing could happen to him unless what 
happens to all—failure and death; but his quality was to appear 
clothed in the illusion of unavoidable success. He seemed too effect- 
ive, too necessary there, too much of an essential condition for the 
existence of 
his land and his people, to be destroyed by anything short 
of an earthquake. He summed up his race, his country, the elemental 
force of ardent life, of tropical nature. He had its luxuriant strength, 
its fascination; and, like it, he carried the seed of peril within. 
In many successive visits we came to know his stage well— 
the purple semicircle of hills, the slim trees leaning over houses, the 
yellow sands, the streaming green of ravines. All that had the crude 
and blended colouring, the appropriateness almost excessive, the 
suspicious immobility of a painted scene;* and it enclosed so perfectly 
the accomplished acting of his amazing pretences that the rest of the 
world seemed shut out for ever from the gorgeous spectacle. There 
could be nothing outside. It was as if 
the earth had gone on spinning, 
and had left that crumb of its surface alone in space. He appeared 
utterly cut off from everything but the sunshine, and that even 
seemed to be made for him alone. Once when asked what was on the 
other side of the hills, he said, with a meaning smile, “Friends and 
enemies—many enemies; else why should I 
buy your rifles and pow- 
der?” He was always like this—word-perfect in his part, playing up 
faithfully to the mysteries and certitudes of his surroundings. 
“Friends and enemies” —nothing 
else. It was impalpable and vast. 
The earth had indeed rolled away from under his land, and he, with 
his handful of people, stood surrounded by 
a silent tumult as of 
contending shades. Certainly no sound came from outside. “Friends 
and enemies!” He might have added, “and memories,” at least as far 
as he himself was concerned; but he neglected to make that point 
then. It made itself later on, though; but it was after the daily 
performance—in the wings, so to speak, and with the lights out. 
Meantime he filled the stage with barbarous dignity. Some ten years 
ago he had led his people—a scratch lot of wandering Bugis—to the 
conquest of the bay, and now in his august care they had forgotten all 
the past, and had lost all concern for the future. He gave them 
wisdom, advice, reward, punishment, life or death, with the same 


Karain: 
A 
Memory 
33 
serenity of attitude and voice. He understood irrigation and the art 
of war—the qualities of weapons and the craft of boat-building. He 
could conceal his heart; had more endurance; he could swim longer, 
and steer a canoe better than any of his people; he could shoot 
straighter, and negotiate more tortuously than any man of his race I 
knew. He was an adventurer of the sea, an outcast, a ruler—and my 
very good friend. I wish him a quick death in a stand-up fight, a 
death in sunshine; for he had known remorse and power, and no man 
can demand more from life. Day after day he appeared before us, 
incomparably faithful to the illusions of the stage, and at sunset the 
night descended upon him quickly, like a falling curtain. The seamed 
hills became black shadows towering high upon a clear sky; above 
them the glittering confusion of stars resembled a mad turmoil 
stilled by a gesture; sounds ceased, men slept, forms vanished—and 
the reality of the universe alone remained—a marvellous thing of 
darkness and glimmers. 


II 
BuT it was at night that he talked openly, forgetting the exactions of 
his stage. In the daytime there were affairs to be discussed in state. 
There were at first between him and me his own splendour, my 
shabby suspicions, and the scenic landscape that intruded upon the 
reality of our lives by its motionless fantasy of outline and colour. 
His followers thronged round him; above his head the broad blades 
of their spears made a 
spiked halo of iron points, and they hedged 
him from humanity by the shimmer of silks, the gleam of weapons, 
the excited and respectful hum of eager voices. Before sunset he 
would take leave with ceremony, and go off sitting under a red 
umbrella, and escorted by 
a 
score of boats. All the paddles flashed 
and struck together with a mighty splash that reverberated loudly in 
the monumental amphitheatre of hills. 
A broad stream of dazzling 
foam trailed behind the flotilla. The canoes appeared very black on 
the white hiss of water; turbaned heads swayed back and forth; a 
multitude of arms in crimson and yellow rose and fell with one 
movement; the spearmen upright in the bows of canoes had varie- 
gated sarongs and gleaming shoulders like bronze statues; the mut- 
tered strophes of the paddlers’ song ended periodically in a plaintive 
shout. They diminished in the distance; the song ceased; they 
swarmed on the beach in the long shadows of the western hills. The 
sunlight lingered on the purple crests, and we could see him leading 
the way to his stockade, a burly bareheaded figure walking far in 
advance of a straggling cortége, and swinging regularly an ebony staff 
taller than himself. The darkness deepened fast; torches gleamed 
fitfully, passing behind bushes; a long hail or two trailed in the 
silence of the evening; and at last the night stretched its smooth veil 
over the shore, the lights, and the voices. 
Then, just as we were thinking of repose, the watchmen of the 
schooner would hail a splash of paddles away in the starlit gloom of 
the bay; a voice would respond in cautious tones, and our serang, 
putting his head down the open skylight, would inform us without 
surprise, “That Rajah, he coming. He here now.” Karain appeared 
noiselessly in the doorway of the little cabin. He was simplicity itself 
then; all in white; muffled about his head; for arms only a kriss with a 


Karain: 
A 
Memory 
a5 
plain buffalo-horn handle, which he would politely conceal within 
a fold of his sarong before stepping over the threshold.* The old 
sword-bearer’s face, the worn-out and mournful face so covered with 
wrinkles that it seemed to look out through the meshes of a fine dark 
net, could be seen close above his shoulder. Karain never moved with- 
out that attendant, who stood or squatted close at his back. He had a 
dislike of an open space behind him. It was more than a 
dislike—it 
resembled fear, a nervous preoccupation of what went on where he 
could not see. This, in view of the evident and fierce loyalty that 
surrounded him, was inexplicable. He was there alone in the midst 
of devoted men; he was safe from neighbourly ambushes, from fra- 
ternal ambitions; and yet more than one of our visitors had assured 
us that their ruler could not bear to be alone. They said, “Even when 
he eats and sleeps there is always one on the watch near him who has 
strength and weapons.” There was indeed always one near him, 
though our informants had no conception of that watcher’s strength 
and weapons, which were both shadowy and terrible. We knew, but 
only later on, when we had heard the story. Meantime we noticed 
that, even during the most important interviews, Karain would often 
give a start, and interrupting his discourse, would sweep his arm 
back with a sudden movement, to feel whether the old fellow was 
there. The old fellow, impenetrable and weary, was always there. He 
shared his food, his repose, and his thoughts; he knew his plans, 
guarded his secrets; and, impassive behind his master’s agitation, 
without stirring the least bit, murmured above his head in a soothing 
tone some words difficult to catch. 
It was only on board the schooner, when surrounded by white 
faces, by unfamiliar sights and sounds, that Karain seemed to forget 
the strange obsession that wound like a black thread through the 
gorgeous pomp of his public life. At night we treated him in a 
free 
and easy manner, which just stopped short of slapping him on the 
back, for there are liberties one must not take with a Malay. He said 
himself that on such occasions he was only a private gentleman 
coming to see other gentlemen whom he supposed as well born as 
himself. I fancy that to the last he believed us to be emissaries of 
Government, darkly official persons furthering by our illegal traffic 
some dark scheme of high statecraft. Our denials and protestations 
were 
unavailing. He only smiled with discreet politeness and 
inquired about the Queen. Every visit began with that inquiry; he 


36 
Karain: A 
Memory 
was insatiable of details; he was fascinated by the holder of a sceptre 
the shadow of which, stretching from the westward over the earth 
and over the seas, passed far beyond his own hand’s-breadth of 
conquered land. He multiplied questions; he could never know 
enough of the Monarch of whom he spoke with wonder and chival- 
rous respect—with a kind of affectionate awe! Afterwards, when we 
had learned that he was the son of a woman who had many years ago 
ruled a small Bugis state, we came to suspect that the memory of his 
mother (of whom he spoke with enthusiasm) mingled somehow in 
his mind with the image he tried to form for himself of the far-off 
Queen whom he called Great, Invincible, Pious, and Fortunate. We 
had to invent details at last to satisfy his craving curiosity; and our 
loyalty must be pardoned, for we tried to make them fit for his august 
and resplendent ideal. We talked. The night slipped over us, over the 
still schooner, over the sleeping land, and over the sleepless sea that 
thundered amongst the reefs outside the bay. His paddlers, two 
trustworthy men, slept in the canoe at the foot of our side-ladder. 
The old confidant, relieved from duty, dozed on his heels, with his 
back against the companion-doorway; and Karain sat squarely in the 
ship’s wooden armchair, under the slight sway of the cabin lamp, a 
cheroot between his dark fingers, and a glass of lemonade before 
him. He was amused by the fizz of the thing, but-after a sip or two 
would let it get flat, and with a courteous wave of his hand ask for a 
fresh bottle. He decimated our slender stock; but we did not 
begrudge it to him, for, when he began, he talked well. He must have 
been a great Bugis dandy in his time, for even then (and when we 
knew him he was no longer young) his splendour was spotlessly neat, 
and he dyed his hair a light shade of brown. The quiet dignity of his 
bearing transformed the dim-lit cuddy of the schooner into an 
audience-hall. He talked of inter-island politics with an ironic and 
melancholy shrewdness. He had travelled much, suffered not a 
little, 
intrigued, fought. He knew native Courts, European Settlements, 
the forests, the sea, and, as he said himself, had spoken in his time to 
many great men. He liked to talk with me because I 
had known some 
of these men: he seemed to think that I could understand him, and, 
with a fine confidence, assumed that I, 
at least, could appreciate how 
much greater he was himself. But he preferred to talk of his native 
country 
—a small Bugis state on the island of Celebes. I 
had visited it 
some time before, and he asked eagerly for news. As men’s names 


Karain: 
A 
Memory 
39 
came up in conversation he would say, “We swam against one 
another when we were boys;” 
or, “We had hunted the deer 
together—he could use the noose and the spear as well as I.” Now 
and then his big dreamy eyes would roll restlessly; he frowned or 
smiled, or he would become pensive, and, staring in silence, would 
nod slightly for a time at some regretted vision of the past. 
His mother had been the ruler of a small semi-independent state 
on the sea-coast at the head of the Gulf of Boni.* He spoke of her 
with pride. She had been a woman resolute in affairs of state and of 
her own heart. After the death of her first husband, undismayed by 
the turbulent opposition of the chiefs, she married a 
rich trader, a 
Korinchi man of no family.* Karain was her son by that second mar- 
riage, but his unfortunate descent had apparently nothing to do with 
his exile. He said nothing as to its cause, though once he let slip with 
a sigh, “Ha! my land will not feel any more the weight of my body.” 
But he related willingly the story of his wanderings, and told us all 
about the conquest of the bay. Alluding to the people beyond the 
hills, he would murmur gently, with a careless wave of the hand, 
“They came over the hills once to fight us, but those who got away 
never came again.” He thought for a while, smiling to himself. “Very 
few got away,” he added, with proud serenity. He cherished the 
recollections of his successes; he had an exulting eagerness for 
endeavour; when he talked, his aspect was warlike, chivalrous, and 
uplifting. No wonder his people admired him. We saw him once 
walking in daylight amongst the houses of the settlement. At the 
doors of huts groups of women turned to look after him, warbling 
softly, and with gleaming eyes; armed men stood out of the way, 
submissive and erect; others approached from the side, bending their 
backs to address him humbly; an old woman stretched out a draped 
lean arm—“Blessings on thy head!” she cried from a dark doorway; a 
fiery-eyed man showed above the low fence of a plantain-patch a 
streaming face, a bare breast scarred in two places, and bellowed out 
pantingly after him, “God give victory to our master!” Karain 
walked fast, and with firm long strides; he answered greetings right 
and left by quick piercing glances. Children ran forward between 
the houses, peeped fearfully round corners; young boys kept up 
with him, gliding between bushes: their eyes gleamed through the 
dark leaves. The old sword-bearer, shouldering the silver scabbard, 
shuffled hastily at his heels with bowed head, and his eyes on the 


38 
Karain: 
A 
Memory 
ground. And in the midst of a great stir they passed swift and 
absorbed, like two men hurrying through a 
great solitude. 
In his council hall he was surrounded by the gravity of armed 
chiefs, while two long rows of old headmen dressed in cotton stuffs 
squatted on their heels, with idle arms hanging over their knees. 
Under the thatch roof supported by smooth columns, of which each 
one had cost the life of a straight-stemmed young palm, the scent of 
flowering hedges drifted in warm waves. The sun was sinking. In the 
open courtyard suppliants walked through the gate, raising, when 
yet far off, their joined hands above bowed heads, and bending low in 
the bright stream of sunlight. Young girls, with flowers in their laps, 
sat under the wide-spreading boughs of a big tree. The blue smoke 
of wood fires spread in a thin mist above the high-pitched roofs of 
houses that had glistening walls of woven reeds, and all round them 
rough wooden pillars under the sloping eaves. He dispensed justice 
in the shade; from a high seat he gave orders, advice, reproof. Now 
and then the hum of approbation rose louder, and idle spearmen that 
lounged listlessly against the posts, looking at the girls, would turn 
their heads slowly. To no man had been given the shelter of so much 
respect, confidence, and awe. Yet at times he would lean forward and 
appear to listen as for a far-off note of discord, as if 
expecting to hear 
some faint voice, the sound of light footsteps; or he would start half 
up in his seat, as though he had been familiarly touched on the 
shoulder. He glanced back with apprehension; his aged follower 
whispered inaudibly at his ear; the chiefs turned their eyes away in 
silence, for the old wizard, the man who could command ghosts and 
send evil spirits against enemies, was speaking low to their ruler. 
Around the short stillness of the open place the trees rustled faintly, 
the soft laughter of girls playing with the flowers rose in clear bursts 
of joyous sound. At the end of upright spear-shafts the long tufts of 
dyed horse-hair waved crimson and filmy in the gust of wind; and 
beyond the blaze of hedges the brook of limpid quick water ran 
invisible and loud under the drooping grass of the bank, with a great 
murmur, passionate and gentle. 
After sunset, far across the fields and over the bay, clusters of 
torches could be seen burning under the high roofs of the council 
shed. Smoky red flames swayed on high poles, and the fiery blaze 
flickered over faces, clung to the smooth trunks of palm-trees, 
kindled bright sparks on the rims of metal dishes standing on fine 


Karain: 
A 
Memory 
39 
floor-mats. That obscure adventurer feasted like a king. Small 
groups of men crouched in tight circles round the wooden platters; 
brown hands hovered over snowy heaps of rice. Sitting upon a rough 
couch apart from the others, he leaned on his elbow with inclined 
head; and near him a youth improvised in a high tone a song that 
celebrated his valour and wisdom. The singer rocked himself to and 
fro, rolling frenzied eyes; old women hobbled about with dishes, and 
men, squatting low, lifted their heads to listen gravely without ceas- 
ing to eat. The song of triumph vibrated in the night, and the stanzas 
rolled out mournful and fiery like the thoughts of a hermit. He 
silenced it with a sign, “Enough!” An owl hooted far away, exulting 
in the delight of deep gloom in dense foliage; overhead lizards ran in 
the attap thatch, calling softly; the dry leaves of the roof rustled; the 
rumour of mingled voices grew louder suddenly. After a circular and 
startled glance, as of a man waking up abruptly to the sense of 
danger, he would throw himself back, and under the downward gaze 
of the old sorcerer take up, wide-eyed, the slender thread of his 
dream. They watched his moods; the swelling rumour of animated 
talk subsided like a wave on a 
sloping beach. The chief is pensive. 
And above the spreading whisper of lowered voices only a 
light rattle 
of weapons would be heard, a single louder word distinct and alone, 
or the grave ring of a big brass tray. 


Ifl 
For two years at short intervals we visited him. We came to like 
him, to trust him, almost to admire him. He was plotting and prepar- 
ing a war with patience, with foresight—with a 
fidelity to his pur- 
pose and with a steadfastness of which I would have thought him 
racially incapable. He seemed fearless of the future, and in his plans 
displayed a sagacity that was only limited by his profound ignorance 
of the rest of the world. We tried to enlighten him, but our attempts 
to make clear the irresistible nature of the forces which he desired to 
arrest failed to discourage his eagerness to strike a blow for his own 
primitive ideas. He did not understand us, and replied by arguments 
that almost drove one to desperation by their childish shrewdness. 
He was absurd and unanswerable. Sometimes we caught glimpses of 
a sombre, glowing fury within him—a brooding and vague sense of 
wrong, and a concentrated lust of violence which is dangerous in a 
native. He raved like one inspired. On one occasion, after we had 
been talking to him late in his campong, he jumped up. A 
great, clear 
fire blazed in the grove; lights and shadows danced together between 
the trees; in the still night bats flitted in and out of the boughs like 
fluttering flakes of denser darkness. He snatched the sword from the 
old man, whizzed it out of the scabbard, and thrust the point into the 
earth. Upon the thin, upright blade the silver hilt, released, swayed 
before him like something alive. He stepped back a pace, and in a 
deadened tone spoke fiercely to the vibrating steel: “If there is virtue 
in the fire, in the iron, in the hand that forged thee, in the words 
spoken over thee, in the desire of my heart, and in the wisdom of thy 
makers,—then we shall be victorious together!” He drew it out, 
looked along the edge. “Take,” he said over his shoulder to the old 
sword-bearer. The other, unmoved on his hams, wiped the point 
with a corner of his sarong, and returning the weapon to its scab- 
bard, sat nursing it on his knees without a single look upwards. 
Karain, suddenly very calm, reseated himself with dignity. We gave 
up remonstrating after this, and let him go his way to an honourable 
disaster. All we could do for him was to see to it that the powder was 
good for the money and the rifles serviceable, if 
old. 
But the game was becoming at last too dangerous; and if we, who 


Karain: 
A 
Memory 
41 
had faced it pretty often, thought little of the danger, it was decided 
for us by some very respectable people sitting safely in counting- 
houses that the risks were too great, and that only one more trip 
could be made. After giving in the usual way. many misleading hints 
as to our destination, we slipped away quietly, and after a very quick 
passage entered the bay. It was early morning, and even before the 
anchor went to the bottom the schooner was surrounded by boats. 
The first thing we heard was that Karain’s mysterious sword- 
bearer had died a few days ago. We did not attach much importance 
to the news. It was certainly difficult to imagine Karain without his 
inseparable follower; but the fellow was old, he had never spoken to 
one of us, we hardly ever had heard the sound of his voice; and we 
had come to look upon him as upon something inanimate, as a part 
of our friend’s trappings of state—like that sword he had carried, or 
the fringed red umbrella displayed during an official progress. 
Karain did not visit us in the afternoon as usual. A message of 
greeting and a present of fruit and vegetables came off for us before 
sunset. Our friend paid us like a banker, but treated us like a prince. 
We sat up for him till midnight. Under the stern awning bearded 
Jackson jingled an old guitar and sang, with an execrable accent, 
Spanish love-songs; while young Hollis and I, 
sprawling on the deck, 
had a game of chess by the light of a cargo lantern. Karain did not 
appear. Next day we were busy unloading, and heard that the Rajah 
was unwell. The expected invitation to visit him ashore did not 
come. We sent friendly messages, but, fearing to intrude upon some 
secret council, remained on board. Early on the third day we had 
landed all the powder and rifles, and also a six-pounder brass gun 
with its carriage, which we had subscribed together for a present to 
our friend. The afternoon was sultry. Ragged edges of black clouds 
peeped over the hills, and invisible thunderstorms circled outside, 
growling like wild beasts. We got the schooner ready for sea, intend- 
ing to leave next morning at daylight. All day a merciless sun blazed 
down into the bay, fierce and pale, as if 
at white heat. Nothing moved 
on the land. The beach was empty, the villages seemed deserted; the 
trees far off stood in unstirring clumps, as if painted; the white 
smoke of some invisible bush-fire spread itself low over the shores of 
the bay like a settling fog. Late in the day three of Karain’s chief 
men, dressed in their best and armed to the teeth, came off in a 
canoe, bringing a case of dollars. They were gloomy and languid, and 


42 
Karain: 
A 
Memory 
told us they had not seen their Rajah for five days. No one had seen 
him! We settled all accounts, and after shaking hands in turn and in 
profound silence, they descended one after another into their boat, 
and were paddled to the shore, sitting close together, clad in vivid 
colours, with hanging heads: the gold embroideries of their jackets 
flashed dazzlingly as they went away gliding on the smooth water, 
and not one of them looked back once. Before sunset the growling 
clouds carried with a rush the ridge of hills, and came tumbling 
down the inner slopes. Everything disappeared; black whirling 
vapours filled the bay, and in the midst of them the schooner swung 
here and there in the shifting gusts of wind. A single clap of thunder 
detonated in the hollow with a violence that seemed capable of burst- 
ing into small pieces the ring of high land, and a warm deluge 
descended. The wind died out. We panted in the close cabin; our 
faces streamed; the bay outside hissed as if boiling; the water fell in 
perpendicular shafts as heavy as lead; it swished about the deck, 
poured off the spars, gurgled, sobbed, splashed, murmured in the 
blind night. Our lamp burned low. Hollis, stripped to the waist, lay 
stretched out on the lockers, with closed eyes and motionless like a 
despoiled corpse; at his head Jackson twanged the guitar, and gasped 
out in sighs a mournful dirge about hopeless love and eyes like stars. 
Then we heard startled voices on deck crying in-the rain, hurried 
footsteps overhead, and suddenly Karain appeared in the doorway of 
the cabin. His bare breast and his face glistened in the light; his 
sarong, soaked, clung about his legs; he had his sheathed kriss in his 
left hand; and wisps of wet hair, escaping from under his red ker- 
chief, stuck over his eyes and down his cheeks. He stepped in with a 
headlong stride and looking over his shoulder like a man pursued. 
Hollis turned on his side quickly and opened his eyes. Jackson 
clapped his big hand over the strings and the jingling vibration died 
suddenly. I stood up. 
“We did not hear your boat’s hail!” I 
exclaimed. 
“Boat! The man’s swum off,” drawled out Hollis from the locker. 
“Look at him!” 
He breathed heavily, wild-eyed, while we looked at him in silence. 
Water dripped from him, made a 
dark pool, and ran crookedly across 
the cabin floor. We could hear Jackson, who had gone out to drive 
away our Malay seamen from the doorway of the companion; he 
swore menacingly in the patter of a heavy shower, and there was a 


Karain: 
A 
Memory 
43 
great commotion on deck. The watchmen, scared out of their wits 
by the glimpse of a shadowy figure leaping over the rail, straight out 
of the night as it were, had alarmed all hands. 
Then Jackson, with glittering drops of -water on his hair and 
beard, came back looking angry, and Hollis, who, being the youngest 
of us, assumed an indolent superiority, said without stirring, “Give 
him a dry sarong—give him mine; it’s hanging up in the bathroom.” 
Karain laid the kriss on the table, hilt inwards, and murmured a few 
words in a strangled voice. 
“What’s that?” asked Hollis, who had not heard. 
“He apologises for coming in with a weapon in his hand,” I 
said, 
dazedly. 
“Ceremonious beggar. Tell him we forgive a friend .. 
. on such a 
night,” drawled out Hollis. “What’s wrong?” 
Karain slipped the dry sarong over his head, dropped the wet one 
at his feet, and stepped out of it. I 
pointed to the wooden armchair— 
his armchair. He sat down very straight, said “Ha!” in a strong voice; 
a short shiver shook his broad frame. He looked over his shoulder 
uneasily, turned as if 
to speak to us, but only stared in a curious blind 
manner, and again looked back. Jackson bellowed out, “Watch well 
on deck there!” heard a faint answer from above, and reaching out 
with his foot slammed-to the cabin door. 
“All right now,” he said. 
Karain’s lips moved slightly. A vivid flash of lightning made the 
two round sternports facing him glimmer like a pair of cruel and 
phosphorescent eyes. The flame of the lamp seemed to wither into 
brown dust for an instant, and the looking-glass over the little side- 
board leaped out behind his back in a smooth sheet of livid light. 
The roll of thunder came near, crashed over us; the schooner trem- 
bled, and the great voice went on, threatening terribly, into the dis- 
tance. For less than a minute a furious shower rattled on the decks. 
Karain looked slowly from face to face, and then the silence became 
so profound that we all could hear distinctly the two chronometers in 
my cabin ticking along with unflagging speed against one another. 
And we three, strangely moved, could not take our eyes from him. 
He had become enigmatical and touching, in virtue of that mysteri- 
ous cause that had driven him through the night and through the 
thunderstorm to the shelter of the schooner’s cuddy. Not one of us 
doubted that we were looking at a fugitive, incredible as it appeared 


44 
Karain: A 
Memory 
to us. He was haggard, as though he had not slept for weeks; he had 
become lean, as though he had not eaten for days. His cheeks were 
hollow, his eyes sunk, the muscles of his chest and arms twitched 
slightly as if after an exhausting contest. Of course, it had been a 
long swim off to the schooner; but his face showed another kind 
of fatigue, the tormented weariness, the anger and the fear of a 
struggle against a thought, an idea—against something that cannot 
be grappled, that never rests—a shadow, a nothing, unconquerable 
and immortal, that preys upon life. We knew it as though he had 
shouted it at us. His chest expanded time after time, as if 
it could not 
contain the beating of his heart. For a moment he had the power of 
the possessed—the power to awaken in the beholders wonder, pain, 
pity, and a fearful near sense of things invisible, of things dark and 
mute, that surround the loneliness of mankind. His eyes roamed 
about aimlessly for a 
moment, then became still. He said with effort— 
“TI came here. . 
. | 
leaped out of my stockade as after a defeat. I 
ran 
in the night. The water was black. I left him calling on the edge of 
black water . 
. 
. 
[left him standing alone on the beach. I 
swam. 
. 
. he 
called out after me...I swam...” 
He trembled from head to foot, sitting very upright and gazing 
straight before him. Left whom? Who called? We did not know. We 
could not understand. I 
said at all hazards— 
“Be firm.” 
The sound of my voice seemed to steady him into a sudden 
rigidity, but otherwise he took no notice. He seemed to listen, to 
expect something for a moment, then went on— 
“He cannot come here—therefore I sought you. You men with 
white faces who despise the invisible voices. He cannot abide your 
unbelief and your strength.” 
He was silent for a while, then exclaimed softly 
— 
“Oh! the strength of unbelievers!” 
“There’s no one here but you—and we three,” said Hollis, quietly. 
He reclined with his head supported on elbow and did not budge. 
“I know,” said Karain. “He has never followed me here. Was not 
the wise man ever by my side? But since the old wise man, who knew 
of my trouble, has died, I have heard the voice every night. I shut 
myself up—for many days—in the dark. I can hear the sorrowful 
murmurs of women, the whisper of the wind, of the running waters; 
the clash of weapons in the hands of faithful men, their footsteps— 
‘ 


Karain: 
A 
Memory 
45 
and his voice! ... Near ... So! In my ear! I felt him near .. 
. His 
breath passed over my neck. I 
leaped out without a cry. All about me 
men slept quietly. I ran to the sea. He ran by my side without foot- 
steps, whispering, whispering old words—whispering into my ear in 
his old voice. I ran into the sea; I swam off to you, with my kriss 
between my teeth. I, 
armed, I 
fled before a breath—to you. Take me 
away to your land. The wise old man has died, and with him is gone 
the power of his words and charms. And I 
can tell no one. No one. 
There is no one here faithful enough and wise enough to know. It is 
only near you, unbelievers, that my trouble fades like a mist under 
the eye of day.” 
He turned to me. 
“With you I go!” he cried in a contained voice. “With you, who 
know so many of us. I want to leave this land—my people . 
. 
. and 
him—there!” 
He pointed a shaking finger at random over his shoulder. It was 
hard for us to bear the intensity of that undisclosed distress. Hollis 
stared at him hard. I 
asked gently 
— 
“Where is the danger?” 
“Everywhere outside this place,” he answered, mournfully. “In 
every place where I am. He waits for me on the paths, under the 
trees, in the place where I sleep—everywhere but here.” 
He looked round the little cabin, at the painted beams, at the 
tarnished varnish of bulkheads; he looked round as if 
appealing to all 
its shabby strangeness, to the disorderly jumble of unfamiliar things 
that belong to an inconceivable life of stress, of power, of endeavour, 
of unbelief—to the strong life of white men, which rolls on irresist- 
ible and hard on the edge of outer darkness. He stretched out his 
arms as if to embrace it and us. We waited. The wind and rain had 
ceased, and the stillness of the night round the schooner was as 
dumb and complete as if 
a dead world had been laid to rest in a grave 
of clouds. We expected him to speak. The necessity within him tore 
at his lips. There are those who say that a native will not speak to a 
white man. Error. No man will speak to his master; but to a wanderer 
and a 
friend, to him who does not come to teach or to rule, to him 
who asks for nothing and accepts all things, words are spoken by the 
camp-fires, in the shared solitude of the sea, in riverside villages, in 
resting-places surrounded by forests—words are spoken that take no 
account of race or colour. One heart speaks—another one listens; 


46 
Karain: 
A 
Memory 
and the earth, the sea, the sky, the passing wind and the stirring leaf, 
hear also the futile tale of the burden of life. 
He spoke at last. It is impossible to convey the effect of his story. It 
is undying, it is but a memory, and its vividness cannot be made clear 
to another mind any more than the vivid emotions of a dream. One 
must have seen his innate splendour, one must have known him 
before—looked at him then. The wavering gloom of the little cabin; 
the breathless stillness outside, through which only the lapping of 
water against the schooner’s sides could be heard; Hollis’s pale face, 
with steady dark eyes; the energetic head of 
Jackson held up between 
two big palms, and with the long yellow hair of his beard flowing 
over the strings of the guitar lying on the table; Karain’s upright and 
motionless pose, his tone—all this made an impression that cannot 
be forgotten. He faced us across the table. His dark head and bronze 
torso appeared above the tarnished slab of wood, gleaming and still 
as if cast in metal. Only his lips moved, and his eyes glowed, went 
out, blazed again, or stared mournfully. His expressions came 
straight from his tormented heart. His words sounded low, in a sad 
murmur as of running water; at times they rang loud like the clash 
of a war-gong—or trailed slowly like weary travellers—or rushed 
forward with the speed of fear. 


IV 
THIS is, imperfectly, what he said— 
“It was after the great trouble that broke the alliance of the four 
states of 
Wajo.* We fought amongst ourselves, and the Dutch watched 
from afar till we were weary. Then the smoke of their fire-ships was 
seen at the mouth of our rivers, and their great men came in boats 
full of soldiers to talk to us of protection and peace. We answered 
with caution and wisdom, for our villages were burnt, our stockades 
weak, the people weary, and the weapons blunt. They came and 
went; there had been much talk, but after they went away everything 
seemed to be as before, only their ships remained in sight from our 
coast, and very soon their traders came amongst us under a promise 
of safety. My brother was a Ruler, and one of those who had given 
the promise. I was young then, and had fought in the war, and Pata 
Matara* had fought by my side. We had shared hunger, danger, 
fatigue, and victory. His eyes saw my danger quickly, and twice my 
arm had preserved his life. It was his destiny. He was my friend. And 
he was great amongst us—one of those who were near my brother, 
the Ruler. He spoke in council, his courage was great, he was the 
chief of many villages round the great lake that is in the middle of 
our country as the heart is in the middle of a man’s body. When his 
sword was carried into a campong in advance of his coming, the 
maidens whispered wonderingly under the fruit-trees, the rich men 
consulted together in the shade, and a feast was made ready with 
rejoicing and songs. He had the favour of the Ruler and the affection 
of the poor. He loved war, deer hunts, and the charms of women. He 
was the possessor of jewels, of lucky weapons, and of men’s 
devotion. He was a 
fierce man; and J 
had no other friend. 
“I was the chief of a stockade at the mouth of the river, and 
collected tolls for my brother from the passing boats. One day I 
saw a 
Dutch trader go up the river. He went up with three boats, and no 
toll was demanded from him, because the smoke of Dutch warships 
stood out from the open sea, and we were too weak to forget treaties. 
He went up under the promise of safety, and my brother gave him 
protection. He said he came to trade. He listened to our voices, for 
we are men who speak openly and without fear; he counted the 


48 
Karain: A 
Memory 
number of our spears, he examined the trees, the running waters, the 
grasses of the bank, the slopes of our hills. He went up to Matara’s 
country and obtained permission to build a house. He traded and 
planted. He despised our joys, our thoughts, and our sorrows. His 
face was red, his hair like flame, and his eyes pale, like a river mist; he 
moved heavily, and spoke with a deep voice; he laughed aloud like a 
fool, and knew no courtesy in his speech. He was a big, scornful man, 
who looked into women’s faces and put his hand on the shoulders of 
free men as though he had been a noble-born chief. We bore with 
him. Time passed. 
“Then Pata Matara’s sister fled from the campong and went to 
live in the Dutchman’s house. She was a great and wilful lady: I 
had 
seen her once carried high on slaves’ shoulders amongst the people, 
with uncovered face, and I 
had heard all men say that her beauty was 
extreme, 
silencing the reason and ravishing the heart of the 
beholders. The people were dismayed; Matara’s face was blackened 
with that disgrace, for she knew she had been promised to another 
man. Matara went to the Dutchman’s house, and said, ‘Give her up 
to die—she is the daughter of chiefs.’ The white man refused, and 
shut himself up, while his servants kept guard night and day with 
loaded guns. Matara raged. My brother called a council. But the 
Dutch ships were near, and watched our coast greedily. My brother 
said, ‘If he dies now our land will pay for his blood. Leave him alone 
till we grow stronger and the ships are gone.’ Matara was wise; he 
waited and watched. But the white man feared for her life and went 
away. 
“He left his house, his plantations, and his goods! He departed, 
armed and menacing, and left all—for her! She had ravished his 
heart! From my stockade I saw him put out to sea in a 
big boat. 
Matara and I watched him from the fighting platform behind the 
pointed stakes. He sat cross-legged, with his gun in his hands, on the 
roof at the stern of his prau. The barrel of his rifle glinted aslant 
before his big red face. The broad river was stretched under him— 
level, smooth, shining, like a plain of silver; and his prau, looking 
very short and black from the shore, glided along the silver plain and 
over into the blue of the sea. 
“Thrice Matara, standing by my side, called aloud her name with 
grief and imprecations. He stirred my heart. It leaped three times; 
and three times with the eye of my mind I saw in the gloom within 


Karain: 
A 
Memory 
49 
the enclosed space of the prau a woman with streaming hair going 
away from her land and her people. I was angry—and sorry. Why? 
And then I 
also cried out insults and threats. Matara said, ‘Now they 
have left our land their lives are mine. I 
shall follow and strike—and, 
alone, pay the price of blood.’ A great wind was sweeping towards 
the setting sun over the empty river. I 
cried, ‘By your side I 
will go!’ 
He lowered his head in sign of assent. It was his destiny. The sun had 
set, and the trees swayed their boughs with a great noise above our 
heads. 
“On the third night we two left our land together in a trading 
prau. 
“The sea met us—the sea, wide, pathless, and without voice. A 
sailing prau leaves no track. We went south. The moon was full; and, 
looking up, we said to one another, ‘When the next moon shines as 
this one, we shall return and they will be dead.’ It was fifteen years 
ago. Many moons have grown full and withered, and I have not seen 
my land since. We sailed south; we overtook many praus; we exam- 
ined the creeks and the bays; we saw the end of our coast, of our 
island—a steep cape over a 
disturbed strait, where drift the shadows 
of shipwrecked praus and drowned men clamour in the night. The 
wide sea was all round us now. We saw a great mountain burning in 
the midst of water;* we saw thousands of islets scattered like bits of 
iron fired from a big gun; we saw a long coast of mountain and 
lowlands stretching away in sunshine from west to east. It was Java. 
We said, ‘They are there; their time is near, and we shall return or 
die cleansed from dishonour.’ 
“We landed. Is there anything good in that country? The paths 
run straight and hard and dusty. Stone campongs, full of white faces, 
are surrounded by fertile fields, but every man you meet is a 
slave. 
The rulers live under the edge of a foreign sword.* We ascended 
mountains, we traversed valleys; at sunset we entered villages. We 
asked every one, ‘Have you seen such a white man?’ Some stared; 
others laughed; women gave us food, sometimes, with fear and 
respect, as though we had been distracted by the visitation of God; 
but some did not understand our language, and some cursed us, or, 
yawning, asked with contempt the reason of our quest. Once, as we 
were going away, an old man called after us, “Desist!” 
“We went on. Concealing our weapons, we stood humbly aside 
before the horsemen on the road; we bowed low in the courtyards of 


50 
Karain: A 
Memory 
chiefs who were no better than slaves. We lost ourselves in the fields, 
in the jungle; and one night, in a tangled forest, we came upon a 
place where crumbling old walls had fallen amongst the trees, and 
where strange stone idols—carved images of devils with many arms 
and legs, with snakes twined round their bodies, with twenty heads 
and holding a hundred swords—seemed to live and threaten in the 
light of our camp-fire. Nothing dismayed us. And on the road, by 
every fire, in resting-places, we always talked of her and of him. 
Their time was near. We spoke of nothing else. No! not of hunger, 
thirst, weariness, and faltering hearts. No! we spoke of him and her! 
Of her! And we thought of them—of her! Matara brooded by the 
fire. I 
sat and thought and thought, till suddenly I 
could see again the 
image of a woman, beautiful, and young, and great, and proud, and 
tender, going away from her land and her people. Matara said, 
‘When we find them we shall kill her first to cleanse the dishonour 
— 
then the man must die.’ I would say, ‘It shall be so; it is your 
vengeance.’ He stared long at me with his big sunken eyes. 
“We came back to the coast. Our feet were bleeding, our bodies 
thin. We slept in rags under the shadow of stone enclosures; we 
prowled, soiled and lean, about the gateways of white men’s court- 
yards. Their hairy dogs barked at us, and their servants shouted from 
afar, ‘Begone!’ Low-born wretches, that keep watch over the streets 
of stone campongs, asked us who we were. We lied, we cringed, we 
smiled with hate in our hearts, and we kept looking here, looking 
there, for them—for the white man with hair like flame, and for her, 
for the woman who had broken faith, and therefore must die. We 
looked. At last in every woman’s face I thought I could see hers. We 
ran swiftly. No! Sometimes Matara would whisper, ‘Here is the 
man,’ and we waited, crouching. He came near. It was not the man— 
those Dutchmen are all alike. We suffered the anguish of deception. 
In my sleep I saw her face, and was both joyful and sorry. ... 
Why? . 
. 
. I 
seemed to hear a whisper near me. I turned swiftly. She 
was not there! And as we trudged wearily from stone city to stone 
city I seemed to hear a 
light footstep near me. A time came when I 
heard it always, and I was glad. I thought, walking dizzy and weary 
in sunshine on the hard paths of white men—I thought, She is 
there—with us! . 
. 
. Matara was sombre. We were often hungry. 
“We sold the carved sheaths of our krisses—the ivory sheaths with 
golden ferules. We sold the jewelled hilts. But we kept the blades— 


Karain: 
A 
Memory 
51 
for them. The blades that never touch but kill—we kept the blades 
for her ... Why? She was always by our side ... We starved. We 
begged. We left Java at last. 
“We went West, we went East. We saw many lands, crowds of 
strange faces, men that live in trees and men who eat their old 
people. We cut rattans in the forest for a handful of rice, and for a 
living swept the decks of big ships and heard curses heaped upon our 
heads. We toiled in villages; we wandered upon the seas with the 
Bajow people, who have no country.* We fought for pay; we hired 
ourselves to work for Goram men, and were cheated; and under the 
orders of rough white-faces we dived for pearls in barren bays, 
dotted with black rocks, upon a coast of sand and desolation. And 
everywhere we watched, we listened, we asked. We asked traders, 
robbers, white men. We heard jeers, mockery, threats—words of 
wonder and words of contempt. We never knew rest; we never 
thought of home, for our work was not done. A year passed, then 
another. I 
ceased to count the number of nights, of moons, of years. I 
watched over Matara. He had my last handful of rice; if there was 
water enough for one he drank it; I 
covered him up when he shivered 
with cold; and when the hot sickness came upon him I 
sat sleepless 
through many nights and fanned his face. He was a 
fierce man, and 
my friend. He spoke of her with fury in the daytime, with sorrow in 
the dark; he remembered her in health, in sickness. I said nothing; 
but I 
saw her every day—always! At first I 
saw only her head, as of a 
woman walking in the low mist on a 
river bank. Then she sat by our 
fire. I 
saw her! I looked at her! She had tender eyes and a ravishing 
face. I 
murmured to her in the night. Matara said sleepily some- 
times, ‘To whom are you talking? Who is there?’ I 
answered quickly, 
‘No one’. . 
. It was a lie! She never left me. She shared the warmth 
of our fire, she sat on my couch of leaves, she swam on the sea to 
follow me...I saw her! . 
. 
. I 
tell you I 
saw her long black hair spread 
behind her upon the moonlit water as she struck out with bare arms 
by the side of 
a swift prau. She was beautiful, she was faithful, and in 
the silence of foreign countries she spoke to me very low in the 
language of my people. No one saw her; no one heard her; she was 
mine only! In daylight she moved with a swaying walk before me 
upon the weary paths; her figure was straight and flexible like the 
stem of a slender tree; the heels of her feet were round and polished 
like shells of eggs; with her round arm she made signs. At night she 


52 
Karain: A 
Memory 
looked into my face. And she was sad! Her eyes were tender and 
frightened; her voice soft and pleading. Once I murmured to her, 
‘You shall not die,’ and she smiled 
. 
. 
. ever after she smiled! 
. 
. 
. She 
gave me courage to bear weariness and hardships. Those were times 
of pain, and she soothed me. We wandered patient in our search. We 
knew deception, false hopes; we knew captivity, sickness, thirst, 
misery, despair. .. 
. Enough! We found them! 
. 
. .” 
He cried out the last words and paused. His face was impassive, 
and he kept still like a man in a 
trance. Hollis sat up quickly, and 
spread his elbows on the table. Jackson made a brusque movement, 
and accidentally touched the guitar. A plaintive resonance filled the 
cabin with confused vibrations and died out slowly. Then Karain 
began to speak again. The restrained fierceness of his tone seemed to 
rise like a voice from outside, like a thing unspoken but heard; it 
filled the cabin and enveloped in its intense and deadened murmur 
the motionless figure in the chair. 
““We were on our way to Atjeh, where there was war;* but the vessel 
ran on a sandbank, and we had to land in Delli. We had earned a 
little 
money, and had bought a gun from some Selangore traders; only 
one gun, which was fired by the spark of a stone: Matara carried it. 
We landed. Many white men lived there, planting tobacco on con- 
quered plains, and Matara 
. 
. 
. But no matter. He saw him! . 
. 
. The 
Dutchman! .. 
. At last! 
... We crept and watched. Two nights and a 
day we watched. He had a house—a big house in a 
clearing in the 
midst of his fields; flowers and bushes grew around; there were 
narrow paths of yellow earth between the cut grass, and thick hedges 
to keep people out. The third night we came armed, and lay behind a 
hedge. 
“A heavy dew seemed to soak through our flesh and made our very 
entrails cold. The grass, the twigs, the leaves, covered with drops of 
water, were grey in the moonlight. Matara, curled up in the grass, 
shivered in his sleep. My teeth rattled in my head so loud that I was 
afraid the noise would wake up all the land. Afar, the watchmen of 
white men’s houses struck wooden clappers and hooted in the 
darkness. And, as every night, I saw her by my side. She smiled no 
more! ... The fire of anguish burned in my breast, and she whis- 
pered to me with compassion, with pity, softly—as women will; she 
soothed the pain of my mind; she bent her face over me—the face of 
a woman who ravishes the hearts and silences the reason of men. She 


Karain: A 
Memory 
53 
was all mine, and no one could see her—no one of living mankind! 
Stars shone through her bosom, through her floating hair. I was 
overcome with regret, with tenderness, with sorrow. Matara slept 
. 
.- Had I 
slept? Matara was shaking me by the shoulder, and the fire 
of the sun was drying the grass, the bushes, the leaves. It was day. 
Shreds of white mist hung between the branches of trees. 
“Was it night or day? I saw nothing again till I heard Matara 
breathe quickly where he lay, and then outside the house I 
saw her. I 
saw them both. They had come out. She sat on a bench under the 
wall, and twigs laden with flowers crept high above her head, hung 
over her hair. She had a box on her lap, and gazed into it, counting 
the increase of her pearls. The Dutchman stood by looking on; he 
smiled down at her; his white teeth flashed; the hair on his lip was 
like two twisted flames. He was big and fat, and joyous, and without 
fear. Matara tipped fresh priming from the hollow of his palm, 
scraped the flint with his thumb-nail,* and gave the gun to me. To 
me! I took it . 
. 
. O fate! 
“He whispered into my ear, lying on his stomach, ‘I shall creep 
close and then amok . 
. 
. let her die by my hand. You take aim at the 
fat swine there. Let him see me strike my shame off the face of the 
earth—and then . 
. 
. you are my friend—kill with a sure shot.’ I 
said 
nothing; there was no air in my chest—there was no air in the world. 
Matara had gone suddenly from my side. The grass nodded. Then a 
bush rustled. She lifted her head. 
“IT saw her! The consoler of sleepless nights, of weary days; the 
companion of troubled years! I saw her! She looked straight at the 
place where I 
crouched. She was there as I 
had seen her for years—a 
faithful wanderer by my side. She looked with sad eyes and had 
smiling lips; she looked at me . 
. 
. Smiling lips! Had I not promised 
that she should not die? 
“She was far off and I felt her near. Her touch caressed me, and 
her voice murmured, whispered above me, around me, ‘Who shall be 
thy companion, who shall console thee if I die?’ I saw a flowering 
thicket to the left of her stir a little 
.. 
. Matara was ready .. 
. I 
cried 
aloud—‘Return!’ 
“She leaped up; the box fell; the pearls streamed at her feet. The 
big Dutchman by her side rolled menacing eyes through the still 
sunshine. The gun went up to my shoulder. I 
was kneeling and I 
was 
firm—firmer than the trees, the rocks, the mountains. But in front of 


54 
Karain: A 
Memory 
the steady long barrel the fields, the house, the earth, the sky 
swayed to and fro like shadows in a forest on a windy day. Matara 
burst out of the thicket; before him the petals of torn flowers 
whirled high as if driven by a tempest. I heard her cry; I saw her 
spring with open arms in front of the white man. She was a woman 
of my country and of noble blood. They are so! I heard her shriek 
of anguish and fear—and all stood still! The fields, the house, the 
earth, the sky stood still—while Matara leaped at her with uplifted 
arm. I pulled the trigger, saw a spark, heard nothing; the smoke 
drove back into my face, and then I could see Matara roll over head 
first and lie with stretched arms at her feet. Ha! A sure shot! The 
sunshine fell on my back colder than the running water. A sure 
shot! I flung the gun after the shot. Those two stood over the dead 
man as though they had been bewitched by a charm. I shouted at 
her, ‘Live and remember!’ Then for a time I stumbled about in a 
cold darkness. 
“Behind me there were great shouts, the running of many feet; 
strange men surrounded me, cried meaningless words into my face, 
pushed me, dragged me, supported me .. 
. I stood before the big 
Dutchman: he stared as if bereft of his reason. He wanted to know, 
he talked fast, he spoke of gratitude, he offered me food, shelter, 
gold—he asked many questions. I laughed in his face. I said, ‘I am a 
Korinchi traveller from Perak over there, and know nothing of that 
dead man. I 
was passing along the path when I 
heard a shot, and your 
senseless people rushed out and dragged me here.’ He lifted his 
arms, he wondered, he could not believe, he could not understand, 
he clamoured in his own tongue! She had her arms clasped round his 
neck, and over her shoulder stared back at me with wide eyes. I 
smiled and looked at her; I smiled and waited to hear the sound of 
her voice. The white man asked her suddenly, ‘Do you know him?’ I 
listened —my life was in my ears! She looked at me long, she looked 
at me with unflinching eyes, and said aloud, ‘No! I never saw him 
before.’ ... What! Never before? Had she forgotten already? Was it 
possible? Forgotten already—after so many years—so many years of 
wandering, of companionship, of trouble, of tender words! Forgotten 
already! . 
. 
. I 
tore myself out from the hands that held me and went 
away without a word . 
. 
. They let me go. 
“I was weary. Did I sleep? I do not know. I remember walking 
upon a broad path under a 
clear starlight; and that strange country 


Karain: 
A 
Memory 
55 
seemed so big, the rice-fields so vast, that, as I looked around, my 
head swam with the fear of space. Then I saw a 
forest. The joyous 
starlight was heavy upon me. I turned off the path and entered the 
forest, which was very sombre and very sad.” 


Vv 
KARAIN’S tone had been getting lower and lower, as though he had 
been going away from us, till the last words sounded faint but clear, 
as if shouted on a calm day from a very great distance. He moved 
not. He stared fixedly past the motionless head of Hollis, who faced 
him, as still as himself. Jackson had turned sideways, and with elbow 
on the table shaded his eyes with the palm of his hand. And I 
looked 
on, surprised and moved; I looked at that man, loyal to a vision, 
betrayed by his dream, spurned by his illusion, and coming to us 
unbelievers for help—against a thought. The silence was profound; 
but it seemed 
full of noiseless phantoms, of things sorrowful, 
shadowy, and mute, in whose invisible presence the firm, pulsating 
beat of the two ship’s chronometers ticking off steadily the seconds 
of Greenwich Time seemed to me a 
protection and a 
relief. Karain 
stared stonily; and looking at his rigid figure, I thought of his wan- 
derings, of that obscure Odyssey of revenge, of all the men that 
wander amongst illusions; of the illusions as restless as men; of the 
illusions faithful, faithless; of the illusions that give joy, that give 
sorrow, that give pain, that give peace; of the invincible illusions that 
can make life and death appear serene, inspiring, tormented, or 
ignoble. 
A murmur was heard; that voice from outside seemed to flow out 
of a dreaming world into the lamplight of the cabin. Karain was 
speaking. 
“T lived in the forest. 
“She came no more. Never! Never once! I lived alone. She had 
forgotten. It was well. I 
did not want her; I 
wanted no one. I 
found an 
abandoned house in an old clearing. Nobody came near. Sometimes I 
heard in the distance the voices of people going along a 
path. I 
slept; 
I rested; there was wild rice, water from a running stream—and 
peace! Every night I 
sat alone by my small fire before the hut. Many 
nights passed over my head. 
“Then, one evening, as I sat by my fire after having eaten, I 
looked down on the ground and began to remember my wanderings. 
I lifted my head. I had heard no sound, no rustle, no footsteps— 
but I 
lifted my head. A man was coming towards me across the small 


Karain: 
A 
Memory 
RY 
clearing. I 
waited. He came up without a greeting and squatted down 
into the firelight. Then he turned his face to me. It was Matara. He 
stared at me fiercely with his big sunken eyes. The night was cold; 
the heat died suddenly out of the fire, and he stared at me. I 
rose and 
went away from there, leaving him by the fire that had no heat. 
“T walked all that night, all next day, and in the evening made up a 
big blaze and sat down—to wait for him. He did not come into the 
light. I 
heard him in the bushes here and there, whispering, whisper- 
ing. I 
understood at last—I had heard the words before, ‘You are my 
friend—kill with a sure shot.’ 
“IT bore it as long as I could—then leaped away, as on this very 
night I leaped from my stockade and swam to you. I ran—I ran 
crying like a child left alone and far from the houses. He ran by my 
side, without 
footsteps, 
whispering, 
whispering—invisible 
and 
heard. I 
sought people—I wanted men around me! Men who had not 
died! And again we two wandered. I sought danger, violence, and 
death. I fought in the Atjeh war, and a brave people wondered at the 
valiance of a stranger. But we were two; he warded off the blows .. 
. 
Why? I wanted peace, not life. And no one could see him; no one 
knew—I dared tell no one. At times he would leave me, but not for 
long; then he would return and whisper or stare. My heart was torn 
with a strange fear, but could not die. Then I 
met an old man. 
“You all knew him. People here called him my sorcerer, my ser- 
vant and sword-bearer; but to me he was father, mother, protection, 
refuge, and peace. When I 
met him he was returning from a 
pilgrim- 
age, and I heard him intoning the prayer of sunset. He had gone to 
the holy place with his son, his son’s wife, and a 
little child; and on 
their return, by the favour of the Most High, they all died: the strong 
man, the young mother, the little child—they died; and the old man 
reached his country alone. He was a 
pilgrim serene and pious, very 
wise and very lonely. I 
told him all. For a time we lived together. He 
said over me words of compassion, of wisdom, of prayer. He warded 
from me the shade of the dead. I 
begged him for a charm that would 
make me safe. For a long time he refused; but at last, with a sigh and 
a smile, he gave me one. Doubtless he could command a spirit 
stronger than the unrest of my dead friend, and again I had peace; 
but I 
had become restless, and a 
lover of turmoil and danger. The old 
man never left me. We travelled together. We were welcomed by the 
great; his wisdom and my courage are remembered where your 


58 
Karain: 
A 
Memory 
strength, O white men, is forgotten! We served the Sultan of Sulu. 
We fought the Spaniards.* There were victories, hopes, defeats, sor- 
row, blood, women’s tears ... What for? .. 
. We fled. We collected 
wanderers of a warlike race and came here to fight again. The rest 
you know. I am the ruler of a conquered land, a lover of war and 
danger, a fighter and a 
plotter. But the old man has died, and I am 
again the slave of the dead. He is not here now to drive away the 
reproachful shade—to silence the lifeless voice! The power of his 
charm has died with him. And I know fear; and I hear the whisper, 
“Kall! kill! kill? . 
. 
. Have I 
not killed enough? . 
. .” 
For the first time that night a sudden convulsion of madness and 
rage passed over his face. His wavering glances darted here and there 
like scared birds in a thunderstorm. He jumped up, shouting 
— 
“By the spirits that drink blood: by the spirits that cry in the 
night: by all the spirits of fury, misfortune, and death, I 
swear—some 
day I 
will strike into every heart I 
meet—I.. 
.” 
He looked so dangerous that we all three leaped to our feet, and 
Hollis, with the back of his hand, sent the kriss flying off the table. I 
believe we shouted together. It was a short scare, and the next 
moment he was again composed in his chair, with three white men 
standing over him in rather foolish attitudes. We felt a little ashamed 
of ourselves. Jackson picked up the kriss, and, after an inquiring 
glance at me, gave it to him. He received it with a 
stately inclination 
of the head and stuck it in the twist of his sarong, with punctilious 
care to give his weapon a 
pacific position. Then he looked up at us 
with an austere smile. We were abashed and reproved. Hollis sat 
sideways on the table and, holding his chin in his hand, scrutinised 
him in pensive silence. I 
said— 
“You must abide with your people. They need you. And there is 
forgetfulness in life. Even the dead cease to speak in time.” 
“Am I 
a woman, to forget long years before an eyelid has had the 
time to beat twice?” he exclaimed, with bitter resentment. He star- 
tled me. It was amazing. To him his life—that cruel mirage of love 
and peace—seemied as real, as undeniable, as theirs would be to any 
saint, philosopher, or fool of us all. Hollis muttered 
— 
“You won’t soothe him with your platitudes.” 
Karain spoke to me. 
“You know us. You have lived with us. Why?—we cannot know; 
but you understand our sorrows and our thoughts. You have lived 


Karain: 
A 
Memory 
59 
with my people, and you understand our desires and our fears. With 
you I will go. To your land—to your people. To your people, who 
live in unbelief; to whom day is day, and night is night—nothing 
more, because you understand all things seen, and despise all else! 
To your land of unbelief, where the dead do not speak, where every 
man is wise, and alone—and at peace!” 
“Capital description,” murmured Hollis, with the flicker of a 
smile. 
Karain hung his head. 
“T can toil, and fight—and be faithful,” he whispered, in a weary 
tone, “but I cannot go back to him who waits for me on the shore. 
No! Take me with you . 
. 
. Or else give me some of your strength— 
of your unbelief... A charm!...” 
He seemed utterly exhausted. 
“Yes, take him home,” said Hollis, very low, as if debating with 
himself. “That would be one way. The ghosts there are in society, 
and talk affably to ladies and gentlemen, but would scorn a naked 
human being—like our princely friend.... Naked ... Flayed! I 
should say. I 
am sorry for him. Impossible—of course. The end of all 
this shall be,” he went on, looking up at us—“the end of this shall be, 
that some day he will run amuck amongst his faithful subjects and 
send ad patres ever so many of them before they make up their minds 
to the disloyalty of knocking him on the head.” 
I nodded. I thought it more than probable that such would be the 
end of Karain. It was evident that he had been hunted by his thought 
along the very limit of human endurance, and very little more press- 
ing was needed to make him swerve over into the form of madness 
peculiar to his race. The respite he had during the old man’s life 
made the return of the torment unbearable. That much was clear. 
He lifted his head suddenly; we had imagined for a moment that 
he had been dozing. 
“Give me your protection—or your strength!” he cried. “A 
charm . 
. 
. a weapon!”* 
Again his chin fell on his breast. We looked at him, then looked at 
one another with suspicious awe in our eyes, like men who come 
unexpectedly upon the scene of some mysterious disaster. He had 
given himself up to us; he had thrust into our hands his errors and 
his torment, his life and his peace; and we did not know what to do 
with that problem from the outer darkness. We three white men, 


60 
Karain: 
A 
Memory 
looking at that Malay, could not find one word to the purpose 
amongst us—if indeed there existed a word that could solve that 
problem. We pondered, and our hearts sank. We felt as though we 
three had been called to the very gate of Infernal Regions to judge, to 
decide the fate of a wanderer coming suddenly from a world of 
sunshine and illusions.* 
“By Jove, he seems to have a great idea of our power,” whispered 
Hollis, hopelessly. And then again there was a 
silence, the feeble 
plash of water, the steady tick of chronometers. Jackson, with bare 
arms crossed, leaned his shoulders against the bulkhead of the cabin. 
He was bending his head under the deck beam; his fair beard spread 
out magnificently over his chest; he looked colossal, ineffectual, and 
mild. There was something lugubrious in the aspect of the cabin; the 
air in it seemed to become slowly charged with the cruel chill of 
helplessness, with the pitiless anger of egoism against the incompre- 
hensible form of an intruding pain. We had no idea what to do; we 
began to resent bitterly the hard necessity to get rid of him. 
Hollis mused, muttered suddenly with a short laugh, “Strength. 
. 
. 
Protection ... Charm.” He slipped off the table and left the cuddy 
without a look at us. It seemed a base desertion. Jackson and I ex- 
changed indignant glances. We could hear him rummaging in his 
pigeon-hole of a cabin. Was the fellow actually going to bed? Karain 
sighed. It was intolerable! 
Then Hollis reappeared, holding in both hands a small leather 
box. He put it down gently on the table and looked at us with a queer 
gasp, we thought, as though he had from some cause become speech- 
less for a moment, or were ethically uncertain about producing that 
box. But in an instant the insolent and unerring wisdom of his youth 
gave him the needed courage. He said, as he unlocked the box with a 
very small key, “Look as solemn as you can, you fellows.” 
Probably we looked only surprised and stupid, for he glanced over 
his shoulder, and said angrily— 
“This is no play; I am going to do something for him. Look 
serious. Confound it! 
... Can’t you lie a 
little . 
. 
. for a friend!” 
Karain seemed to take no notice of us, but when Hollis threw open 
the lid of the box his eyes flew to it—and so did ours. The quilted 
crimson satin of the inside put in a violent patch of colour into the 
sombre atmosphere; it was something positive to look at—it was 
fascinating. 


VI 
HO 
_LIs 
looked smiling into the box. He had lately made a dash 
home through the Canal. He had been away six months, and only 
joined us again just in time for this last trip. We had never seen the 
box before. His hands hovered above it; and he talked to us ironically, 
but his face became as grave as though he were pronouncing a 
powerful incantation over the things inside. 
“Every one of us,” he said, with pauses that somehow were more 
offensive than his words—“every one of us, you’ll admit, has been 
haunted by some woman ... And ... as to friends .. 
. dropped by 
the way ... Well! .. 
. ask yourselves...” 
He paused. Karain stared. A deep rumble was heard high up 
under the deck. Jackson spoke seriously 
— 
“Don’t be so beastly cynical.” 
“Ah! You are without guile,” said Hollis, sadly. “You will learn... 
Meantime this Malay has been our friend . 
. .” 
He repeated several times thoughtfully, “Friend 
... 
Malay. 
Friend, Malay,” as though weighing the words against one another, 
then went on more briskly 
— 
“A good fellow—a gentleman in his way. We can’t, so to speak, 
turn our backs on his confidence and belief in us. Those Malays are 
easily impressed—all nerves, you know—therefore 
. 
. .” 
He turned to me sharply. 
“You know him best,” he said, in a practical tone. “Do you think 
he is fanatical—I mean very strict in his faith?” 
I 
stammered in profound amazement that I did not think so. 
“It’s on account of its being a likeness—an engraved image,”* 
muttered Hollis, enigmatically, turning to the box. He plunged his 
fingers into it. Karain’s lips were parted and his eyes shone. We 
looked into the box. 
There were there a couple of reels of cotton, a packet of needles, a 
bit of silk ribbon, dark blue; a cabinet photograph, at which Hollis 
stole a glance before laying it on the table face downwards. A 
girl’s 
portrait, I could see. There were, amongst a 
lot of various small 
objects, a bunch of flowers, a narrow white glove with many buttons, 
a slim packet of letters carefully tied up. Amulets of white men! 


62 
Karain: A 
Memory 
Charms and talismans! Charms that keep them straight, that drive 
them crooked, that have the power to make a young man sigh, an old 
man smile. Potent things that procure dreams of joy, thoughts of 
regret; that soften hard hearts, and can temper a 
soft one to the 
hardness of steel. Gifts of heaven—things of earth . 
. 
. 
Hollis rummaged in the box. 
And it seemed to me, during that moment of waiting, that the 
cabin of the schooner was becoming filled with a stir invisible and 
living as of subtle breaths. All the ghosts driven out of the unbeliev- 
ing West by men who pretend to be wise and alone and at peace—all 
the homeless ghosts of an unbelieving world—appeared suddenly 
round the figure of Hollis bending over the box; all the exiled and 
charming shades of loved women; all the beautiful and tender ghosts 
of ideals, remembered, forgotten, cherished, execrated; all the cast- 
out and reproachful ghosts of friends admired, trusted, traduced, 
betrayed, left dead by the way—they all seemed to come from the 
inhospitable regions of the earth to crowd into the gloomy cabin, as 
though it had been a refuge and, in all the unbelieving world, the 
only place of avenging belief. 
. 
. 
. It lasted a second —all disappeared. 
Hollis was facing us alone with something small that glittered 
between his fingers. It looked like a coin. 
“Ah! here it is,” he said. 
2 
He held it up. It was a sixpence—a Jubilee sixpence. It was gilt; it 
had a hole punched near the rim.* Hollis looked towards Karain. 
“A charm for our friend,” he said to us. “The thing itself is of 
great power—money, you know—and his imagination is struck. A 
loyal vagabond; if only his puritanism doesn’t shy at a likeness 
. 
. .” 
We said nothing. We did not know whether to be scandalised, 
amused, or relieved. Hollis advanced towards Karain, who stood up 
as if 
startled, and then, holding the coin up, spoke in Malay. 
“This is the image of the Great Queen, and the most powerful 
thing the white men know,” he said, solemnly. 
Karain covered the handle of his kriss in sign of respect, and 
stared at the crowned head. 
“The Invincible, the Pious,” he muttered. 
“She is more powerful than Suleiman the Wise, who commanded 
the genii,* as you know,” said Hollis, gravely. “I shall give this to you.” 
He held the sixpence in the palm of his hand, and looking at it 
thoughtfully, spoke to us in English. 


Karain: A 
Memory 
63 
“She commands a 
spirit, too—the spirit of her nation; a master- 
ful, conscientious, unscrupulous, unconquerable devil . 
. 
. that does 
a lot of good—incidentally ... 
a lot of good ... at times—and 
wouldn’t stand any fuss from the best ghost out for such a 
little thing 
as our friend’s shot. Don’t look thunderstruck, you fellows. Help me 
to make him believe—everything’s in that.” 
“His people will be shocked,” I murmured. 
Hollis looked fixedly at Karain, who was the incarnation of the 
very essence of still excitement. He stood rigid, with head thrown 
back; his eyes rolled wildly, flashing; the dilated nostrils quivered. 
“Hang it all!” said Hollis at last, “he is a good fellow. Pll give him 
something that I shall really miss.” 
He took the ribbon out of the box, smiled at it scornfully, then 
with a pair of scissors cut out a piece from the palm of the glove. 
“T shall make him a thing like those Italian peasants wear, you 
know.”* 
He sewed the coin in the delicate leather, sewed the leather to the 
ribbon, tied the ends together. He worked with haste. Karain 
watched his fingers all the time. 
“Now then,” he said—then stepped up to Karain. They looked 
close into one another’s eyes. Those of Karain stared in a 
lost glance, 
but Hollis’s seemed to grow darker and looked out masterful and 
compelling. They were in violent contrast together—one motionless 
and the colour of bronze, the other dazzling white and lifting his 
arms, where the powerful muscles rolled slightly under a skin that 
gleamed like satin. Jackson moved near with the air of a man closing 
up to a chum in a tight place. I said impressively, pointing to 
Hollis— 
“He is young, but he is wise. Believe him!” 
Karain bent his head: Hollis threw lightly over it the dark-blue 
ribbon and stepped back. 
“Forget, and be at peace!” I 
cried. 
Karain seemed to wake up from a dream. He said, “Ha!” —shook 
himself as if 
throwing off a burden. He looked round with assurance. 
Some one on deck dragged off the skylight cover and a 
flood of light 
fell into the cabin. It was morning already. 
“Time to go on deck,” said Jackson. 
Hollis put on a coat, and we went up, Karain leading. 
The sun had risen beyond the hills, and their long shadows 


64 
Karain: 
A 
Memory 
stretched far over the bay in the pearly light. The air was clear, 
stainless, and cool. I 
pointed at the curved line of yellow sands. 
‘He is not there,” I said, emphatically, to Karain. “He waits no 
more. He has departed for ever.” 
A 
shaft of bright hot rays darted into the bay between the summits 
of two hills, and the water all round broke out as if by magic into a 
dazzling sparkle. 
“No! He is not there waiting,” said Karain, after a long look over 
the beach. “I do not hear him,” he went on, slowly. “No!” 
He turned to us. 
“He has departed again—for ever!” he cried. 
We assented vigorously, repeatedly, and without compunction. 
The great thing was to impress him powerfully; to suggest absolute 
safety—the end of all trouble. We did our best; and I hope we 
affirmed our faith in the power of Hollis’s charm efficiently enough 
to put the matter beyond the shadow of a doubt. Our voices rang 
around him joyously in the still air, and above his head the sky, 
pellucid, pure, stainless, arched its tender blue from shore to shore 
and over the bay, as if 
to envelop the water, the earth, and the man in 
the caress of its light. 
The anchor was up, the sails hung still, and half-a-dozen big boats 
were seen sweeping over the bay to give us a tow out. The paddlers in 
the first one that came alongside lifted their heads and saw their ruler 
standing amongst us. A low murmur of surprise arose—then a shout 
of greeting. 
He left us, and seemed straightway to step into the glorious splen- 
dour of his stage, to wrap himself in the illusion of unavoidable 
success. For a moment he stood erect, one foot over the gangway, one 
hand on the hilt of his kriss, in a martial pose; and, relieved from the 
fear of outer darkness, he held his head high, he swept a serene look 
over his conquered foothold on the earth. The boats far off took up 
the cry of greeting; a great clamour rolled on the water; the hills 
echoed it, and seemed to toss back at him the words invoking long 
life and victories. 
He descended into a canoe, and as soon as he was clear of the side 
we gave him three cheers. They sounded faint and orderly after the 
wild tumult of his loyal subjects, but it was the best we could do. He 
stood up in the boat, lifted up both his arms, then pointed to the 
infallible charm. We cheered again; and the Malays in the boats 


Karain: A 
Memory 
65 
stared—very much puzzled and impressed. I wonder what they 
thought; what he thought; . 
. 
. what the reader thinks? 
We towed out slowly. We saw him land and watch us from the 
beach. A figure approached him humbly but openly—not at all like a 
ghost with a grievance. We could see other men running towards 
him. Perhaps he had been missed? At any rate there was a 
great stir. 
A group formed itself rapidly near him, and he walked along the 
sands, followed by a growing cortége, and kept nearly abreast of the 
schooner. With our glasses we could see the blue ribbon on his neck 
and a patch of white on his brown chest. The bay was waking up. 
The smoke of morning fires stood in faint spirals higher than the 
heads of palms; people moved between the houses; a herd of buffa- 
loes galloped clumsily across a green slope; the slender figures of 
boys brandishing sticks appeared black and leaping in the long grass; 
a coloured line of women, with water bamboos on their heads, 
moved swaying through a 
thin grove of fruit-trees. Karain stopped 
in the midst of his men and waved his hand; then, detaching himself 
from the splendid group, walked alone to the water’s edge and waved 
his hand again. The schooner passed out to sea between the steep 
headlands that shut in the bay, and at the same instant Karain passed 
out of our life for ever. 
But the memory remains. Some years afterwards I 
met Jackson, in 
the Strand. He was magnificent as ever. His head was high above the 
crowd. His beard was gold, his face red, his eyes blue; he had a wide- 
brimmed grey hat and no collar or waistcoat; he was inspiring; he 
had just come home—had landed that very day! Our meeting caused 
an eddy in the current of humanity. Hurried people would run 
against us, then walk round us, and turn back to look at that giant. We 
tried to compress seven years of life into seven exclamations; then, 
suddenly appeased, walked sedately along, giving one another the 
news of yesterday. Jackson gazed about him, like a man who looks 
for landmarks, then stopped before Bland’s window.* He always 
had a 
passion for firearms; so he stopped short and contemplated the 
row of weapons, perfect and severe, drawn up in a line behind 
the black-framed panes. I 
stood by his side. Suddenly he said 
— 
“Do you remember Karain?” 
I 
nodded. 
“The sight of all this made me think of him,” he went on, with his 


66 
Karain: 
A 
Memory 
face near the glass ... and I could see another man, powerful and 
bearded, peering at him intently from amongst the dark and polished 
tubes that can cure so many illusions. “Yes; it made me think of 
him,” he continued, slowly. “I saw a paper this morning; they are 
fighting over there again. He’s sure to be in it. He will make it hot for 
the caballeros. Well, good luck to him, poor devil! He was perfectly 
stunning.” 
We walked on. 
“I wonder whether the charm worked—you remember Hollis’s 
charm, of course. If it did . .. never was a sixpence wasted to better 
advantage! Poor devil! I wonder whether he got rid of that friend of 
his. Hope so . 
.. Do you know, I 
sometimes think that 
3 
I 
stood still and looked at him. 
“Yes ... I 
mean, whether the thing was so, you know . 
. 
. whether 
it really happened to him . 
. 
. What do you think?” 
“My dear chap,” I cried, “you have been too long away from 
home. What a question to ask! Only look at all this.” 
A watery gleam of sunshine flashed from the west and went out 
between two long lines of walls; and then the broken confusion of 
roofs, the chimney-stacks, 
the gold letters sprawling over the 
fronts of houses, the sombre polish of windows, stood resigned 
and sullen under the falling gloom. The whole length of the street, 
deep as a well and narrow like a corridor, was full of a sombre and 
ceaseless stir. Our ears were filled by a headlong shuffle and beat 
of rapid footsteps and an underlying rumour—a rumour vast, 
faint, pulsating, as of panting breaths, of beating hearts, of gasping 
voices.* Innumerable eyes stared straight in front, feet moved hur- 
riedly, blank faces flowed, arms swung. Over all, a narrow ragged 
strip of smoky sky wound about between the high roofs, extended 
and motionless, like a soiled streamer flying above the rout of a 
mob. 
“Ye-e-e-s,” said Jackson, meditatively. 
The big wheels of hansoms turned slowly along the edge of side- 
walks; a pale-faced youth strolled, overcome by weariness, by the 
side of his stick and with the tails of his overcoat flapping gently near 
his heels; horses stepped gingerly on the greasy pavement, tossing 
their heads; two young girls passed by, talking vivaciously and with 
shining eyes; a fine old fellow strutted, red-faced, stroking a white 
moustache; and a line of yellow boards with blue letters on them 


Karain: 
A 
Memory 
67 
approached us slowly, tossing on high behind one another like some 
queer wreckage adrift upon a 
river of hats.* 
“Ye-e-es,” repeated Jackson. His clear blue eyes looked about, 
contemptuous, amused and hard, like the eyes of a boy. A clumsy 
string of red, yellow, and green omnibuses rolled swaying, monstrous 
and gaudy; two shabby children ran across the road; a knot of dirty 
men with red neckerchiefs round their bare throats lurched along, 
discussing filthily; a ragged old man with a face of despair yelled 
horribly in the mud the name of a paper; while far off, amongst the 
tossing heads of horses, the dull flash of harnesses, the jumble of 
lustrous panels and roofs of carriages, we could see a policeman, 
helmeted and dark, stretching out a rigid arm at the crossing of the 
streets. 
“Yes: I 
see it,” said Jackson, slowly. “It is there; it pants, it runs, it 
rolls; it is strong and alive; it would smash you if 
you didn’t look out; 
but I'll be hanged if 
it is yet as real to me as . 
. 
. as the other thing... . 
say, Karain’s story.” 
I think that, decidedly, he had been too long away from home. 


dikzatiepume 90:) et 
oak 
sind 
° 
Pex Go 
eT ana: 
Aated tester 
dares fedow! care. oats 
cerboetge ind 
pe he: 
aaah 
17 
eerspiand) qfztwdant 
a 
. 
Mercator 
hela Vertes 
line 
lk 
hapeghy letttord Vater? Santen: sche 
nssylie wiltdibecenagl 
SD ogee idiAsve! 2teontt wind och, nw did be dice 
pier iqgbhaowal 
¢ 
dire casn blo legge erhdsta 
ra 
sft ean. oud sielle corey 
ote ke vat 
teres, dc 
twit Jo genihlinh 
owt peed Wolabied 
mphin| 
we 
toe: hee ee de 
seadere tego tte olathe 
ititeameiiais se aor yt weal 
shor ghel 
sation 
= 
; 
= a 
hiiiyd 
u 
Lae 
pO 
ROY. 
itera tates 
f+ 
cards 
aed cldege ay 
red 
dhpsdewth sheloong tans: Arrest civale bad 
pact pede 
aes 
aerepmnatinadh 
Sg 
otha alter Mega +74) longer 
HE 
ire. 
Via 
a 
A 
boo 
of) 
hath, Sie 
ae 
. 
niiadaelih-aieets asubeiie Aaratdan | heehee heed 
eal 
yw 
=—_.- 
easy; 
i? 
F 
9 
>. 
‘ia 
% 
pe 
Re 
aes 
one 
Te 
ris 
aL 
tee 
urge line 
@lgy 
i 
% 
_ 
iéy 
-wnwirren, 
@rpel. so 
- 
aE 
vd 
ie 
“t 
af 
op 
ues 
Mhety ok tie 
i 
5 
, 
i 
eee ee? ere 
> 
a (ahee 
ee 
“ETE 
amc: 
wre 
WAcd 
rhe» 
dec 
<i By 
=i 
i? 
oe 
® Wnieapny 
- 
, 
Sha 
besa ete Nise al 
ws 
ti 
: 
’ 
i 
a” 
Ss 
Maly aes hi, 3 
i 
o, 
re 
= 
oe 
il 
cst tae 
ms 
-' 
tn, 
he he 
wah, 
© 
re 
i 
~~ 
=F 
A) eagt eh 
vam Goa: 
an 
= 
~~ 
7 
ae] 
> 
- 
_ 
a= 
“= 
far ta) 
kaeeSe ohyegegtar qlee 
ee 
=e 
eS To 
_ 
orton bh 
eee 
a 
es 
2 
4 a art oe 
7 
BA\e=. 
= > 
te Be devas 5 
: _ 
aa 
=< 
i 
‘ra athe 4 
eh 
ep ~ ! 
-« ost edo 
a 
a i> > 
awe wwe 
~ 


YOUTH: A NARRATIVE 


- 
- 
_, 
rR AHI 
aa) 


YOUTH: A NARRATIVE 
THIS could have occurred nowhere but in England, where men and 
sea interpenetrate, so to speak—the sea entering into the life of most 
men, and the men knowing something or everything about the sea, in 
the way of amusement, of travel, or of bread-winning. 
We were sitting round a mahogany table that reflected the bottle, 
the claret-glasses, and our faces as we leaned on our elbows. There 
was a director of companies, an accountant, a lawyer, Marlow, and 
myself. The director had been a Conway boy,* the accountant had 
served four years at sea, the lawyer—a fine crusted Tory, High 
Churchman, the best of old fellows, the soul of honour—had been 
chief officer in the P. & O. service in the good old days when mail- 
boats were square-rigged at least on two masts, and used to come 
down the China Sea before a fair monsoon with stun’-sails set alow 
and aloft. We all began life in the merchant service. Between the five 
of us there was the strong bond of the sea, and also the fellowship of 
the craft, which no amount of enthusiasm for yachting, cruising, and 
so on can give, since one is only the amusement of life and the other 
is life itself. 
Marlow (at least I think that is how he spelt his name) told the 
story, or rather the chronicle, of a voyage: 
— 
“Yes, I 
have seen a 
little of the Eastern seas; but what I remember 
best is my first voyage there. You fellows know there are those voy- 
ages that seem ordered for the illustration of life, that might stand 
for a symbol of existence. You fight, work, sweat, nearly kill yourself, 
sometimes do kill yourself, trying to accomplish something—and 
you can’t. Not from any fault of yours. You simply can do nothing, 
neither great nor little—not a thing in the world—not even marry an 
old maid, or get a wretched 600-ton cargo of coal to its port of 
destination. 
“Tt was altogether a memorable affair. It was my first voyage to the 
East, and my first voyage as second mate; it was also my skipper’s 
first command.* You’l] admit it was time. He was sixty if 
a day; a 
little 
man, with a broad, not very straight back, with bowed shoulders and 
one leg more bandy than the other, he had that queer twisted-about 
appearance you see so often in men who work in the fields. He had a 


72 
Youth: A Narrative 
nut-cracker face—chin and nose trying to come together over a 
sunken mouth—and it was framed in iron-grey fluffy hair, that 
looked like a chin-strap of cotton-wool sprinkled with coal-dust. 
And he had blue eyes in that old face of his, which were amazingly 
like a boy’s, with that candid expression some quite common men 
preserve to the end of their days by 
a 
rare internal gift of simplicity 
of heart and rectitude of soul. What induced him to accept me was a 
wonder. I had come out of a crack Australian clipper, where I had 
been third officer, and he seemed to have a prejudice against crack 
clippers as aristocratic and high-toned. He said to me, ‘You know, in 
this ship you will have to work.’ I said I had to work in every ship I 
had ever been in. ‘Ah, but this is different, and you gentlemen out of 
them big ships; . 
. 
. but there! I daresay you will do. Join tomorrow.’ 
“J joined tomorrow. It was twenty-two years ago; and I was just 
twenty.* How time passes! It was one of the happiest days of my life. 
Fancy! Second mate for the first time—a really responsible officer! I 
wouldn’t have thrown up my new billet for a fortune. The mate 
looked me over carefully. He was also an old chap, but of another 
stamp. He had a Roman nose, a snow-white, long beard, and his 
name was Mahon, but he insisted that it should be pronounced 
Mann. He was well connected; yet there was something wrong with 
his luck, and he had never got on. 
. 
“As to the captain, he had been for years in coasters, then in the 
Mediterranean, and last in the West Indian trade. He had never been 
round the Capes. He could just write a kind of sketchy hand, and 
didn’t care for writing at all. Both were thorough good seamen of 
course, and between those two old chaps I 
felt like a small boy 
between two grandfathers. 
“The ship also was old. Her name was the Judea. Queer name, 
isn’t it? She belonged to a man Wilmer, Wilcox—some name like 
that; but he has been bankrupt and dead these twenty years or more, 
and his name don’t matter. She had been laid up in Shadwell basin 
for ever so long. You may imagine her state. She was all rust, dust, 
grime—soot aloft, dirt on deck. To me it was like coming out of a 
palace into a ruined cottage. She was about 400 tons, had a 
primitive 
windlass, wooden latches to the doors, not a bit of brass about her, 
and a big square stern. There was on it, below her name in big 
letters, a lot of scrollwork, with the gilt off, and some sort of a coat of 
arms, with the motto ‘Do or Die’ underneath.* I 
remember it 
took my 


Youth: A Narrative 
73 
fancy immensely. There was a touch of romance in it, something that 
made me love the old thing—something that appealed to my youth! 
“We left London in ballast—sand ballast—to load a cargo of coal 
in a northern port for Bankok. Bankok! I thrilled. I had been six 
years at sea, but had only seen Melbourne and Sydney, very good 
places, charming places in their way—but Bankok! 
“We worked out of the Thames under canvas, with a North Sea 
pilot on board. His name was Jermyn, and he dodged all day long 
about the galley drying his handkerchief before the stove. Appar- 
ently he never slept. He was a dismal man, with a perpetual tear 
sparkling at the end of his nose, who either had been in trouble, or 
was in trouble, or expected to be in trouble—couldn’t be happy 
unless something went wrong. He mistrusted my youth, my 
common-sense, and my seamanship, and made a 
point of showing it 
in a hundred little ways. I daresay he was right. It seems to me I 
knew very little then, and I 
know not much more now; but I 
cherish a 
hate for that Jermyn to this day. 
“We were a week working up as far as Yarmouth Roads, and then 
we got into a gale—the famous October gale of twenty-two years 
ago. It was wind, lightning, sleet, snow, and a 
terrific sea. We were 
flying light, and you may imagine how bad it was when I 
tell you we 
had smashed bulwarks and a 
flooded deck. On the second night she 
shifted her ballast into the lee bow, and by that time we had been 
blown off somewhere on the Dogger Bank. There was nothing for it 
but go below with shovels and try to right her, and there we were in 
that vast hold, gloomy like a cavern, the tallow dips stuck and flicker- 
ing on the beams, the gale howling above, the ship tossing about like 
mad on her side; there we all were, Jermyn, the captain, every one, 
hardly able to keep our feet, engaged on that gravedigger’s work, and 
trying to toss shovelfuls of wet sand up to windward. At every tum- 
ble of the ship you could see vaguely in the dim light men falling 
down with a 
great flourish of shovels. One of the ship’s boys (we had 
two), impressed by the weirdness of the scene, wept as if his heart 
would break. We could hear him blubbering somewhere in the 
shadows. 
“On the third day the gale died out, and by-and-by a north- 
country tug picked us up. We took sixteen days in all to get from 
London to the Tyne! When we got into dock we had lost our turn for 
loading, and they hauled us off to a tier where we remained for a 


74 
Youth: A Narrative 
month. Mrs Beard (the captain’s name was Beard) came from Col- 
chester to see the old man. She lived on board. The crew of runners 
had left, and there remained only the officers, one boy, and the 
steward, a mulatto who answered to the name of Abraham.* Mrs 
Beard was an old woman, with a 
face all wrinkled and ruddy like a 
winter apple, and the figure of a young girl. She caught sight of me 
once, sewing on a button, and insisted on having my shirts to repair. 
This was something different from the captains’ wives I had known 
on board crack clippers. When I brought her the shirts, she said: 
‘And the socks? They want mending, I am sure, and John’s— 
Captain Beard’s—things are all in order now. I would be glad of 
something to do.’ Bless the old woman. She overhauled my outfit 
for me, and meantime I read for the first time Sartor Resartus and 
Burnaby’s Ride to Khiva.* 1 didn’t understand much of the first 
then; but I remember I preferred the soldier to the philosopher at 
the time; a preference which life has only confirmed. One was a 
man, and the other was either more—or less. However, they are both 
dead, and Mrs Beard is dead, and youth, strength, genius, thoughts, 
achievements, simple hearts—all dies. . 
. 
. No matter. 
“They loaded us at last. We shipped a crew. Eight able seamen and 
two boys. We hauled off one evening to the buoys at the dock-gates, 
ready to go out, and with a fair prospect of beginning the voyage 
next day. Mrs Beard was to start for home by 
a 
late train. When the 
ship was fast we went to tea. We sat rather silent through the meal— 
Mahon, the old couple, and I. I 
finished first, and slipped away for a 
smoke, my cabin being in a deck-house just against the poop. It was 
high water, blowing fresh with a drizzle; the double dock-gates were 
opened, and the steam-colliers were going in and out in the darkness 
with their lights burning bright, a great plashing of propellers, rat- 
tling of winches, and a 
lot of hailing on the pier-heads. I 
watched the 
procession of head-lights gliding high and of green lights gliding low 
in the night, when suddenly a red gleam flashed at me, vanished, 
came into view again, and remained.* The fore-end of a steamer 
loomed up close. I 
shouted down the cabin, ‘Come up, quick!’ and 
then heard a 
startled voice saying afar in the dark, ‘Stop her, sir.’ A 
bell jingled. Another voice cried warningly, ‘We are going right into 
that barque, sir.’ The answer to this was a gruff ‘All right,’ and the 
next thing was a heavy crash as the steamer struck a glancing blow 
with the bluff of her bow about our fore-rigging. There was a 


Youth: A Narrative 
75 
moment of confusion, yelling, and running about. Steam roared. 
Then somebody was heard saying, ‘All clear, sir.’ ... ‘Are you all 
right?’ asked the gruff voice. I had jumped forward to see the dam- 
age, and hailed back, ‘I think so.’ ‘Easy astern,’ said the gruff voice. 
A bell jingled. ‘What steamer is that?’ screamed Mahon. By that 
time she was no more to us than a bulky shadow manceuvring a 
little 
way off. They shouted at us some name—a woman’s name, Miranda 
or Melissa—or some such thing. “This means another month in this 
beastly hole,’ said Mahon to me, as we peered with lamps about the 
splintered bulwarks and broken braces. ‘But where’s the captain?’ 
“We had not heard or seen anything of him all that time. We went 
aft to look. A doleful voice arose hailing somewhere in the middle of 
the dock, ‘Judea ahoy!’ ... How the devil did he get there? ... 
‘Hallo!’ we shouted. ‘I am adrift in our boat without oars,’ he cried. 
A belated waterman offered his services, and Mahon struck a bar- 
gain with him for half-a-crown to tow our skipper alongside; but it 
was Mrs Beard that came up the ladder first. They had been floating 
about the dock in that mizzly cold rain for nearly an hour. I was 
never so surprised in my life. 
“It appears that when he heard my shout ‘Come up’ he under- 
stood at once what was the matter, caught up his wife, ran on deck, 
and across, and down into our boat, which was fast to the ladder. Not 
bad for a sixty-year-old. Just imagine that old fellow saving heroic- 
ally in his arms that old woman—the woman of his life. He set her 
down on a thwart, and was ready to climb back on board when the 
painter came adrift somehow, and away they went together. Of 
course in the confusion we did not hear him shouting. He looked 
abashed. She said cheerfully, ‘I suppose it does not matter my losing 
the train now?’ ‘No, Jenny—you go below and get warm,’ he 
growled. Then to us: ‘A sailor has no business with a wife—I say.* 
There I was, out of the ship. Well, no harm done this time. Let’s go 
and look at what that fool of a steamer smashed.’ 
“Tt wasn’t much, but it delayed us three weeks. At the end of that 
time, the captain being engaged with his agents, I carried Mrs 
Beard’s bag to the railway-station and put her all comfy into a third- 
class carriage. She lowered the window to say, ‘You are a good young 
man. If you see John—Captain Beard—without his muffler at night, 
just remind him from me to keep his throat well wrapped up.’ ‘Cer- 
tainly, Mrs Beard,’ I 
said. ‘You are a good young man; I 
noticed how 


76 
Youth: A Narrative 
attentive you are to John—to Captain 
> The train pulled out 
suddenly; I took my cap off to the old woman: I never saw her 
again. .. 
. Pass the bottle. 
‘“‘We went to sea next day. When we made that start for Bankok we 
had been already three months out of London. We had expected to 
be a fortnight or so—at the outside. 
“It was January, and the weather was beautiful—the beautiful 
sunny winter weather that has more charm than in the summer-time, 
because it is unexpected, and crisp, and you know it won’t, it can’t, 
last long. It’s like a windfall, like a godsend, like an unexpected piece 
of luck. 
“Tt lasted all down the North Sea, all down Channel; and it lasted 
till we were three hundred miles or so to the westward of the 
Lizards: then the wind went round to the sou’west and began to pipe 
up. In two days it blew a gale. The Judea, hove to, wallowed on the 
Atlantic like an old candle-box. It blew day after day: it blew with 
spite, without interval, without mercy, without rest. The world was 
nothing but an immensity of great foaming waves rushing at us, 
under a sky low enough to touch with the hand and dirty like a 
smoked ceiling. In the stormy space surrounding us there was as 
much flying spray as air. Day after day and night after night there 
was nothing round the ship but the howl of the wind, the tumult of 
the sea, the noise of water pouring over her deck. There was no rest 
for her and no rest for us. She tossed, she pitched, she stood on her 
head, she sat on her tail, she rolled, she groaned, and we had to hold 
on while on deck and cling to our bunks when below, in a constant 
effort of body and worry of mind. 
“One night Mahon spoke through the small window of my berth. 
It opened right into my very bed, and I was lying there sleepless, in 
my boots, feeling as though I 
had not slept for years, and could not if 
I 
tried. He said excitedly 
— 
“You got the sounding-rod in here, Marlow? I can’t get the 
pumps to suck. By God! it’s no child’s play.’ 
“I gave him the sounding-rod and lay down again, trying to think 
of various things—but I thought only of the pumps. When I came 
on deck they were still at it, and my watch relieved at the pumps. By 
the light of the lantern brought on deck to examine the sounding- 
rod I caught a glimpse of their weary, serious faces. We pumped all 
the four hours. We pumped all night, all day, all the week—watch 


Youth: A Narrative 
77 
and watch. She was working herself loose, and leaked badly—not 
enough to drown us at once, but enough to kill us with the work at 
the pumps. And while we pumped the ship was going from us 
piecemeal: the bulwarks went, the stanchions were torn out, the 
ventilators smashed, the cabin-door burst in. There was not a dry 
spot in the ship. She was being gutted bit by bit. The long-boat 
changed, as if by magic, into matchwood where she stood in her 
gripes. I had lashed her myself, and was rather proud of my handi- 
work, which had withstood so long the malice of the sea. And we 
pumped. And there was no break in the weather. The sea was white 
like a sheet of foam, like a caldron of boiling milk; there was not a 
break in the clouds, no—not the size of a man’s hand—no, not for so 
much as ten seconds. There was for us no sky, there were for us no 
stars, no sun, no universe—nothing but angry clouds and an infuri- 
ated sea. We pumped watch and watch, for dear life; and it seemed to 
last for months, for years, for all eternity, as though we had been 
dead and gone to a 
hell for sailors. We forgot the day of the week, the 
name of the month, what year it was, and whether we had ever been 
ashore. The sails blew away, she lay broadside on under a weather- 
cloth, the ocean poured over her, and we did not care. We turned 
those handles, and had the eyes of idiots. As soon as we had crawled 
on deck I used to take a round turn with a rope about the men, the 
pumps, and the mainmast, and we turned, we turned incessantly, 
with the water to our waists, to our necks, over our heads. It was all 
one. We had forgotten how it felt to be dry. 
“And there was somewhere in me the thought: By 
Jove! this is the 
deuce of an adventure—something you read about; and it is my first 
voyage as second mate—and I am only twenty—and here I am last- 
ing it out as well as any of these men, and keeping my chaps up to the 
mark. I was pleased. I would not have given up the experience for 
worlds. I had moments of exultation. Whenever the old dismantled 
craft pitched heavily with her counter high in the air, she seemed to 
me to throw up, like an appeal, like a defiance, like a cry to the clouds 
without mercy, the words written on her stern: ‘Judea, London. Do 
or Die.’ 
“OQ youth! The strength of it, the faith of it, the imagination of it! 
To me she was not an old rattle-trap carting about the world a 
lot of 
coal for a freight—to me she was the endeavour, the test, the trial of 
life. I think of her with pleasure, with affection, with regret—as you 


78 
Youth: A Narrative 
would think of some one dead you have loved. I shall never forget 
her. . 
. 
. Pass the bottle. 
“One night when tied to the mast, as I explained, we were pump- 
ing on, deafened with the wind, and without spirit enough in us to 
wish ourselves dead, a heavy sea crashed aboard and swept clean over 
us. As soon as I 
got my breath I 
shouted, as in duty bound, ‘Keep on, 
boys!’ when suddenly I felt something hard floating on deck strike 
the calf of my leg. I 
made a grab at it and missed. It was so dark we 
could not see each other’s faces within a foot—you understand. 
“After that thump the ship kept quiet for a while, and the thing, 
whatever it was, struck my leg again. This time I caught it—and it 
was a sauce-pan. At first, being stupid with fatigue and thinking of 
nothing but the pumps, I 
did not understand what I 
had in my hand. 
Suddenly it dawned upon me, and I shouted, ‘Boys, the house on 
deck is gone. Leave this, and let’s look for the cook.’ 
“There was a deck-house forward, which contained the galley, the 
cook’s berth, and the quarters of the crew. As we had expected for 
days to see it swept away, the hands had been ordered to sleep in the 
cabin—the only safe place in the ship. The steward, Abraham, how- 
ever, persisted in clinging to his berth, stupidly, like a mule—from 
sheer fright I believe, like an animal that won’t leave a stable falling 
in an earthquake. So we went to look for him. It was chancing death, 
since once out of our lashings we were as exposed as if on a raft. But 
we went. The house was shattered as if a shell had exploded inside. 
Most of it had gone overboard—stove, men’s quarters, and their 
property, all was gone; but two posts, holding a portion of the bulk- 
head to which Abraham’s bunk was attached, remained as if by a 
miracle. We groped in the ruins and came upon this, and there he 
was, sitting in his bunk, surrounded by foam and wreckage, jabber- 
ing cheerfully to himself. He was out of his mind; completely and for 
ever mad, with this sudden shock coming upon the fag-end of his 
endurance. We snatched him up, lugged him aft, and pitched him 
head-first down the cabin companion. You understand there was no 
time to carry him down with infinite precautions and wait to see how 
he got on. Those below would pick him up at the bottom of the stairs 
all right. We were in a hurry to go back to the pumps. That business 
could not wait. A bad leak is an inhuman thing. 
“One would think that the sole purpose of that fiendish gale had 
been to make a lunatic of that poor devil of a mulatto. It eased before 


Youth: A Narrative 
79 
morning, and next day the sky cleared, and as the sea went down the 
leak took up. When it came to bending a 
fresh set of sails the crew 
demanded to put back—and really there was nothing else to do. 
Boats gone, decks swept clean, cabin gutted, men without a 
stitch 
but what they stood in, stores spoiled, ship strained. We put her head 
for home, and—would you believe it? The wind came east right in 
our teeth. It blew fresh, it blew continuously. We had to beat up 
every inch of the way, but she did not leak so badly, the water keep- 
ing comparatively smooth. Two hours’ pumping in every four is no 
joke—but it kept her afloat as far as Falmouth. 
“The good people there live on casualties of the sea, and no doubt 
were glad to see us. A hungry crowd of shipwrights sharpened their 
chisels at the sight of that carcass of a ship. And, by Jove! they had 
pretty pickings off us before they were done. I fancy the owner was 
already in a tight place. There were delays. Then it was decided to 
take part of the cargo out and caulk her topsides. This was done, the 
repairs finished, cargo reshipped; a new crew came on board, and we 
went out—for Bankok. At the end of a week we were back again. 
The crew said they weren’t going to Bankok—a hundred and fifty 
days’ passage—in a something hooker that wanted pumping eight 
hours out of the twenty-four; and the nautical papers inserted again 
the little paragraph: ‘Judea. Barque. Tyne to Bankok; coals; put back 
to Falmouth leaky and with crew refusing duty.’ 
“There were more delays—more tinkering. The owner came 
down for a day, and said she was as right as a 
little fiddle. Poor old 
Captain Beard looked like the ghost of a Geordie skipper—through 
the worry and humiliation of it. Remember he was sixty, and it was 
his first command. Mahon said it was a foolish business, and would 
end badly. I 
loved the ship more than ever, and wanted awfully to get 
to Bankok. To Bankok! Magic name, blessed name. Mesopotamia* 
wasn’t a patch on it. Remember I was twenty, and it was my first 
second mate’s billet, and the East was waiting for me. 
“We went out and anchored in the outer roads with a fresh crew— 
the third. She leaked worse than ever. It was as if those confounded 
shipwrights had actually made a hole in her. This time we did not 
even go outside. The crew simply refused to man the windlass. 
“They towed us back to the inner harbour, and we became a 
fixture, a feature, an institution of the place. People pointed us out to 
visitors as “That ’ere barque that’s going to Bankok—has been here 


80 
Youth: A 
Narrative 
six months— 
put back three times.’ On holidays the small boys pull- 
ing about in boats would hail, ‘Judea, ahoy!’ and if a head showed 
above the rail shouted, ‘Where you bound to? —Bankok?’ and jeered. 
We were only three on board. The poor old skipper mooned in the 
cabin. Mahon undertook the cooking, and unexpectedly developed 
all a Frenchman’s genius for preparing nice little messes. I looked 
languidly after the rigging. We became citizens of Falmouth. Every 
shopkeeper knew us. At the barber’s or tobacconist’s they asked 
familiarly, ‘Do you think you will ever get to Bankok?’ Meantime the 
owner, the underwriters, and the charterers squabbled amongst 
themselves in London, and our pay went on. 
. 
. 
. Pass the bottle. 
“It was horrid. Morally it was worse than pumping for life. It 
seemed as though we had been forgotten by the world, belonged to 
nobody, would get nowhere; it seemed that, as if bewitched, we 
would have to live for ever and ever in that inner harbour, a derision 
and a byword to generations of long-shore loafers and dishonest 
boatmen. I obtained three months’ pay and a five days’ leave, and 
made a rush for London. It took me a 
day to get there and pretty well 
another to come back—but three months’ pay went all the same. I 
don’t know what I did with it. I went to a music-hall, I believe, 
lunched, dined, and supped in a swell place in Regent Street, and 
was back to time, with nothing but a complete set of Byron’s works 
and a new railway rug to show for three months’ work. The boatman 
who pulled me off to the ship said: ‘Hallo! I 
thought you had left the 
old thing. She will never get to Bankok.’ “That’s all you know about 
it,’ I 
said, scornfully—but I 
didn’t like that prophecy at all. 
“Suddenly a man, some kind of agent to somebody, appeared with 
full powers. He had grog-blossoms all over his face, an indomitable 
energy, and was a 
jolly soul. We leaped into life again. A hulk came 
alongside, took our cargo, and then we went into dry dock to get our 
copper stripped. No wonder she leaked. The poor thing, strained 
beyond endurance by the gale, had, as if in disgust, spat out all the 
oakum of her lower seams. She was recaulked, new coppered, and 
made as tight as a bottle. We went back to the hulk and reshipped our 
cargo. 
“Then, on a fine moonlight night, all the rats left the ship. 
“We had been infested with them. They had destroyed our sails, 
consumed more stores than the crew, affably shared our beds and our 
dangers, and now, when the ship was made seaworthy, concluded to 


Youth: A Narrative 
81 
clear out.* I called Mahon to enjoy the spectacle. Rat after rat 
appeared on our rail, took a last look over his shoulder, and leaped 
with a hollow thud into the empty hulk. We tried to count them, but 
soon lost the tale. Mahon said: ‘Well, well! don’t talk to me about the 
intelligence of rats. They ought to have left before, when we had that 
narrow squeak from foundering. There you have the proof how silly 
is the superstition about them.* They leave a good ship for an old 
rotten hulk, where there is nothing to eat, too, the fools! 
. 
. 
. I 
don’t 
believe they know what is safe or what is good for them, any more 
than you or I.’ 
“And after some more talk we agreed that the wisdom of rats had 
been grossly overrated, being in fact no greater than that of men. 
“The story of the ship was known, by this, all up the Channel 
from Land’s End to the Forelands, and we could get no crew on the 
south coast. They sent us one all complete from Liverpool, and we 
left once more—for Bankok. 
“We had fair breezes, smooth water right into the tropics, and the 
old Judea lumbered along in the sunshine. When she went eight 
knots everything cracked aloft, and we tied our caps to our heads; 
but mostly she strolled on at the rate of three miles an hour. What 
could you expect? She was tired—that old ship. Her youth was 
where mine is—where yours is—you fellows who listen to this yarn; 
and what friend would throw your years and your weariness in your 
face? We didn’t grumble at her. To us aft, at least, it seemed as 
though we had been born in her, reared in her, had lived in her for 
ages, had never known any other ship. I would just as soon have 
abused the old village church at home for not being a cathedral. 
“And for me there was also my youth to make me patient. There 
was all the East before me, and all life, and the thought that I had 
been tried in that ship and had come out pretty well. And I thought 
of men of old who, centuries ago, went that road in ships that sailed 
no better, to the land of palms, and spices, and yellow sands, and of 
brown nations ruled by kings more cruel than Nero the Roman and 
more splendid than Solomon the Jew. The old bark lumbered on, 
heavy with her age and the burden of her cargo, while I lived the life 
of youth in ignorance and hope. She lumbered on through an 
interminable procession of days; and the fresh gilding flashed back at 
the setting sun, seemed to cry out over the darkening sea the words 
painted on her stern, ‘Judea, London. Do or Die.’ 


82 
Youth: A 
Narrative 
“Then we entered the Indian Ocean and steered northerly for Java 
Head. The winds were light. Weeks slipped by. She crawled on, do 
or die, and people at home began to think of posting us as overdue. 
“One Saturday evening, I 
being off duty, the men asked me to give 
them an extra bucket of water or so—for washing clothes. As I did 
not wish to screw on the fresh-water pump so late, I went forward 
whistling, and with a key in my hand to unlock the forepeak scuttle, 
intending to serve the water out of a spare tank we kept there. 
“The smell down below was as unexpected as it was frightful. One 
would have thought hundreds of paraffin-lamps had been flaring and 
smoking in that hole for days. I 
was glad to get out. The man with me 
coughed and said, ‘Funny smell, sir.’ | 
answered negligently, ‘It’s 
good for the health they say,’ and walked aft. 
“The first thing I did was to put my head down the square of the 
midship ventilator. As I 
lifted the lid a visible breath, something like 
a thin fog, a puff of faint haze, rose from the opening. The ascending 
air was hot, and had a 
heavy, sooty, paraffiny smell. I gave one sniff, 
and put down the lid gently. It was no use choking myself. The cargo 
was on fire.* 
“Next day she began to smoke in earnest. You see it was to be 
expected, for though the coal was of a safe kind, that cargo had been 
so handled, so broken up with handling, that it looked more. like 
smithy coal than anything else.* Then it had been wetted—more than 
once. It rained all the time we were taking it back from the hulk, and 
now with this long passage it got heated, and there was another case 
of spontaneous combustion. 
“The captain called us into the cabin. He had a 
chart spread on 
the table, and looked unhappy. He said, ‘The coast of West Australia 
is near, but I mean to proceed to our destination. It is the hurricane 
month too; but we will just keep her head for Bankok, and fight the 
fire. No more putting back anywhere, if we all get roasted. We will 
try first to stifle this °ere damned combustion by want of air.’* 
“We tried. We battened down everything, and still she smoked. 
The smoke kept coming out through imperceptible crevices; it 
forced itself through bulkheads and covers; it oozed here and there 
and everywhere in slender threads, in an invisible film, in an 
incomprehensible manner. It made its way into the cabin, into the 
forecastle; it poisoned the sheltered places on the deck, it could be 
sniffed as high as the mainyard. It was clear that if the smoke came 


Youth: A Narrative 
83 
out the air came in. This was disheartening. This combustion 
refused to be stifled. 
“We resolved to try water, and took the hatches off. Enormous 
volumes of smoke, whitish, yellowish, thick,’greasy, misty, choking, 
ascended as high as the trucks. All hands cleared out aft. Then the 
poisonous cloud blew away, and we went back to work in a smoke 
that was no thicker now than that of an ordinary factory chimney. 
“We rigged the force-pump, got the hose along, and by-and-by it 
burst. Well, it was as old as the ship—a prehistoric hose, and past 
repair. Then we pumped with the feeble head-pump, drew water 
with buckets, and in this way managed in time to pour lots of Indian 
Ocean into the main hatch. The bright stream flashed in sunshine, 
fell into a layer of white crawling smoke, and vanished on the black 
surface of coal. Steam ascended mingling with the smoke. We 
poured salt water as into a barrel without a bottom. It was our fate to 
pump in that ship, to pump out of her, to pump into her; and after 
keeping water out of her to save ourselves from being drowned, we 
frantically poured water into her to save ourselves from being burnt. 
“And she crawled on, do or die, in the serene weather. The sky 
was a miracle of purity, a miracle of azure. The sea was polished, was 
blue, was pellucid, was sparkling like a precious stone, extending on 
all sides, all round to the horizon—as if the whole terrestrial globe 
had been one jewel, one colossal sapphire, a single gem fashioned 
into a planet. And on the lustre of the great calm waters the Judea 
glided imperceptibly, enveloped in languid and unclean vapours, in a 
lazy cloud that drifted to leeward, light and slow: a pestiferous cloud 
defiling the splendour of sea and sky.* 
“All this time of course we saw no fire. The cargo smouldered at 
the bottom somewhere. Once Mahon, as we were working side by 
side, said to me with a queer smile: ‘Now, if she only would spring a 
tidy leak—like that time when we first left the Channel—it would 
put a stopper on this fire. Wouldn’t it?’ I 
remarked irrelevantly, ‘Do 
you remember the rats?’ 
“We fought the fire and sailed the ship too as carefully as though 
nothing had been the matter. The steward cooked and attended on 
us. Of the other twelve men, eight worked while four rested. Every 
one took his turn, captain included. There was equality, and if not 
exactly fraternity, then a deal of good feeling. Sometimes a man, as 
he dashed a bucketful of water down the hatchway, would yell out, 


84 
Youth: A Narrative 
‘Hurrah for Bankok!’ and the rest laughed. But generally we were 
taciturn and serious—and thirsty. Oh! how thirsty! And we had to be 
careful with the water. Strict allowance. The ship smoked, the sun 
blazed. 
. 
. 
. Pass the bottle. 
“We tried everything. We even made an attempt to dig down to 
the fire. No good, of course. No man could remain more than a 
minute below. Mahon, who went first, fainted there, and the man 
who went to fetch him out did likewise. We lugged them out on 
deck. Then I 
leaped down to show how easily it could be done. They 
had learned wisdom by that time, and contented themselves by fish- 
ing for me with a chain-hook tied to a broom-handle, I 
believe. I did 
not offer to go and fetch up my shovel, which was left down below. 
“Things began to look bad. We put the long-boat into the water. 
The second boat was ready to swing out. We had also another, a 
14-foot thing, on davits aft, where it was quite safe. 
“Then, behold, the smoke suddenly decreased. We redoubled our 
efforts to flood the bottom of the ship. In two days there was no 
smoke at all. Everybody was on the broad grin. This was on a Friday. 
On Saturday no work, but sailing the ship of course, was done. The 
men washed their clothes and their faces for the first time in a 
fortnight, and had a 
special dinner given them. They spoke of spon- 
taneous combustion with contempt, and implied they were the boys 
to put out combustions. Somehow we all felt as though we each had 
inherited a large fortune. But a beastly smell of burning hung about 
the ship. Captain Beard had hollow eyes and sunken cheeks. I had 
never noticed so much before how twisted and bowed he was. He and 
Mahon prowled soberly about hatches and ventilators, sniffing. It 
struck me suddenly poor Mahon was a 
very, very old chap. As to me, 
I was as pleased and proud as though I had helped to win a great 
naval battle. O! Youth! 
“The night was fine. In the morning a homeward-bound ship 
passed us hull down, —the first we had seen for months; but we were 
nearing the land at last, Java Head being about 190 miles off, and 
nearly due north. 
“Next day it was my watch on deck from eight to twelve. At 
breakfast the captain observed, ‘It’s wonderful how that smell hangs 
about the cabin.’ About ten, the mate being on the poop, I stepped 
down on the main-deck for a moment. The carpenter’s bench stood 
abaft the mainmast: I leaned against it sucking at my pipe, and the 


Youth: A Narrative 
85 
carpenter, a young chap, came to talk to me. He remarked, ‘I think 
we have done very well, haven’t we?’ and then I perceived with 
annoyance the fool was trying to tilt the bench. I 
said curtly, ‘Don’t, 
Chips,’ and immediately became aware of a queer sensation, of an 
absurd delusion,—I seemed somehow to be in the air. I heard all 
round me like* a pent-up breath released—as if a thousand giants 
simultaneously had said Phoo!—and felt a dull concussion which 
made my ribs ache suddenly. No doubt about it—I was in the air, and 
my body was describing a short parabola. But short as it was, I had 
the time to think several thoughts in, as far as I 
can remember, the 
following order: ‘This can’t be the carpenter— What is it?p—Some 
accident— Submarine volcano? —Coals, gas!—By Jove! we are being 
blown up—Everybody’s dead—I am falling into the after-hatch—I 
see fire in it.’ 
“The coal-dust suspended in the air of the hold had glowed 
dull-red at the moment of the explosion.* In the twinkling of an eye, 
in an infinitesimal fraction of a second since the first tilt of the 
bench, I was sprawling full length on the cargo.* I picked myself up 
and scrambled out. It was quick like a rebound. The deck was a 
wilderness of smashed timber, lying crosswise like trees in a wood 
after a hurricane; an immense curtain of soiled rags waved gently 
before me—it was the mainsail blown to strips. I 
thought, The masts 
will be toppling over directly; and to get out of the way bolted on all- 
fours towards the poop-ladder. The first person I saw was Mahon, 
with eyes like saucers, his mouth open, and the long white hair 
standing straight on end round his head like a 
silver halo. He was just 
about to go down when the sight of the main-deck stirring, heaving 
up, and changing into splinters before his eyes, petrified him on the 
top step. I 
stared at him in unbelief, and he stared at me with a queer 
kind of shocked curiosity. I did not know that I had no hair, no 
eyebrows, no eyelashes, that my young moustache was burnt off, that 
my face was black, one cheek laid open, my nose cut, and my chin 
bleeding. I 
had lost my cap, one of my slippers, and my shirt was torn 
to rags. Of all this I was not aware. I was amazed to see the ship 
still afloat, the poop-deck whole—and, most of all, to see anybody 
alive. Also the peace of the sky and the serenity of the sea were dis- 
tinctly surprising. I suppose I expected to see them convulsed with 
horror. 
. 
. 
. Pass the bottle. 
“There was a voice hailing the ship from somewhere—in the air, 


86 
Youth: A Narrative 
in the sky—I couldn’t tell. Presently I saw the captain—and he was 
mad. He asked me eagerly, ‘Where’s the cabin-table?’ and to hear 
such a question was a 
frightful shock. I had just been blown up, you 
understand, and vibrated with that experience,—I wasn’t quite sure 
whether I 
was alive. Mahon began to stamp with both feet and yelled 
at him, ‘Good God! don’t you see the deck’s blown out of her?’ I 
found my voice, and stammered out as if conscious of some gross 
neglect of duty, ‘I don’t know where the cabin-table is.’ It was like an 
absurd dream. 
“Do you know what he wanted next? Well, he wanted to trim the 
yards. Very placidly, and as if lost in thought, he insisted on having 
the foreyard squared. ‘I don’t know if there’s anybody alive,’ said 
Mahon, almost tearfully. ‘Surely,’ he said, gently, ‘there will be 
enough left to square the foreyard.’ 
“The old chap, it seems, was in his own berth, winding up the 
chronometers, when the shock sent him spinning. Immediately it 
occurred to him—as he said afterwards—that the ship had struck 
something, and he ran out into the cabin. There, he saw, the cabin- 
table had vanished somewhere. The deck being blown up, it had 
fallen down into the lazarette of course. Where we had our breakfast 
that morning he saw only a 
great hole in the floor. This appeared to 
him so awfully mysterious, and impressed him so immensely, that 
what he saw and heard after he got on deck were mere trifles in 
comparison. And, mark, he noticed directly the wheel deserted and 
his barque off her course—and his only thought was to get that 
miserable, stripped, undecked, smouldering shell of a ship back 
again with her head pointing at her port of destination. Bankok! 
That’s what he was after. I 
tell you this quiet, bowed, bandy-legged, 
almost deformed little man was immense in the singleness of his idea 
and in his placid ignorance of our agitation. He motioned us forward 
with a commanding gesture, and went to take the wheel himself. 
“Yes; that was the first thing we did—trim the yards of that 
wreck! No one was killed, or even disabled, but every one was more 
or less hurt. You should have seen them! Some were in rags, with 
black faces, like coalheavers, like sweeps, and had bullet heads that 
seemed closely cropped, but were in fact singed to the skin. Others, 
of the watch below, awakened by being shot out from their collapsing 
bunks, shivered incessantly, and kept on groaning even as we went 
about our work. But they all worked. That crew of Liverpool hard 


Youth: A Narrative 
87 
cases had in them the right stuff. It’s my experience they always 
have. It is the sea that gives it—the vastness, the loneliness surround- 
ing their dark stolid souls. Ah! Well! we stumbled, we crept, we fell, 
we barked our shins on the wreckage, we hauled. The masts stood, 
but we did not know how much they might be charred down below. 
It was nearly calm, but a long swell ran from the west and made 
her roll. They might go at any moment. We looked at them with 
apprehension. One could not foresee which way they would fall. 
“Then we retreated aft and looked about us. The deck was a tangle 
of planks on edge, of planks on end, of splinters, of ruined wood- 
work. The masts rose from that chaos like big trees above a matted 
undergrowth. The interstices of that mass of wreckage were full of 
something whitish, sluggish, stirring—of something that was like a 
greasy fog. The smoke of the invisible fire was coming up again, was 
trailing, like a poisonous thick mist in some valley choked with dead 
wood. Already lazy wisps were beginning to curl upwards amongst 
the mass of splinters. Here and there a piece of timber, stuck 
upright, resembled a 
post. Half of a fife-rail had been shot through 
the foresail, and the sky made a 
patch of glorious blue in the ignobly 
soiled canvas. A portion of several boards holding together had fallen 
across the rail, and one end protruded overboard, like a gangway 
leading upon nothing, like a gangway leading over the deep sea, 
leading to death—as if inviting us to walk the plank at once and be 
done with our ridiculous troubles.* And still the air, the sky—a ghost, 
something invisible was hailing the ship. 
“Some one had the sense to look over, and there was the helms- 
man, who had impulsively jumped overboard, anxious to come back. 
He yelled and swam lustily like a merman, keeping up with the ship. 
We threw him a 
rope, and presently he stood amongst us streaming 
with water and very crestfallen. The captain had surrendered the 
wheel, and apart, elbow on rail and chin in hand, gazed at the sea 
wistfully. We asked ourselves, What next? I thought, Now, this is 
something like. This is great. I 
wonder what will happen. O youth!* 
“Suddenly Mahon sighted a steamer far astern. Captain Beard 
said, ‘We may do something with her yet.’ We hoisted two flags, 
which said in the international language of the sea, ‘On fire. Want 
immediate assistance.’ The steamer grew bigger rapidly, and by-and- 
by spoke with two flags on her foremast, ‘I am coming to your 
assistance.’ 


88 
Youth: A Narrative 
“In half an hour she was abreast, to windward, within hail, and 
rolling slightly, with her engines stopped. We lost our composure, 
and yelled all together with excitement, ‘We’ve been blown up.’ A 
man in a white helmet, on the bridge, cried, ‘Yes! All right! all right!’ 
and he nodded his head, and smiled, and made soothing motions 
with his hand as thought at a lot of frightened children. One of the 
boats dropped in the water, and walked towards us upon the sea with 
her long oars. Four Calashes pulled a swinging stroke. This was my 
first sight of Malay seamen. I’ve known them since, but what struck 
me then was their unconcern: they came alongside, and even the 
bowman standing up and holding to our main-chains with the boat- 
hook did not deign to lift his head for a glance. I 
thought people who 
had been blown up deserved more attention. 
“A little man, dry like a chip and agile like a monkey, clambered 
up. It was the mate of the steamer. He gave one look, and cried, ‘O 
boys—you had better quit.’ 
“We were silent. He talked apart with the captain for a time,— 
seemed to argue with him. Then they went away together to the 
steamer. 
“When our skipper came back we learned that the steamer was the 
Sommerville, Captain Nash, from West Australia to Singapore vid 
Batavia with mails, and that the agreement was she should tow us to 
Anjer or Batavia, if possible, where we could extinguish the fire by 
scuttling, and then proceed on our voyage—to Bankok! The old man 
seemed excited. ‘We will do it yet,’ he said to Mahon, fiercely. He 
shook his fist at the sky. Nobody else said a word. 
“At noon the steamer began to tow. She went ahead slim and high, 
and what was left of the Judea followed at the end of seventy fathom 
of tow-rope, —followed her swiftly like a cloud of smoke with mast- 
heads protruding above. We went aloft to furl the sails. We coughed 
on the yards, and were careful about the bunts. Do you see the lot of 
us there, putting a neat furl on the sails of that ship doomed to arrive 
nowhere? There was not a man who didn’t think that at any moment 
the masts would topple over. From aloft we could not see the ship for 
smoke, and they worked carefully, passing the gaskets with even 
turns. “Harbour furl—aloft there!’ cried Mahon from below. 
“You understand this? I don’t think one of those chaps expected 
to get down in the usual way. When we did I heard them saying to 
each other, ‘Well, I thought we would come down overboard, in a 


Youth: A Narrative 
89 
lump—sticks and all—blame me if I didn’t.’ “That’s what I was 
thinking to myself,’ would answer wearily another battered and ban- 
daged scarecrow. And, mind, these were men without the drilled-in 
habit of obedience. To an onlooker they would be a 
lot of profane 
scallywags without a redeeming point. What made them do 1t— what 
made them obey me when I, thinking consciously how fine it was, 
made them drop the bunt of the foresail twice to try and do it better? 
What? They had no professional reputation—no examples, no 
praise. It wasn’t a sense of duty; they all knew well enough how to 
shirk, and laze, and dodge—when they had a mind to it—and mostly 
they had. Was it the two pounds ten a month that sent them there? 
They didn’t think their pay half good enough. No; it was something 
in them, something inborn and subtle and everlasting. I don’t say 
positively that the crew of a French or German merchantman 
wouldn’t have done it, but I doubt whether it would have been done 
in the same way.* There was a completeness in it, something solid like 
a principle, and masterful like an instinct—a disclosure of something 
secret—of that hidden something, that gift of good or evil that 
makes racial difference, that shapes the fate of nations. 
“Tt was that night at ten that, for the first time since we had been 
fighting it, we saw the fire. The speed of the towing had fanned the 
smouldering destruction. A blue gleam appeared forward, shining 
below the wreck of the deck. It wavered in patches, it seemed to stir 
and creep like the light of a glowworm. I saw it first, and told 
Mahon. ‘Then the game’s up,’ he said. ‘We had better stop this 
towing, or she will burst out suddenly fore and aft before we can 
clear out.’ We set up a 
yell; rang bells to attract their attention; they 
towed on. At last Mahon and I 
had to crawl forward and cut the rope 
with an axe. There was no time to cast off the lashings. Red tongues 
could be seen licking the wilderness of splinters under our feet as we 
made our way back to the poop. 
“Of course they very soon found out in the steamer that the rope 
was gone. She gave a loud blast of her whistle, her lights were seen 
sweeping in a wide circle, she came up ranging close alongside, and 
stopped. We were all in a tight group on the poop looking at her. 
Every man had saved a 
little bundle or a bag. Suddenly a conical 
flame with a twisted top shot up forward and threw upon the black 
sea a circle of light, with the two vessels side by side and heaving 
gently in its centre. Captain Beard had been sitting on the gratings 


go 
Youth: A Narrative 
still and mute for hours, but now he rose slowly and advanced in 
front of us, to the mizzen-shrouds. Captain Nash hailed: ‘Come 
along! Look sharp. I have mail-bags on board. I will take you and 
your boats to Singapore.’ 
“*Thank you! No!’ said our skipper. ‘We must see the last of the 
ship.’ 
““T can’t stand by any longer,’ shouted the other. ‘Mails—you 
know.’ 
“Ay! ay! We are all right.’ 
“Very well! Pll report you in Singapore. 
. 
. 
. Goodbye!’ 
“He waved his hand. Our men dropped their bundles quietly. The 
steamer moved ahead, and passing out of the circle of light, vanished 
at once from our sight, dazzled by the fire which burned fiercely. 
And then I knew that I would see the East first as commander of a 
small boat. I 
thought it fine; and the fidelity to the old ship was fine. 
We should see the last of her. Oh the glamour of youth! Oh the fire of 
it, more dazzling than the flames of the burning ship, throwing a 
magic light on the wide earth, leaping audaciously to the sky, pres- 
ently to be quenched by time, more cruel, more pitiless, more bitter 
than the sea—and like the flames of the burning ship surrounded by 
an impenetrable night. 
“The old man warned us in his gentle and inflexible way that it was 
part of our duty to save for the underwriters as much as we could of 
the ship’s gear.* Accordingly we went to work aft, while she blazed 
forward to give us plenty of light. We lugged out a lot of rubbish. 
What didn’t we save? An old barometer fixed with an absurd quan- 
tity of screws nearly cost me my life: a sudden rush of smoke came 
upon me, and I 
just got away in time. There were various stores, 
bolts of canvas, coils of rope; the poop looked like a marine bazaar, 
and the boats were lumbered to the gunwales. One would have 
thought the old man wanted to take as much as he could of his first 
command with him. He was very, very quiet, but off his balance 
evidently. Would you believe it? He wanted to take a length of old 
stream-cable and a kedge-anchor with him in the long-boat. We said, 
“Ay, ay, sir,’ deferentially, and on the quiet let the things slip over- 
board. The heavy medicine-chest went that way, two bags of green 
coffee, tins of paint—fancy, paint!—a whole lot of things. Then I 
was ordered with two hands into the boats to make a stowage and get 


Youth: A 
Narrative 
gi 
them ready against the time it would be proper for us to leave the 
ship. 
“We put everything straight, stepped the long-boat’s mast for our 
skipper, who was to take charge of her, and-I was not sorry to sit 
down for a moment. My face felt raw, every limb ached as if 
broken, I was aware of all my ribs, and would have sworn to a twist 
in the backbone. The boats, fast astern, lay in a deep shadow, and 
all around I could see the circle of the sea lighted by the fire. A 
gigantic flame rose forward straight and clear. It flared fierce, with 
noises like the whirr of wings, with rumbles as of thunder. There 
were cracks, detonations, and from the cone of flame the sparks flew 
upwards, as man is born to trouble,* to leaky ships, and to ships 
that burn. 
“What bothered me was that the ship, lying broadside to the swell 
and to such wind as there was—a mere breath—the boats would not 
keep astern where they were safe, but persisted, in a pig-headed way 
boats have, in getting under the counter and then swinging along- 
side. They were knocking about dangerously and coming near the 
flame, while the ship rolled on them, and, of course, there was always 
the danger of the masts going over the side at any moment. I 
and my 
two boat-keepers kept them off as best we could, with oars and boat- 
hooks; but to be constantly at it became exasperating, since there was 
no reason why we should not leave at once. We could not see those on 
board, nor could we imagine what caused the delay. The boat- 
keepers were swearing feebly, and I had not only my share of the 
work but also had to keep at it two men who showed a constant 
inclination to lay themselves down and let things slide. 
“At last I hailed, ‘On deck there,’ and some one looked over. 
‘We’re ready here,’ I said. The head disappeared, and very soon 
popped up again. ‘The captain says, All right, sir, and to keep the 
boats well clear of the ship.’ 
“Half an hour passed. Suddenly there was a frightful racket, 
rattle, clanking of chain, hiss of water, and millions of sparks flew up 
into the shivering column of smoke that stood leaning slightly above 
the ship. The cat-heads had burned away, and the two red-hot 
anchors had gone to the bottom, tearing out after them two hundred 
fathom of red-hot chain. The ship trembled, the mass of flame 
swayed as if ready to collapse, and the fore top-gallant-mast fell. It 
darted down like an arrow of fire, shot under, and instantly leaping 


g2 
Youth: A Narrative 
up within an oar’s-length of the boats, floated quietly, very black on 
the luminous sea. I hailed the deck again. After some time a man in 
an unexpectedly cheerful but also muffled tone, as though he had 
been trying to speak with his mouth shut, informed me, ‘Coming 
directly, sir,’ and vanished. For a long time I heard nothing but the 
whirr and roar of the fire. There were also whistling sounds. The 
boats jumped, tugged at the painters, ran at each other playfully, 
knocked their sides together, or, do what we would, swung in a 
bunch against the ship’s side. I couldn’t stand it any longer, and 
swarming up a rope, clambered aboard over the stern. 
“It was as bright as day. Coming up like this, the sheet of fire 
facing me, was a 
terrifying sight, and the heat seemed hardly bear- 
able at first. On a settee cushion dragged out of the cabin, Captain 
Beard, his legs drawn up and one arm under his head, slept with the 
light playing on him. Do you know what the rest were busy about? 
They were sitting on deck right aft, round an open case, eating bread 
and cheese and drinking bottled stout. 
“On the background of flames twisting in fierce tongues above 
their heads they seemed at home like salamanders, and looked like a 
band of desperate pirates. The fire sparkled in the whites of their 
eyes, gleamed on patches of white skin seen through the torn shirts. 
Each had the marks as of a battle about him—bandaged heads, tied- 
up arms, a strip of dirty rag round a knee—and each man had a 
bottle between his legs and a chunk of cheese in his hand. Mahon got 
up. With his handsome and disreputable head, his hooked profile, his 
long white beard, and with an uncorked bottle in his hand, he 
resembled one of those reckless sea-robbers of old making merry 
amidst violence and disaster. ‘The last meal on board,’ he explained 
solemnly. ‘We had nothing to eat all day, and it was no use leaving all 
this.’ He flourished the bottle and indicated the sleeping skipper. ‘He 
said he couldn’t swallow anything, so I 
got him to lie down,’ he went 
on; and as I 
stared, ‘I don’t know whether you are aware, young 
fellow, the man had no sleep to speak of for days—and there will be 
dam’ little sleep in the boats.’ ‘There will be no boats by-and-by if 
you fool about much longer,’ I said, indignantly. I walked up to the 
skipper and shook him by the shoulder. At last he opened his eyes, 
but did not move. “Time to leave her, sir,’ I 
said, quietly. 
“He got up painfully, looked at the flames, at the sea sparkling 
round the ship, and black, black as ink farther away; he looked at the 


Youth: A 
Narrative 
93 
stars shining dim through a 
thin veil of smoke in 
a 
sky black, black as 
Erebus. 
“Youngest first,’ he said. 
“And the ordinary seaman, wiping his mouth with the back of his 
hand, got up, clambered over the taffrail, and vanished. Others fol- 
lowed. One, on the point of going over, stopped short to drain his 
bottle, and with a great swing of his arm flung it at the fire. “Take 
this!’ he cried. 
“The skipper lingered disconsolately, and we left him to commune 
alone for a while with his first command. Then I went up again and 
brought him away at last. It was time. The ironwork on the poop 
was hot to the touch. 
“Then the painter of the long-boat was cut, and the three boats, 
tied together, drifted clear of the ship. It was just sixteen hours after 
the explosion when we abandoned her. Mahon had charge of the 
second boat, and I had the smallest—the 14-foot thing. The long- 
boat would have taken the lot of us; but the skipper said we must save 
as much property as we could—for the underwriters—and so I 
got 
my first command. I had two men with me, a bag of biscuits, a few 
tins of meat, and a breaker of water. I was ordered to keep close to 
the long-boat, that in case of bad weather we might be taken into her. 
“And do you know what I thought? I thought I would part com- 
pany as soon as I could. I wanted to have my first command all to 
myself. I 
wasn’t going to sail in a squadron if there were a chance for 
independent cruising. I would make land by myself. I 
would beat the 
other boats. Youth! All youth! The silly, charming, beautiful youth.* 
“But we did not make a start at once. We must see the last of the 
ship. And so the boats drifted about that night, heaving and setting 
on the swell. The men dozed, waked, sighed, groaned. I looked at 
the burning ship. 
“Between the darkness of earth and heaven she was burning 
fiercely upon a disc of purple sea shot by the blood-red play of 
gleams; upon a disc of water glittering and sinister. A high, clear 
flame, an immense and lonely flame, ascended from the ocean, and 
from its summit the black smoke poured continuously at the sky. She 
burned furiously, mournful and imposing like a funeral pile kindled 
in the night, surrounded by the sea, watched over by the stars. A 
magnificent death had come like a grace, like a gift, like a reward to 
that old ship at the end of her laborious days. The surrender of her 


94 
Youth: A Narrative 
weary ghost to the keeping of stars and sea was stirring like the sight 
of a glorious triumph. The masts fell just before daybreak, and for a 
moment there was a burst and turmoil of sparks that seemed to fill 
with flying fire the night patient and watchful, the vast night lying 
silent upon the sea. At daylight she was only a charred shell, floating 
still under a cloud of smoke and bearing a glowing mass of coal 
within. 
“Then the oars were got out, and the boats forming in a line 
moved round her remains as if 
in procession—the long-boat leading. 
As we pulled across her stern a slim dart of fire shot out viciously at 
us, and suddenly she went down, head first, in a great hiss of steam. 
The unconsumed stern was the last to sink; but the paint had gone, 
had cracked, had peeled off, and there were no letters, there was no 
word, no stubborn device that was like her soul, to flash at the rising 
sun her creed and her name. 
‘““We made our way north. A breeze sprang up, and about noon all 
the boats came together for the last time. I had no mast or sail in 
mine, but I 
made a mast out of a spare oar and hoisted a boat-awning 
for a sail, with a boat-hook for a yard. She was certainly over-masted, 
but I had the satisfaction of knowing that with the wind aft I could 
beat the other two. I 
had to wait for them. Then we all had a look at 
the captain’s chart, and, after a sociable meal of hard bread and 
water, got our last instructions. These were simple: steer north, and 
keep together as much as possible. ‘Be careful with that jury-rig, 
Marlow,’ said the captain; and Mahon, as I 
sailed proudly past his 
boat, wrinkled his curved nose and hailed, ‘You will sail that ship of 
yours under water, if you don’t look out, young fellow.’ He was a 
malicious old man—and may the deep sea where he sleeps now rock 
him gently, rock him tenderly to the end of time! 
“Before sunset a thick rain-squall passed over the two boats, 
which were far astern, and that was the last I 
saw of them for a time. 
Next day I sat steering my cockle-shell—my first command —with 
nothing but water and sky around me. I did sight in the afternoon 
the upper sails of a ship far away, but said nothing, and my men did 
not notice her. You see I was afraid she might be homeward bound, 
and I had no mind to turn back from the portals of the East. I was 
steering for Java—another blessed name—like Bankok, you know. I 
steered many days. 
“I need not tell you what it is to be knocking about in an open 


Youth: A Narrative 
95 
boat. I remember nights and days of calm when we pulled, we 
pulled, and the boat seemed to stand still, as if 
bewitched within the 
circle of the sea horizon. I remember the heat, the deluge of rain- 
squalls that kept us baling for dear life (but filled our water-cask), 
and I remember sixteen hours on end with a mouth dry as a cinder 
and a 
steering-oar over the stern to keep my first command head on 
to a breaking sea. I did not know how good a man I 
was till then. I 
remember the drawn faces, the dejected figures of my two men, and I 
remember my youth and the feeling that will never come back any 
more—the feeling that I 
could last for ever, outlast the sea, the earth, 
and all men; the deceitful feeling that lures us on to joys, to perils, to 
love, to vain effort—to death; the triumphant conviction of strength, 
the heat of life in the handful of dust,* the glow in the heart that with 
every year grows dim, grows cold, grows small, and expires—and 
expires, too soon, too soon—before life itself. 
“And this is how I see the East. I have seen its secret places and 
have looked into its very soul; but now I 
see it always from a small 
boat, a high outline of mountains, blue and afar in the morning; like 
faint mist at noon; a jagged wall of purple at sunset. I 
have the feel of 
the oar in my hand, the vision of a scorching blue sea in my eyes. 
And I 
see a bay, a wide bay, smooth as glass and polished like ice, 
shimmering in the dark. A red light burns far off upon the gloom of 
the land, and the night is soft and warm. We drag at the oars with 
aching arms, and suddenly a puff of wind, a puff faint and tepid and 
laden with strange odours of blossoms, of aromatic wood, comes out 
of the still night—the first sigh of the East on my face. That I can 
never forget. It was impalpable and enslaving, like a charm, like a 
whispered promise of mysterious delight. 
“We had been pulling this finishing spell for eleven hours. Two 
pulled, and he whose turn it was to rest sat at the tiller. We had made 
out the red light in that bay and steered for it, guessing it must mark 
some small coasting port. We passed two vessels, outlandish and 
high-sterned, sleeping at anchor, and, approaching the light, now 
very dim, ran the boat’s nose against the end of a jutting wharf. We 
were blind with fatigue. My men dropped the oars and fell off the 
thwarts as if dead. I 
made fast to a 
pile. A current rippled softly. The 
scented obscurity of the shore was grouped into vast masses, a dens- 
ity of colossal clumps of vegetation, probably —mute and fantastic 
shapes. And at their foot the semicircle of a beach gleamed faintly, 


96 
Youth: A 
Narrative 
like an illusion. There was not a 
light, not a stir, not a sound. The 
mysterious East faced me, perfumed like a flower, silent like death, 
dark like a grave. 
“And I sat weary beyond expression, exulting like a conqueror, 
sleepless and entranced as if before a profound, a fateful enigma. 
“A splashing of oars, a measured dip reverberating on the level of 
water, intensified by the silence of the shore into loud claps, made me 
jump up. A boat, a European boat, was coming in. I invoked the 
name of the dead; I 
hailed: Judea ahoy! A thin shout answered. 
“It was the captain. I 
had beaten the flagship by three hours, and I 
was glad to hear the old man’s voice again, tremulous and tired. ‘Is it 
you, Marlow?’ ‘Mind the end of that jetty, sir,’ I 
cried. 
“He approached cautiously, and brought up with the deep-sea 
lead-line which we had saved—for the underwriters. 
I eased my 
painter and fell alongside. He sat, a broken figure at the stern, wet 
with dew, his hands clasped in his lap. His men were asleep already. ‘I 
had a 
terrible time of it,’ he murmured. ‘Mahon is behind—not very 
far.’ We conversed in whispers, in low whispers, as if afraid to wake 
up the land. Guns, thunder, earthquakes would not have awakened 
the men just then. 
“Looking round as we talked, I saw away at sea a 
bright light 
travelling in the night. “There’s a steamer passirig the bay,’ I said. 
She was not passing, she was entering, and she even came close and 
anchored. ‘I wish,’ said the old man, ‘you would find out whether she 
is English. Perhaps they could give us a passage somewhere.’ He 
seemed nervously anxious. So by dint of punching and kicking I 
started one of my men into a 
state of somnambulism, and giving him 
an oar, took another and pulled towards the lights of the steamer. 
“There was a murmur of voices in her, metallic hollow clangs of 
the engine-room, footsteps on the deck. Her ports shone, round like 
dilated eyes. Shapes moved about, and there was a shadowy man 
high up on the bridge. He heard my oars. 
“And then, before I 
could open my lips, the East spoke to me, but 
it was in a Western voice. A torrent of words was poured into the 
enigmatical, the fateful silence; outlandish, angry words, mixed with 
words and even whole sentences of good English, less strange but 
even more surprising. The voice swore and cursed violently; it 
riddled the solemn peace of the bay by a volley of abuse. It began by 
calling me Pig, and from that went crescendo into unmentionable 


Youth: A Narrative 
97 
adjectives—in English. The man up there raged aloud in two lan- 
guages, and with a sincerity in his fury that almost convinced me I 
had, in some way, sinned against the harmony of the universe. 
I could hardly see him, but began to think he would work himself 
into a 
fit. 
“Suddenly he ceased, and I could hear him snorting and blowing 
like a porpoise. I said— 
“What steamer is this, pray?’ 
“*Eh? What’s this? And who are you?’ 
“Castaway crew of an English barque burnt at sea. We came here 
tonight. I am the second mate. The captain is in the long-boat, and 
wishes to know if you would give us a passage somewhere.’ 
“Oh, my goodness! I 
say. . 
. 
. This is the Celestial from Singapore 
on her return trip. P’ll arrange with your captain in the morning, . 
. 
. 
and, ...Isay,... did you hear me just now?’ 
““T should think the whole bay heard you.’ 
“‘T thought you were a shore-boat. Now, look here—this infernal 
lazy scoundrel of a caretaker has gone to sleep again—curse him. 
The light is out, and I 
nearly ran foul of the end of this damned jetty. 
This is the third time he plays me this trick. Now, I ask you, can 
anybody stand this kind of thing? It’s enough to drive a man out of 
his mind. [ll report him... 
. Pll get the Assistant Resident to give 
him the sack, by .. 
. ! 
See—there’s no light. It’s out, isn’t it? I take 
you to witness the light’s out. There should be a light, you know. A 
red light on the 
: 
“There was a 
light,’ I 
said, mildly. 
“But it’s out, man! What’s the use of talking like this? You can 
see for yourself it’s out—don’t you? If you had to take a valuable 
steamer along this God-forsaken coast you would want a 
light too. 
I'll kick him from end to end of his miserable wharf. You'll see if I 
don’t. I 
will 
i 
“So I 
may tell my captain you'll take us?’ I 
broke in. 
“‘Ves Tl take you. Good night,’ he said, brusquely. 
“J pulled back, made fast again to the jetty, and then went to sleep 
at last. I had faced the silence of the East. I had heard some of its 
language. But when I opened my eyes again the silence was as com- 
plete as though it had never been broken. I was lying in a flood of 
light, and the sky had never looked so far, so high, before. I opened 
my eyes and lay without moving. 


98 
Youth: A Narrative 
“And then I saw the men of the East—they were looking at me. 
The whole length of the jetty was full of people. I saw brown, 
bronze, yellow faces, the black eyes, the glitter, the colour of an 
Eastern crowd. And all these beings stared without a murmur, with- 
out a sigh, without a movement. They stared down at the boats, at 
the sleeping men who at night had come to them from the sea. 
Nothing moved. The fronds of palms stood still against the sky. Not 
a branch stirred along the shore, and the brown roofs of hidden 
houses peeped through the green foliage, through the big leaves that 
hung shining and still like leaves forged of heavy metal. This was the 
East of the ancient navigators, so old, so mysterious, resplendent and 
sombre, living and unchanged, full of danger and promise. And 
these were the men. I sat up suddenly. A wave of movement passed 
through the crowd from end to end, passed along the heads, swayed 
the bodies, ran along the jetty like a ripple on the water, like a breath 
of wind on a 
field—and all was still again. I see it now—the wide 
sweep of the bay, the glittering sands, the wealth of green infinite and 
varied, the sea blue like the sea of a dream, the crowd of attentive 
faces, the blaze of vivid colour—the water reflecting it all, the curve 
of the shore, the jetty, the high-sterned outlandish craft floating still, 
and the three boats with the tired men from the West sleeping, 
unconscious of the land and the people and of the violence of 
sunshine. They slept thrown across the thwarts, curled on bottom- 
boards, in the careless attitudes of death. The head of the old 
skipper, leaning back in the stern of the long-boat, had fallen on his 
breast, and he looked as though he would never wake. Farther out 
old Mahon’s face was upturned to the sky, with the long white beard 
spread out on his breast, as though he had been shot where he sat at 
the tiller; and a man, all in a heap in the bows of the boat, slept with 
both arms embracing the stem-head and with his cheek laid on the 
gunwale. The East looked at them without a sound. 
“I have known its fascination since: I have seen the mysterious 
shores, the still water, the lands of brown nations, where a 
stealthy 
Nemesis lies in wait, pursues, overtakes so many of the conquering 
race, who are proud of their wisdom, of their knowledge, of their 
strength. But for me all the East is contained in that vision of my 
youth. It is all in that moment when I 
opened my young eyes on it. I 
came upon it from a tussle with the sea—and I was young—and I 
saw it looking at me. And this is all that is left of it! Only a moment; a 


Youth: A Narrative 
99 
moment of strength, of romance, of glamour—of youth!* ... A flick 
of sunshine upon a 
strange shore, the time to remember, the time for 
a sigh, and— goodbye! —Night—Goodbye 
. 
. 
. !” 
He drank. 
; 
“Ah! The good old time—the good old time.* Youth and the sea.* 
Glamour and the sea! The good, strong sea, the salt, bitter sea, that 
could whisper to you and roar at you and knock your breath out of 
you.” 
He drank again. 
“By all that’s wonderful, it is the sea, I 
believe, the sea itself—or is 
it youth alone? Who can tell? But you here—you all had something 
out of life: money, love—whatever one gets on shore—and, tell me, 
wasn’t that the best time, that time when we were young at sea; 
young and had nothing, on the sea that gives nothing, except hard 
knocks—and sometimes a chance to feel your strength—that only— 
what you all regret?” 
And we all nodded at him: the man of finance, the man of 
accounts, the man of law, we all nodded at him over the polished 
table that like a still sheet of brown water reflected our faces, lined, 
wrinkled; our faces marked by toil, by deceptions, by success, by 
love; our weary eyes looking still, looking always, looking anxiously 
for something out of life, that while it is expected is already gone— 
has passed unseen, in a sigh, in a flash—together with the youth, 
with the strength, with the romance of illusions.* 


4 
» 
sie 
<2 
aks 
(2 hae 
te 
cepyoms 
ts 
ww 
Uy wD 
alates tr cooler at? oul 
din ieee a 
. 
a 
agli 
tae 
; 
oe 
dpc 
ce st 
maidens 
7 
eral bre iar) * npl“ete-tieae 
yy 
soe Petey 
als che pepe fi yi 
Ss 
+ 
apie Ae 
oe Fl 
ey E 
Ta 
76 be eT eae Sue 
Zoe 
(Pr 
-e 
i 
aeee 
ate if 4 
* 
—! 
ar 
- 
ee 
| 
is -M aw 
(me 
Oh Srehal Oo OTe 
i S6ifetnwed 
yal 
Satta 
Wa Ng 
sors 
(eg ee 4) Gn les 
ear See 
fee: 
446 
fet (re Sem 
“med 
& 
peel pretense 
ae 
rue 
fee 
4R aw 
FAad tpl 
lt 
' 
ealP 
fee Dre 
tu PK 
rt» 
2/ae@ 
Guryinill ea 
<r 
.ar' pee 
Gad Chess 
Jit TEL 
CU are 200 
Weide? DiesbAd 
© 
MATT 
s g OPO 
ROWE 1A 
1 
@« 
| 
@hageartiedks 
etna 
dt te 
ees 
at 
tcald 
a -deneeen dy et 
PSE. Web>y) wh’ wc 
4 
inane Ve 
GT yal 
ey 
e@iear ype 
ey 
(thon 
Rie Ay 
we! 
Tie 
vet) 
ive fies 
& Al (aie 
tia, 
pre ®, 
2-90 
-ai- 
Gay 
te) 
wor 
wet ie 
a 
oe ee eee ee ae eee ere 
Pee 
pays 
1 Nts 
v) 
alg’ weit 
TA thyeas 
= 
- 
7 
ies 
iy SOc 
ony 
paarst, 
~i7'o > 
@-wiie TH 
> 
uly 
teendreams dite. depend 
: 
ches 
‘i =_ ss 
i 
; 
i 
cam 
‘oie 
i 
= 
- 
r 
- 
< 
a 
68 
4. 
@@ 
7 
= 
inl 
( 
e 
a4 
& 
ghee 
@ 
pe 
~™ 
-£ ire 
: 
4 
Dar? 
Ne eal 
ae 
aad 
o—. 
Gar 
@ tad Vlieee 
ee 
—— 
~ 
aD 
err? OF US 
_ 
= 
»— = 
7 
Sad 
is U oe 
a 
w ° 
; 
a4 2 os @ bbdg< 


BEART OR DARKNESS 


eeaVAXATHO PAAR ® 


HEART OF DARKNESS#* 
THE Nellie, a cruising yawl, swung to her anchor without a 
flutter of 
the sails, and was at rest. The flood had made, the wind was nearly 
calm, and being bound down the river, the only thing for it was to 
come to and wait for the turn of the tide. 
The sea-reach of the Thames stretched before us like the begin- 
ning of an interminable waterway. In the offing the sea and the sky 
were welded together without a 
joint, and in the luminous space the 
tanned sails of the barges drifting up with the tide seemed to stand 
still in red clusters of canvas sharply peaked, with gleams of var- 
nished sprits. A haze rested on the low shores that ran out to sea in 
vanishing flatness. The air was dark above Gravesend, and farther 
back still seemed condensed into a mournful gloom, brooding 
motionless over the biggest, and the greatest, town on earth. 
The Director of Companies was our captain and our host.* We four 
affectionately watched his back as he stood in the bows looking to 
seaward. On the whole river there was nothing that looked half so 
nautical. He resembled a pilot, which to a seaman is trustworthiness 
personified.* It was difficult to realise his work was not out there in 
the luminous estuary, but 
behind him, within the brooding gloom. 
Between us there was, as I 
have already said somewhere, the bond 
of 
the sea.* Besides holding our hearts together through long periods 
of separation, it had the effect of making us tolerant of each other’s 
yarns—and 
even 
convictions. 
The Lawyer—the 
best 
of old 
fellows—had, because of his many years and many virtues, the only 
cushion on deck, and was lying on the only rug. The Accountant had 
brought out already a box of dominoes, and was toying architectur- 
ally with the bones.* Marlow sat cross-legged right aft, leaning 
against the mizzen-mast. He had sunken cheeks, a yellow com- 
plexion, a straight back, an ascetic aspect, and, with his arms 
dropped, the palms of hands outwards, resembled an idol.* The 
Director, satisfied the anchor had good hold, made his way aft and 
sat down amongst us. We exchanged a few words lazily. Afterwards 
there was silence on board the yacht. For some reason or other we 


104 
Heart of 
Darkness 
did not begin that game of dominoes. We felt meditative, and fit for 
nothing but placid staring. The day was ending in 
a 
serenity of still 
and exquisite brilliance. The water shone pacifically; the sky, without 
a speck, was a benign immensity of unstained light; the very mist on 
the Essex marshes was like a gauzy and radiant fabric, hung from the 
wooded rises inland, and draping the low shores in diaphanous folds. 
Only the gloom to the west, brooding over the upper reaches, 
became more sombre every minute, as if angered by the approach of 
the sun. 
And at last, in its curved and imperceptible fall, the sun sank low, 
and from glowing white changed to a dull red without rays and 
without heat, as if about to go out suddenly, stricken to death by the 
touch of that gloom brooding over a crowd of men. 
Forthwith a change came over the waters, and the serenity became 
less brilliant but more profound. The old river in its broad reach 
rested unruffled at the decline of day, after ages of good service done 
to the race that peopled its banks, spread out in the tranquil dignity 
of a waterway leading to the uttermost ends of the earth. We looked 
at the venerable stream not in the vivid flush of a short day that 
comes and departs for ever, but in the august light of abiding memor- 
ies. And indeed nothing is easier for a man who has, as the phrase 
goes, “followed the sea” with reverence and affection, than to evoke 
the great spirit of the past upon the lower reaches of the Thames. 
The tidal current runs to and fro in its unceasing service, crowded 
with memories of men and ships it had borne to the rest of home or 
to the battles of the sea. It had known and served all the men of 
whom the nation is proud, from Sir Francis Drake to Sir John 
Franklin, knights all, titled and untitled —the great knights-errant of 
the sea. It had borne all the ships whose names are like jewels flash- 
ing in the night of time, from the Golden Hind returning with her 
round flanks full of treasure, to be visited by the Queen’s Highness 
and thus pass out of the gigantic tale, to the Erebus and T, 
error, bound 
on other conquests—and that never returned.* It had known the 
ships and the men. They had sailed from Deptford, from Green- 
wich, from Erith—the adventurers and the settlers; kings’ ships and 
the ships of men on ’Change; captains, admirals, the dark “inter- 
lopers” of the Eastern trade, and the commissioned “generals” of 
East India fleets.* Hunters for gold or pursuers of fame, they all had 
gone out on that stream, bearing the sword, and often the torch, 


teart of 
Darton 
105 
messengers of the might within the land, bearers of a spark from the 
sacred fire. What greatness had not floated on the ebb of that river 
into the mystery of an unknown earth! ... The dreams of men, the 
seed of commonwealths, the germs of empires. 
The sun set; the dusk fell on the stream, and lights began to 
appear along the shore. The Chapman lighthouse, a three-legged 
thing erect on a mud-flat, shone strongly. Lights of ships moved in 
the fairway—a great stir of lights going up and going down. And 
farther west on the upper reaches the place of the monstrous town 
was still marked ominously on the sky, a brooding gloom in sunshine, 
a lurid glare und 
nd 
this also,” said Marlow suddenly, “has been 
one 
cof 
the dar 
places of the earth.”* 
- 
SSS SST 
TTT 
He was the only man of us who still “followed the sea.” The worst 
that could be said of him was that he did not represent his class. He 
was a seaman, but he was a wanderer too, while most seamen lead, if 
one may so express it, a sedentary life. Their minds are of the stay- 
at-home order, and their home is always with them—the ship; and so 
is their country—the sea. One ship is very much like another, and 
the sea is always the same. In the immutability of their surroundings 
the foreign shores, the foreign faces, the changing immensity of life, 
glide past, veiled not by a sense of mystery but by 
a 
slightly disdain- 
ful ignorance; for there is nothing mysterious to a seaman unless it be 
the sea itself, which is the mistress of his existence and as inscrutable 
as Destiny. For the rest, after his 
hours of work, a casual stroll or a 
casual spree on shore siiffices 
to unfold for him the secret of a whole 
continent, and generally he finds the secret not worth knowing. The 
yarns of seamen have a direct simplicity, the whole meaning of which 
lies within the shell of a cracked nut. But Marlow was not typical (if 
his propensity to spin yarns be excepted), and to him the meaning of 
an episode Saath ae 
ata 
stings 
ante 
nog 
tale which brought it out only 
as a 
glow brings out a 
haze, 
in the 
by the 
spectralillumination of 
moonshine. 
His remark did not seem at 
“did 
not 
seem at 
all surpri 
surprising. It was just like Marlow. 
It was accepted 
in silence. No one took the trouble to grunt even; and 
presently he said, very slow, 
— 
“T was thinking of very old times, when the Romans first came 
here, nineteen hundred years ago—the other day.*. . 
. Light came out 


106 
Heart of 
Darkness 
of this river since—you say ‘knights’?* Yes; but it is like a running 
blaze on a 
plain, like a flash of lightning in the clouds. We live in the 
flicker—may it last as long as the old earth keeps rolling! But dark- 
ness was here yesterday. Imagine the feelings of a commander of a 
fine—what d’ye call ’em?—trireme in the Mediterranean, ordered 
suddenly to the north; run overland across the Gauls in a hurry; put 
in charge of one of these craft the legionaries,—a wonderful lot of 
handy men they must have been too—used to build, apparently by 
the hundred, in a month or two, if we may believe what we read.* 
Imagine him here—the very end of the world, a sea the colour of 
lead, a sky the colour of smoke, a kind of ship about as rigid as a 
concertina—and going up this river with stores, or orders, or what 
you like. Sandbanks, marshes, forests, savages, —precious little to eat 
fit for a civilised man, nothing but Thames water to drink. No Faler- 
nian wine here, no going ashore. Here and there a military camp lost 
in a wilderness, like a needle in a bundle of hay—cold, fog, tempests, 
disease, exile, and death, —death skulking in the air, in the water, in 
the bush. They must have been dying like flies here. Oh yes—he did 
it. Did it very well, too, no doubt, and without thinking much about 
it either, except afterwards to brag of what he had gone through in 
his time, perhaps. The 
ough 
to face the darkness. And 
perhaps he was ctfccredibiiFeenisdsine tides acea ae 
to the fleet at Ravenna by-and-by, if he had good friends in Rome 
and survived the awful climate. Or think of a decent young citizen in 
a toga—perhaps too much dice, you know—coming out here in the 
train of some prefect, or tax-gatherer, or trader even, to mend his 
fortunes.* Land in a swamp, march through the woods, and in some 
inland post feel the savagery, the utter savagery, had closed round 
him,—all that mysterious life of the wilderness that stirs in the 
forest, in the jungles, in the hearts of wild men. There’s no initiation 
either into such mysteries. He has to live in the midst of the 
incomprehensible, which is also detestable. And it has a fascination, 
too, 
that 
goes 
to work 
upon 
him. 
The 
fascination 
of the 
abomination—you know. Imagine the growing regrets, the longing 
to escape, the powerless disgust, the surrender, the hate.” 
He paused. 
“Mind,” he began again, lifting one arm from the elbow, the palm 
of the hand outwards, so that, with his legs folded before him, he had 
the pose of a Buddha preaching in European clothes and without a 


107 
lotus-flower*— “Mind, none of us would feel exactly like this. What 
saves us is efficiency—the devotion to efficiency.* But these chaps 
were not much account, 
really. They were no colonists; their 
administration was merely a squeeze, and nothing more, I suspect. 
They were conquerors, and for that you want only brute force— 
nothing to boast of, when you have it, since your strength is just an 
accident arising from the weakness of others. They grabbed what 
they could get for the sake of what was to be got.* It was just robbery 
with violence, aggravated murder on a 
great scale, and men going at 
it blind—as is very proper for those who tackle a darkness.* The 
conquest of the earth, which mostly means the taking it away from 
those who have a 
different complexion or slightly flatter noses than 
ourselves, is not a pretty thing when you look into it too much. What 
redeems itis 
the idea only. An idea at the back of it; not a sentimental 
you can set up, and bow down before, and offer a 
sacrifice to. . 
. .” 
He broke off. Flames glided in the river, small green 
flames, red 
flames, white flames, pursuing, overtaking, joining, crossing each 
other—then separating slowly or hastily.* The traffic of the great city 
went on in the deepening night upon the sleepless river.* We looked 
on, waiting patiently—there was nothing else to do till the end of 
the flood; but it was only after a long silence, when he said, in a 
hesitating voice, “I suppose you fellows remember I did once turn 
fresh-water sailor for a bit,” that we knew we were fated, before the 
ebb began to run, to hear about one of Marlow’s inconclusive 
experiences. 
“J don’t want to bother you much with what happened to me 
personally,” he began, showing in this remark the weakness of many 
tellers of tales who seem so often 
unaware of what their audience 
Shion e 
meepetm aear 
eer 
ought to 
know how I 
got out there, what I saw, how I went up that 
river to the place where I 
first met the poor chap. It was the farthest 
point of navigation and the culminating point of my experience. It 
seemed somehow to throw a 
kind o€ligh? on everything about me— 
and into my thoughts. It was sombre enough too—and pitiful—not 
extraordinary in any way—not very clear either. No, not very clear. 
And yet it seemed to throw a kind o 
“TI had then, as you remember, just returned to London after 
a lot of Indian Ocean, Pacific, China Seas—a regular dose of the 


108 
Heart of 
Darkness 
East—six years or so, and I was loafing about, hindering you fellows 
in your work and invading your homes, just as though I had got a 
heavenly mission to civilise you. It was very fine for a time, but after 
a bit I did get tired of resting. Then I began to look for a ship—I 
should think the hardest work on earth. But the ships wouldn’t even 
look at me. And I got tired of that game too. 
“Now when I 
was a 
little chap I had a passion for maps. I would 
look for hours at South America, or Africa, or Australia, and lose 
myself in all the glories of exploration. At that time there were many 
blank spaces on the earth, and when I saw one that looked particu- 
larly inviting on a map (but they all look that) I would put my finger 
on it and say, When I grow up I will go there.* The North Pole was 
one of these places, I remember. Well, I haven’t been there yet, and 
shall not try now. The glamour’s off. Other places were scattered 
about the Equator, and in every sort of latitude all over the two 
hemispheres. I have been in some of them, and ... well, we won’t 
talk about that. But there was one yet—the biggest, the most blank, 
so to speak—that I 
had a hankering after. 
“True, by 
this-time 
it 
was not a blank space any more. It had got 
filled since my boyhood with rivers and lakes and names. It had 
ceased to be a blank space of delightful mystery 
—a 
white patch for a 
boy to dream gloriously over.* It had become a place of darkness.But 
there was in it one river especially, a mighty big river, that you could 
see on the map, resembling an 
immense 
snake uncoiled, with its head 
in the sea, its body at rest curving afar over a vast country, and its tail 
lost in the depths of the land. And as I looked at the map of it in a 
shop-window, it fascinated me as a snake would a bird—a silly little 
bird. Then I remembered there was a big concern, a Company for 
trade on that river.* Dash it all! I thought to myself, they can’t trade 
without using some kind of craft on that lot of fresh water— 
steamboats! Why shouldn’t I try to get charge of one. I went on 
along Fleet Street, but could not shake off the idea. The snake had 
charmed me. 
“You understand it was a Continental concern, that Trading 
Society; but I 
have a lot of relations living on the Continent, because 
it’s cheap and not so nasty as it looks, they say. 
“I am sorry to own I began to worry them. This was already a 
fresh departure for me. I was not used to get things that way, you 
know. I 
always went my own road and on my own legs where I had a 


Heart of 
Darkness 
109 
mind to go. I wouldn’t have believed it of myself; but, then—you 
see—I felt somehow I must get there by hook or by crook. So I 
worried them. The men said ‘My dear fellow,’ and did nothing. 
Then—would you believe it?—I tried the women. I, Charlie Mar- 
low, set the women to work—to get a job. Heavens! Well, you see, the 
notion drove me. I had an aunt, a dear enthusiastic soul.* She wrote: 
‘It will be delightful. I 
am ready to do anything, anything for you. It 
is a glorious idea. I know the wife of a very high personage in the 
Administration, and also a man who has lots of influence with,’ &c., 
&c. She was determined to make no end of fuss to get me appointed 
skipper of a river steamboat, if such was my fancy. 
“I got my appointment—of course; and I got it very quick. It 
appears the Company had received news that one of their captains 
had been killed in a scuffle with the natives. This was my chance, and 
it made me the more anxious to go. It was only months and months 
afterwards, when I made the attempt to recover what was left of the 
body, that I 
heard the original quarrel arose from a misunderstanding 
about some hens. Yes, two black hens. Fresleven—that was the fel- 
low’s name, a Dane—thought himself wronged somehow in the bar- 
gain, so he went ashore and started to hammer the chief of the 
village with a stick.* Oh, it didn’t surprise me in the least to hear this, 
and at the same time to be told that Fresleven was the gentlest, 
quietest creature that ever walked on two legs. No doubt he was; but 
he had been a couple of years already out there engaged in the noble 
cause, you know, and he probably felt the need at last of asserting his 
self-respect in some way. Therefore he whacked the old nigger mer- 
cilessly, while a big crowd of his people watched him, thunderstruck, 
till some man,—I was told the chief’s son, —in desperation at hear- 
ing the old chap yell, made a 
tentative jab with a spear at the white 
man—and of course it went quite easy between the shoulder-blades. 
Then the whole population cleared into the forest, expecting all 
kinds of calamities to happen, while, on the other hand, the steamer 
Fresleven commanded left also in a bad panic, in charge of the 
engineer, I believe. Afterwards nobody seemed to trouble much 
about Fresleven’s remains, till I got out and stepped into his shoes. I 
couldn’t let it rest, though; but when an opportunity offered at last 
to meet my predecessor, the grass growing through his ribs was tall 
enough to hide his bones. They were all there. The supernatural 
being had not been touched after he fell. And the village was 


ee 
Heart of 
Darkness 
“= 
peor 
the huts gaped black, rotting, all askew within the fallen 
x 
enclosures. A calamity had come to it, sure enough. The people had 
« vanished. Mad terror had scattered them, men, women, and chil- 
(P 
dren, through the bush, and they had never returned. What became 
| 
of the hens I 
don’t know either. I should think the cause of progress 
got them, anyhow. However, through this glorious affair I got my 
ag, 
appointment, before I 
had fairly begun to hope for it. 
( 
“T flew around like mad to get ready, and before forty-eight hours 
I 
was crossing the Channel to show myself to my employers, and sign 
the contract. In a very few hours I 
arrived in a city that always makes 
me 
think of.a whited sepulchre.* Prejudice no doubt. I had no dif- 
ficulty 
in finding the Company’s 
offices. It was the biggest thing 
in 
the town, and everybody I 
met was full of 
it. They were going to run 
an over-sea empire, and make no end of coin by trade. 
“A narrow and deserted street in deep shadow, high houses, 
innumerable windows with venetian blinds, a dead silence, grass 
sprouting between the stones, imposing carriage archways right and 
left, immense double doors standing ponderously ajar. I slipped 
through one of these cracks, went up a swept and ungarnished stair- 
case, as arid as a desert, and opened the first door I came to. Two 
women, one fat and the other slim, sat on straw-bottomed chairs, 
knitting black wool.* The slim one got up and walked straight at 
me—still knitting with down-cast eyes—and only just as I began to 
think of getting out of her way, as you would for a somnambulist, 
stood still, and looked up. Her dress was as plain as an umbrella- 
cover, and she turned round without a word and preceded me into a 
waiting-room. I gave my name, and looked about. Deal table in the 
middle, plain chairs all round the walls, on one end a 
large shining 
map, marked with all the colours of a rainbow. There was a vast 
amount of red—good to see at any time, because one knows that 
some real work is done in there, a deuce of a lot of blue, a little green, 
smears of orange, and, on the East Coast, a purple patch, to show 
where the jolly pioneers of progress drink the jolly lager-beer. How- 
ever, I wasn’t going into any of these. I was going into the yellow.* 
Dead in the centre. And the river was there— fascinating —deadly — 
like a snake. Ough! A door opened, a white-haired secretarial head, 
but wearing a compassionate expression, appeared, and a skinny 
forefinger beckoned me into the sanctuary. Its light was dim, and a 
heavy writing-desk squatted in the middle. From behind that struc- 


Heart of 
Darkness 
III 
ture came out an impression of pale plumpness in a frock-coat.* The 
great man himself. He was five feet six, I 
should judge, and had his 
grip on the handle-end of ever so many millions. He shook hands, I 
fancy, murmured vaguely, was satisfied with my French. Bon voyage. 
“In about forty-five seconds I found myself again in the waiting- 
room with the compassionate secretary, who, full of desolation and 
sympathy, made me sign some document. I believe I undertook 
amongst other things not to disclose any trade secrets.* Well, 
Iam not 
going to. 
“I began to feel slightly uneasy. You know I am not used to such 
ceremonies, and there was something ominous in the atmosphere. It 
was just as though I had been let into-Some conspiracy—I don’t 
know—something not quite right; and I was glad to get out. In the 
outer room the two women knitted black wool feverishly. People 
were arriving, and the younger one was walking back and forth 
introducing them. The old one sat on her chair. Her flat cloth slip- #l4¢j< 
pers were propped up on a foot-warmer, and a cat reposed on her wintbe
lap. She wore a starched white affair on her head, had a wart on one 
cheek, and silver-rimmed spectacles hung on the tip of her nose. She 
glanced at me above the glasses. The swift and indifferent placidity 
of that look troubled me. Two youths with foolish and cheery coun- 
tenances were being piloted over, and she threw at them the same 
quick glance of unconcerned wisdom. She seemed to know all about 
them and about me too. An eerie feeling came over me. She seemed 
uncanny and fateful. Often far away there I thought of these two, 
guarding the door of Darkness,* knitting black wool as for a warm 
pall, one Rud eeasnincie continuously to the unknown, the 
other scrutinising the cheery and foolish faces with unconcerned old 
eyes. Ave! Old knitter of black wool. Morituri te salutant.* Not many 
of those she looked at ever saw her again—not half, by a long way. 
“There was yet a visit to the doctor. ‘A simple formality,’ assured 
me the secretary,* with an air of taking an immense part in all my 
sorrows. Accordingly a young chap wearing his hat over the left 
eyebrow, some clerk I suppose,—there must have been clerks in the 
business, though the house was as still as a house in a 
city of the 
dead,—came from somewhere up-stairs, and led me forth. He was 
shabby and careless, with ink-stains on the sleeves of his jacket, and 
his cravat was large and billowy, under a chin shaped like the toe of 
an old boot. It was a 
little too early for the doctor, so I proposed a 
vs 


ih 5) 
Heart of 
Darkness 
drink, and thereupon he developed a 
vein of joviality. As we sat over 
our vermuths he glorified the Company’s business, and by-and-by I 
expressed casually my surprise at him not going out there. He 
became very cool and collected all at once. ‘I am not such a 
fool as I 
look, quoth Plato to his disciples,’* he said sententiously, emptied his 
glass with great resolution, and we rose. 
“The old doctor felt my pulse, evidently thinking of something 
else the while. ‘Good, good for there,’ he mumbled, and then with a 
certain eagerness asked me whether I would let him measure my 
head.* Rather surprised, I said Yes, when he produced a 
thing like 
“Calipers and got the dimensions back and front and every way, taking 
notes carefully. He was an unshaven little man in a threadbare coat 
like a gaberdine, with his feet in slippers, and I thought him a harm- 
less fool. ‘I always ask leave, in the interests of science, to measure 
the crania of those going out there,’ he said. ‘And when they come 
back too?’ I 
asked. ‘Oh, I 
never see them,’ he remarked; ‘and, more- 
over, the changes take place inside, you know.’ He smiled, as if at 
some quiet joke. ‘So you are going out there. Famous. Interesting 
too.’ He gave me a searching glance, and made another note. ‘Ever 
any madness in your family?’ he asked, in a matter-of-fact tone. I 
felt 
very annoyed. ‘Is that question in the interests 
of 
science too?” ‘It 
would be,’ he said, without taking notice of my irritation, ‘interest- 
ing for science to watch the mental changes of individuals, on the 
spot, but ...’ ‘Are you an alienist?’ I interrupted. ‘Every doctor 
should be—a little,’ answered that original, imperturbably. ‘I have a 
little theory which you Messieurs who go out there must help me to 
prove. This is my share in the advantages my country shall reap from 
the possession of such a magnificent dependency. The mere wealth I 
leave to others. Pardon my questions, but you are the first English- 
man coming under my observation .. .’ I hastened to assure him I 
was not in the least typical. ‘If I were,’ said I, 
‘I wouldn’t be talking 
like this with you.’ ‘What you say is rather profound, and probably 
erroneous,’ he said, with a laugh. ‘Avoid irritation more than 
exposure to the sun. Adieu. How do you English say, eh? Goodbye. 
Ah! Goodbye. Adieu. In the tropics one must before everything keep 
calm.’ ... He lifted a warning forefinger. ... ‘Du calme, du calme. 
Adieu.’* 
“One thing more remained to do—say goodbye to my excellent 
aunt. I 
found her triumphant. I 
had a cup of tea—the last decent cup 


Heart of 
Darkness 
113 
of tea for many days—and in a room that most soothingly looked just 
as you would expect a lady’s drawing-room to look, we had a long 
quiet chat by the fireside. In the course of these confidences it 
became quite plain to me I had been represented to the wife of the 
high dignitary, and goodness knows to how many more people 
besides, as an exceptional and gifted creature—a piece of good for- 
tune for the Company—a man you don’t get hold of every day. Good 
heavens! and I was going to take charge of a twopenny-halfpenny 
river-steamboat with a penny whistle attached! It appeared, however, 
I 
was also one of the Workers, with a capital—you know.* Something 
like an emissary of light, something like a lower sort of apostle.* 
There had been a 
lot of such rot let loose in print and talk just about 
that time,* and the excellent woman, living right in the rush of 
all that 
humbug, got carried off her feet. She talked about ‘weaning those 
ignorant millions from their horrid ways,’ till, upon my word, she 
made me quite uncomfortable. I ventured to hint that the Company 
was run for profit. 
“*You forget, dear Charlie, that the labourer is worthy of 
his hire,’* 
she said, brightly. It’s queer how out of touch with truth women are. 
They live in a world of their own, and there had never been anything 
like it, and never can be. It is too beautiful altogether, and if they 
were to set it up it would go to pieces before the first sunset. Some 
confounded fact we men have been living contentedly with ever 
since the day of creation would start up and knock the whole thing 
over.* 
“After this I got embraced, told to wear flannel, be sure to write 
often, and so on—and I left. In the street—I don’t know why—a 
queer feeling came to me that I was an impostor. Odd thing that I, 
who used to clear out for any part of the world at twenty-four hours’ 
notice, with less thought than most men give to the crossing of a 
street, had 
a moment—I won’t say of hesitation, but of startled 
pause, before this commonplace affair. The best way I can explain it 
tO you is by saying that, for a second or two, I 
felt as though, instead 
of going to the centre of a continent, I were about to set off for the 
centre of the earth.* 
ek A 
ietal bik Rae 
“J left in a French steamer, and she called in every blamed port 
they have out there, for, as far as I could see, the sole purpose of 
landing soldiers and custom-house officers. I watched the coast. 
Watching a coast as it slips by the ship is like thinking about an 


114 
Heart of 
Darkness 
enigma. There it is before you—smiling, frowning, inviting, grand, 
mean, insipid, or savage, and always mute with an air of whispering, 
Come and find out. This one was almost featureless, as if 
still in the 
making, with an aspect of monotonous grimness. The edge of a 
colossal jungle, so dark-green as to be almost black, fringed with 
white surf, ran straight, like a ruled line, far, far away along a blue sea 
whose glitter was blurred by a creeping mist. The sun was fierce, the 
land seemed to glisten and drip with steam. Here and there greyish- 
whitish specks showed up, clustered inside the white surf, with a 
flag 
flying above them perhaps. Settlements some centuries old, and still 
no bigger than pin-heads on the untouched expanse of their back- 
ground. We pounded along, stopped, landed soldiers; went on, 
landed custom-house clerks to levy toll in what looked like a God- 
forsaken wilderness, with a tin shed and a 
flag-pole lost in it; landed 
more soldiers—to take care of the custom-house clerks, presumably. 
Some, I 
heard, got drowned in the surf; but whether they did or not, 
nobody seemed particularly to care. They were just flung out there, 
and on we went. Every day the coast looked the same, as though we 
had not moved; but we passed various places—trading places—with 
names like Gran’ Bassam, Little Popo,* names that seemed to belong 
to some sordid farce acted in front of a sinister backcloth. The idle- 
ness of a passenger, my isolation amongst all these men with whom I 
adiestolppolntoot poNten-terelly-asa- lance eccene 
nea 
tee 
things, within the toil of 
a mournful and senseless delusion. The 
voice of the surf heard now and then was a 
positive pleasure, like the 
speech of a brother. It was something natural, that had its reason, 
that had a meaning. Now and then a 
boat from the shore gave one a 
momentary contact with reality. It was paddled by black fellows. You 
could see from afar the white of their eyeballs glistening. They 
shouted, sang; their bodies streamed with perspiration; they had 
faces like grotesque masks—these chaps; but they had bone, muscle, 
a wild vitality, an intense energy of movement, that was as natural 
and true as the surf along their coast. They wanted no excuse for 
being there. They were a great comfort to look at. For a time I 
would 
feel I belonged still to a world of straightforward facts; but the 
feeling would not last long. Something would turn up to scare it 
away. Once, I remember, we came upon a man-of-war anchored off 
the coast. There wasn’t even a shed there, and she was shelling the — 


Heart of 
Darkness 
115 
bush. It appears the French had one of their wars going on there- 
abouts.* Her ensign dropped limp* like a rag; the muzzles of the long 
eight-inch guns stuck out all over the low hull; the greasy, slimy swell 
swung her up lazily and let her down, swaying her thin masts. In the 
empty immensity of earth, sky, and water, there she was, incompre- 
hensible, firing into a continent. Pop, would go one of the eight-inch 
guns; a small flame would dart and vanish, a 
little white smoke would 
disappear, a tiny projectile would give a feeble screech—and nothing 
happened. Nothing could happen. There was a touch of insanity in 
the proceeding, a sense of lugubrious drollery in the sight; and it was 
not dissipated by somebody on board assuring me earnestly there 
was a camp of natives—he called them enemies!—hidden out of 
sight somewhere. 
“We gave her her letters (I 
heard the men in that lonely ship were 
dying of fever at the rate of three a day) and went on. We called at 
some more places with farcical names, where the merry dance of 
death and trade goes on in a still and earthy atmosphere as of an 
overheated catacomb; all along the formless coast bordered by dan- 
gerous surf, as if Nature herself had tried to ward off intruders; 
in and out of rivers, streams of death in life, whose banks were 
rotting into mud, whose waters, thickened into slime, invaded the 
contorted mangroves, that seemed to writhe at us in the extremity of 
an impotent despair. Nowhere did we stop long enough to get a 
particularised impression, but the general sense of vague and 
oppressive wonder grew upon me. It was like a weary pilgrimage 
amongst hints for nightmares. 
“It was upward of thirty days before I saw the mouth of the big 
river. We anchored off the seat of the government.* But my work 
would not begin till some two hundred miles farther on. So as soon 
as I could I 
made a 
start for a place thirty miles higher up. 
“T had my passage on a 
little sea-going steamer. Her captain was a 
Swede, and knowing me for a seaman, invited me on the bridge. He 
was a young man, lean, fair, and morose, with lanky hair and a 
shuffling gait. As we left the miserable little wharf, he tossed his head 
contemptuously at the shore. ‘Been living there?’ he asked. I said, 
‘Yes.’ ‘Fine lot these government chaps—are they not?’ he went on, 
speaking English with great precision and considerable bitterness. ‘It 
is funny what some people will do for a few francs a month. I 
wonder 
what becomes of that kind when it goes up country?’ I 
said to him I 


116 
Heart of 
Darkness 
expected to see that soon. 
‘So-o-o!’ he exclaimed. He shuffled 
athwart, keeping one eye ahead vigilantly. ‘Don’t be too sure,’ he 
continued. ‘The other day I took up a man who hanged himself on 
the road. He was a Swede, too.’ ‘Hanged himself! Why, in God’s 
name?’ I 
cried. He kept on looking out watchfully. ‘Who knows? The 
sun too much for him, or the country perhaps.’ 
At last we opened a 
reach. A rocky cliff appeared, mounds of 
turned-up earth by the shore, houses on a hill, others, with iron 
roofs, amongst a waste of excavations, or hanging to the declivity. A 
continuous noise of the rapids above hovered over this scene of 
inhabited devastation. A lot of people, mostly black and naked, 
moved about like ants. A jetty projected into the river. A blinding 
sunlight drowned all this at times in a sudden recrudescence of glare. 
‘There’s your Company’s station,’ said the Swede, pointing to three 
wooden barrack-like structures on the rocky slope.* ‘I will send your 
things up. Four boxes did you say? So. Farewell.’ 
“IT came upon a 
boiler wallowing in the grass, then found a path 
leading up the hill. It turned aside for the boulders, and also for an 
undersized railway-truck lying there on its back with its wheels in 
the air. One was off. The thing looked as dead as the carcass of 
some animal. I came upon more pieces of decaying machinery, a 
stack of rusty rails. To the left a clump of trees made a shady spot, 
where dark things seemed to stir feebly. I blinked, the path was 
steep. A horn tooted to the right, and I saw the black people run. A 
heavy and dull detonation shook the ground, a puff of smoke came 
out of the cliff, and that was all. No change appeared on the face 
of the rock. They were building a railway.* The cliff was not in 
the way of anything; but this objectless blasting was all the work 
going on. 
“A slight clinking behind me made me turn my head. Six black 
men advanced in 
a 
file, toiling up the path. They walked erect and 
slow, balancing small baskets full of earth on their heads, and the 
clink kept time with their footsteps. Black rags were wound round 
their loins, and the short ends behind wagged to and fro like tails. I 
could see every rib, the joints of their limbs were like knots in a rope; 
each had an iron collar on his neck, and all were connected together 
with a chain whose bights swung between them, rhythmically clink- 
ing. Another report from the cliff made me think suddenly of that 
ship of war I 
had seen firing into a continent. It was the same kind of 


Heart of 
Darkness 
117 
ominous voice; but these men could by no stretch of imagination be 
called enemies. They were called criminals, and the outraged law, 
like the bursting shells, had come to them, an insoluble 
e mystery from 
over the sea. All their meagre breasts panted together, the violently 
dilated nostrils quivered, the eyes stared stonily up-hill. They passed 
me within six inches, without a glance, with that complete, deathlike 
indifference of unhappy savages.* Behind this raw matter one of the 
reclaimed, the product of the new forces at work, strolled despond- 
ently, carrying a rifle by its middle. He had a uniform jacket with one 
button off, and seeing a white man on the path, hoisted his weapon 
to his shoulder with alacrity. This was simple prudence, white men 
being so much alike at a distance that he could not tell who I might 
be. He was speedily reassured, and with a large, white, rascally grin, 
and a glance at his charge, seemed to take me into partnership in his 
exalted trust. After all, I also was a part of the great cause of these 
high and just proceedings. 
“Instead of going up, I turned and descended to the left. My idea 
was to let that chain-gang get out of sight before I climbed the hill. 
You know I 
am not particularly tender; I’ve had to strike and to fend 
off. I’ve had to resist and to attack sometimes—that’s only one way 
of resisting—without counting the exact cost, according to the 
demands of such sort of life as I had blundered into. I’ve seen the 
devil of violence, and the devil of greed, and the devil of hot desire; 
but, by all the stars! these were strong, lusty, red-eyed devils, that 
swayed and drove men—men, I tell you. But as I stood on this 
hillside, I foresaw that in the blinding sunshine of that land I would 
become acquainted with a 
flabby, pretending, weak-eyed devil of a 
rapacious and pitiless folly. How insidious he could be, too, I was 
only to find out several months later and a thousand miles farther. 
For a moment I stood appalled, as though by a warning. Finally I 
descended the hill, obliquely, towards the trees I had seen. 
“T avoided a 
vast artificial hole somebody had been digging on the 
slope, the purpose of which I 
found it impossible to divine. It wasn’t 
a quarry or a sandpit, anyhow. It was just a hole. It might have been 
connected with the philanthropic desire of giving the criminals 
something to do. I don’t know. Then I 
nearly fell into a very narrow 
ravine, almost no more than a 
scar in the hillside. I 
discovered that a 
lot of imported drainage-pipes for the settlement had been tumbled 
in there. There wasn’t one that was not broken. It was a wanton 


118 
Heart of 
Darkness 
smash-up. At last I 
got under the trees. My purpose was to stroll into 
the shade for a moment; but no sooner within than it seemed to me I 
had stepped into the gloomy circle of some Inferno.* The rapids were 
near, and an uninterrupted, uniform, headlong, rushing noise filled 
the mournful stillness of the grove, where not a breath stirred, not a 
leaf moved, with a mysterious sound—as though the tearing pace 
of the launched earth had suddenly become audible. 
“Black shapes crouched, lay, sat between the trees, leaning against 
the trunks, clinging to the earth, half coming out, half effaced within 
the dim light, in all the attitudes of pain, abandonment, and despair. 
Another mine on the cliff went off, followed by a slight shudder of 
the soil under my feet. The work was going on. The work! And this 
the place where some of the helpers had withdrawn to die.* 
“They were dying slowly—it was very clear. They were not 
enemies, they were not criminals, they were nothing earthly now, 
— 
nothing but black shadows of disease and starvation, lying con- 
fusedly in the greenish gloom. Brought from all the recesses of the 
coast in all the legality of time contracts,* lost in uncongenial sur- 
roundings, fed on unfamiliar food, they sickened, became inefficient, 
and were then allowed to crawl away and rest. These moribund 
shapes were free as air—and nearly as thin. I 
began to distinguish the 
gleam of eyes under the trees. Then, glancing down, I 
saw a 
face near 
my hand. The black bones reclined at full length with one shoulder 
against the tree, and slowly the eyelids rose and the sunken eyes 
looked up at me, enormous and vacant, a kind of blind, white flicker 
in the depths of the orbs, which died out slowly. The man seemed 
young—almost a boy—but you know with them it’s hard to tell. I 
found nothing else to do but to offer him one of my good Swede’s 
ship’s biscuits I had in my pocket. The fingers closed slowly on it 
and held—there was no other movement and no other glance. He 
had tied a bit of white worsted round his neck— Why?* Where did he 
get it? Was it a badge—an ornament—a charm—a propitiatory act? 
Was there any idea at all connected with it? It looked startling round 
his black neck, this bit of white thread from beyond the seas. 
“Near the same tree two more bundles of acute angles sat with 
their legs drawn up. One, with his chin propped on his knees, stared 
at nothing, in an intolerable and appalling manner: his brother 
phantom rested its forehead, as if overcome with a great weariness; 
and all about others were scattered in every pose of contorted 


Heart of 
Darkness 
119 
collapse, as in some picture of a massacre or a 
pestilence. While I 
stood horror-struck, one of these creatures rose to his hands and 
knees, and went off on all-fours towards the river to drink. He 
lapped out of his hand, then sat up in the sunlight, crossing his shins 
in front of him, and after a time let his woolly head fall on his 
breastbone. 
“T didn’t want any more loitering in the shade, and I made haste 
towards the station. When near the buildings I met a white man, in 
such an unexpected elegance of get-up that in the first moment I 
took him for a 
sort of vision. I 
saw a 
high starched collar, white cuffs, 
a light alpaca jacket, snowy trousers, a clear necktie,* and varnished 
boots. No hat. Hair parted, brushed, oiled, under a green-lined para- 
sol held in a big white hand. He was amazing, and had a penholder 
behind his ear. 
“T shook hands with this miracle, and I learned he was the Com- 
pany’s chief accountant, and that all the book-keeping was done at 
this station. He had come out for a moment, he said, ‘to get a breath 
of fresh air.’ The expression sounded wonderfully odd, with its sug- 
gestion of sedentary desk-life. I 
wouldn’t have mentioned the fellow 
to you at all, only it was from his lips that I first heard the name of 
the man who is so indissolubly connected with the memories of that 
time. Moreover, I respected the fellow. Yes; I respected his collars, 
his vast cuffs, his brushed hair. His appearance was certainly that of 
a hairdresser’s dummy; but in the great demoralisation of the land he 
kept up his appearance. That’s backbone. His starched collars and 
got-up shirt-fronts were achievements of character. He had been out 
nearly three years; and, later on, I 
could not help asking him how he 
managed to sport such linen. He had just the faintest blush, and said 
modestly, ‘ve been teaching one of the native women about the 
station. It was difficult. She had a distaste for the work.’ Thus this 
man had verily accomplished something. And he was devoted to his 
books, which were in apple-pie order. 
“Everything else in the station was in a muddle,—heads, things, 
buildings. Strings of dusty niggers with splay feet arrived and 
departed; a stream of manufactured goods, rubbishy cottons, beads, 
and brass-wire set into the depths of darkness, and in return came a 
precious trickle of ivory. 
“T had to wait in the station for ten days—an eternity. I lived in a 
hut in the yard, but to be out of the chaos I 
would sometimes get into 


120 
Heart of 
Darkness 
the accountant’s office. It was built of horizontal planks, and so badly 
put together that, as he bent over his high desk, he was barred from 
neck to heels with narrow strips of sunlight. There was no need to 
open the big shutter to see. It was hot there too; big flies buzzed 
fiendishly, and did not sting, but stabbed. I 
sat generally on the floor, 
while, of faultless appearance (and even slightly scented), perching 
on a high stool, he wrote, he wrote. Sometimes he stood up for 
exercise. When a 
truckle-bed with a sick man (some invalided agent 
from up-country) was put in there, he exhibited a gentle annoyance. 
‘The groans of this sick person,’ he said, ‘distract my attention. And 
without that it is extremely difficult to guard against clerical errors 
in this climate.’ 
“One day he remarked, without lifting his head, ‘In the interior 
you will no doubt meet Mr 
Kurtz.* On my asking who Mr Kurtz 
was, he said he was a 
first-class agent; and seeing my disappointment 
at this information, he 
added slowly, laying down his pen, ‘He 
is 
a_ 
v 
ble 
person.’ Further questions elicited from him that 
Mr Kurtz was at present in charge of 
a 
trading 
post, a very import- 
ant one, in the true ivory-country, at ‘the very bottom of there. Sends 
in as much ivory as all the others put together . 
. .. He began to write 
again. The sick man was too ill to groan. The flies buzzed in a great 
peace. 
“Suddenly there was a growing murmur of voices and a great 
tramping of feet. A caravan had come in. A violent babble of 
uncouth sounds burst out on the other side of the planks. All the 
carriers were speaking together, and in the midst of the uproar the 
lamentable voice of the chief agent was heard ‘giving it up’ tearfully 
for the twentieth time that day. . 
. 
. He rose slowly. ‘What a frightful 
row,’ he said. He crossed the room gently to look at the sick man, and 
returning, said to me, ‘He does not hear.’ ‘What! Dead?’ I asked, 
startled. ‘No, not yet,’ he answered, with great composure. Then, 
alluding with a toss of the head to the tumult in the station-yard, 
“When one has got to make correct entries, one comes to hate those 
savages—hate them to the death.’ He remained thoughtful for a 
moment. ‘When you see Mr Kurtz,’ he went on, ‘tell him from me 
that everything here’ —he glanced at the desk—‘is very satisfactory. I 
don’t like to write to him—with those messengers of ours you never 
know who may get hold of your letter—at that Central Station.’ He 
stared at me for a moment with his mild, bulging eyes. ‘Oh,-he-will 


Heart of 
Darkness 
121 
go far, very far,’ he began again. ‘He will be a somebody in the 
Administration before long. They, above—the Council in Europe, 
you know—mean him to be.’ 
“He turned to his work. The noise outside had ceased, and pres- 
ently in going out I 
stopped at the door. In the steady buzz of flies the 
homeward-bound agent was lying flushed and insensible; the other, 
bent over his books, was making correct entries of perfectly correct 
transactions; and fifty feet below the doorstep I could see the still 
tree-tops of the grove of death. 
“Next day I 
left that station at last, with a caravan of sixty men, 
for a two-hundred-mile tramp.* 
“No use telling you much about that. Paths, paths, everywhere; a 
stamped-in network of paths spreading over 
the empty land, 
through long grass, through burnt grass, through thickets, down and 
up chilly ravines, up and down stony hills ablaze with heat; and a 
solitude, a solitude, nobody, not a hut. The population had cleared 
out a long time ago.* Well, if a lot of mysterious niggers armed with 
all kinds of fearful weapons suddenly took to travelling on the road 
between Deal and Gravesend, catching the yokels right and left to 
carry heavy loads for them, I fancy every farm and cottage there- 
abouts would get empty very soon. Only here the dwellings were 
gone too. Still I passed through several abandoned villages. There’s 
something pathetically childish in the ruins of grass walls. Day after 
day, with the stamp and shuffle of sixty pair of bare feet behind me, 
each pair under a 60-Ib. load. Camp, cook, sleep, strike camp, march. 
Now and then a 
carrier dead in harness, at rest in the long grass near 
the path, with an empty water-gourd and his long staff lying by his 
side. A great silence around and above. Perhaps on some quiet night 
the tremor of far-off drums, sinking, swelling, a tremor vast, faint; a 
sound weird, appealing, suggestive, and wild—and perhaps with as 
profound a meaning as the sound of bells in a Christian country. 
Once a white man in an unbuttoned uniform, camping on the path 
with an armed escort of lank Zanzibaris,* very hospitable and 
festive—not to say drunk. Was looking after the upkeep of the road, 
he declared. Can’t say I 
saw any road or any upkeep, unless the body 
of a middle-aged negro, with a bullet-hole in the forehead, upon 
which I absolutely stumbled three miles farther on, may be con- 
sidered as a permanent improvement. I had a white companion too, 
not a bad chap, but rather too fleshy and with the exasperating habit 


122 
Heart of 
Darkness 
of fainting on the hot hillsides, miles away from the least bit of shade 
and water. Annoying, you know, to hold your own coat like a parasol 
over a man’s head while he is coming-to. I couldn’t help asking him 
once what he meant by coming there at all. “To make money, of 
course. What do you think?’ he said, scornfully. Then he got fever, 
and had to be carried in a hammock slung under a pole. As he 
weighed sixteen stone I had no end of rows with the carriers.* They 
jibbed, ran away, sneaked off with their loads in the night—quite a 
mutiny. So, one evening, I made a speech in English with gestures, 
not one of which was lost to the sixty pairs of eyes before me, and the 
next morning I started the hammock off in front all right. An hour 
afterwards I 
came upon the whole concern wrecked in a bush—man, 
hammock, groans, blankets, horrors. The heavy pole had skinned his 
poor nose. He was very anxious for me to kill somebody, but there 
wasn’t the shadow of 
a 
carrier near. | 
remembered the old doctor, 
— 
‘It would be interesting for science to watch the mental changes of 
individuals, on the spot.’ I 
felt I 
was becoming scientifically interest- 
ing. However, all that is to no purpose. On the fifteenth day I 
came in 
sight of the big river again, and hobbled into the Central Station. It 
was on a back water surrounded by scrub and forest, with a pretty 
border of smelly mud on one side, and on the three others enclosed 
by a crazy fence of rushes. A neglected gap was all the gate it had, 
and the first glance at the place was enough to let you see the flabby 
devil was running that show. White men with long staves in their 
hands appeared languidly from amongst the buildings, strolling up 
to take a look at me, and then retired out of sight somewhere. One of 
them, a stout, excitable chap with black moustaches, informed me 
with great volubility and many digressions, as soon as I told him 
who I was, that my steamer was at the bottom of the river. I was 
thunderstruck. What, how, why? Oh, it was ‘all right.’ The ‘manager 
himself’ was there. All quite correct. ‘Everybody had behaved* 
splendidly! splendidly!’ —‘You must,’ he said in agitation, ‘go and 
see the general manager at once. He is waiting!’ 
‘I did not see the real significance of that wreck at once.* I fancy I 
see it now, but I am not sure—not at all. Certainly the affair was too 
stupid—when I 
think of it—to be altogether natural. Still... 
. But at 
the moment it presented itself simply as a confounded nuisance. The 
steamer was sunk. They had started two days before in a sudden 
hurry up the river with the manager on board, in charge of some 


Heart of 
Darkness 
123 
volunteer skipper, and before they had been out three hours they 
tore the bottom out of her on stones, and she sank near the south 
bank. I asked myself what I was to do there, now my boat was lost. 
As a matter of fact, I 
had plenty to do in fishing my command out of 
the river. I 
had to set about it the very next day. That, and the repairs 
when I 
brought the pieces to the station, took some months. 
“My first 
i 
interview with the manager was curious. He did not ask 
wn after my twenty-mile walk that morning. He was 
“commonplace) 
in complexion, 
in feature, in manners, and 
in voi 
iddle size and of ofdinary 
Build: His eyes, of the/isual 
blue, were perhaps remarkably cold, and he certainly could makehis 
glance fall on one as trenchant and heavy as an axe. But even at these 
times the rest of his person seemed to disclaim the intention. Other- 
wise there was only an indefinable, faint expression of his lips, some- 
~~ 
thi 
Stealthy2—a smile—not a smile—I remember it, but I can’t 
‘Y * 
explain. [t 
was unconscious, this 
smile was, though just 
after he 
had ( 3 
said something it got intensified for an instant. It came at the end of 
his 
speeches like a 
seal 
applied on 
the words to make the meaning of 
the commonest phrase appear absolutely inscrutable. He was a EY 
common trader, from his youth up employed in these parts— 
- 
nothing more. He was obeyed, yet he inspired neither love nor fear, 
nor even respect.* He inspired uneasiness. That was it! Uneasiness. 
Not a definite mistrust—just uneasiness —nothing more. You have 
no idea how effective such a...a... faculty can be. He had no 
o 
genius for organising, for initiative, or for order even. That was 
evident in such things as the deplorable state of the station. He had < 
no learning, and no intelligence. His position had come to him— 
— 
why? Perhaps because he was never ill . 
. 
. He had served three terms 
of three years out there . 
. 
. Because triumphant health in the general 
rout of constitutions is a kind of power in itself. When he went home 
on leave he rioted on a large scale—pompously. Jack ashore—with a 
difference—in externals only. This one could gather from his casual 
talk. He originated nothing, he could keep the routine going—that’s 
all. But he was great. He was great by this little thing that it was 
impossible 
to 
tell what 
could controt such a 
man. He 
never gave that 
secret away. Perhaps there was nothing within him. Such a 
suspicion 
made one pausé—for out 
there 
there were no 
external checks. Once 
when panes tropical diseases had laid low almost every ‘agent’ in. 
the au J 
he was heard to say, ‘Men who come out here should 
be 
FAws
vn 
tn 
| 
NEY 
A 
Sona |} 


9 
i 
x 
. 
124 
Heart of 
Darkness 
have no entrails.’* He sealed the utterance with that smile of his, as 
though it had been a door opening into a darkness he had in his 
keeping. You fancied you had seen things—but the seal was on. 
When annoyed at meal-times by the constant quarrels of the white 
men about precedence, he ordered an immense round table to be 
made, for which a special house had to be built. This was the 
station’s mess-room. Where he sat was the first place—the rest 
were nowhere. One felt this to be his unalterable conviction. He was 
neither civil nor uncivil. He was quiet. He allowed his ‘boy’—an 
overfed young negro from the coast—to treat the white men, under 
his very eyes, with provoking insolence. 
“He began to speak as soon as he saw me. I 
had been very long on 
the road. He could not wait. Had to start without me. The up-river 
stations had to be relieved. There had been so many delays already 
that he did not know who was dead and who was alive, and how they 
got on—and so on, and so on. He paid no attention to my explan- 
ations, and, playing with a stick of sealing-wax, repeated several 
times that the situation was ‘very grave, very grave.’ There were 
rumours that a very important station was in jeopardy, and its chief, 
ra a 
Hoped it was not true. Mr Kurtz was... 
I 
felt 
weary and irritable. Hang Kurtz, I thought. I interrupted him by 
saying I 
had heard of Mr Kurtz on the coast. ‘Ah! So they talk of-him 
down there,’ he murmured to himself. Then he began again, assur- 
ing me Mr Kurtz was the best agent he had, an exceptional man, of 
the greatest importance to the Company; therefore I could under- 
stand his anxiety. He was, he said, ‘very, very uneasy.’ Certainly he 
fidgeted on his chair a good deal, exclaimed, ‘Ah, Mr Kurtz!’, broke 
the stick of sealing-wax and seemed dumfounded by the accident. 
Next thing he wanted to know ‘how long it would take to’... I 
interrupted him again. Being hungry, you know, and kept on my feet 
too, I was getting savage. ‘How could I 
tell?’ I said. ‘I hadn’t even 
seen the wreck yet—some months, no doubt.’* All this talk seemed to 
me so futile. ‘Some months,’ he said. ‘Well, let us say three months 
before we can make a 
start. Yes. That ought to do the affair.’ I flung 
out of his hut (he lived all alone in a clay hut with a sort of verandah) 
muttering to myself my opinion of him. He was a 
chattering idiot. 
Afterwards I took it back when it was borne in upon me startlingly 
with what extreme nicety he had estimated the time requisite for the 
« 
Se 
Aue 
affair. 


Heart of 
Darkness 
rs 
“T went to work the next day, turning, so to speak, my back on that 
station. In that way only it seemed to me I 
could keep my hold on the 
redeeming facts of life. Still, one must look about sometimes; and 
then I saw this station, these men strolling aimlessly about in the 
sunshine of the yard. I asked myself sometimes what it all meant. 
They wandered here and there with their absurd long staves in their 
hands, like a lot of faithless pilgrims bewitched inside a 
rotten fence. 
The word ‘ivory’ rang in the air, was whispered, was sighed. You 
_would think they were praying to it. A taint of imbecile rapacity blew 
through it all, like a whiff from some corpse. By 
Jove! I’ve_n. 
anything so unreal in my 
life. And outside the 
Silent 
wilderness 
surrounding this cleared speck on the earth struck me as something 
great and invincible, like evil or truth, waiting patiently for the 
passing away of this fantastic invasion. 
“Oh, these months! Well, never mind. Various things happened. 
One evening a grass shed full of calico, cotton prints, beads, and I 
don’t know what else, burst into a blaze so suddenly that you would 
have thought the earth had opened to let an avenging fire consume all 
that trash. I 
was smoking my pipe quietly by my dismantled steamer, 
and saw them all cutting capers in the light, with their arms lifted 
high, when the stout man with moustaches came tearing down to the 
river, a tin pail in his hand, assured me that everybody was ‘behaving 
splendidly, splendidly,’ dipped about a quart of water and tore back 
again. I 
noticed there was a 
hole in the bottom of his pail. 
“T strolled up. There was no hurry. You see the thing had gone off 
like a box of matches. It had been hopeless from the very first. The 
flame 
had 
leaped 
high, 
driven 
everybody 
back, 
lighted 
up 
everything—and collapsed. The shed was already a heap of embers 
glowing fiercely. A nigger was being beaten near by. They said he had 
caused the fire in some way; be that as it may, he was screeching most 
horribly. I saw him, later on, for several days, sitting in a bit of shade 
looking very sick and trying to recover himself: afterwards he arose 
and went out—and the wilderness without a sound took him into 
its bosom again. As I approached the glow from the dark I found 
myself at the back of two men, talking. I heard the name of Kurtz 
pronounced, then the words, ‘take advantage of this unfortunate 
accident.’* One of the men was the manager. I wished him a good 
evening. ‘Did you ever see anything like it—eh? it is incredible,’ he 
said, and walked off. The other man remained. He was a 
first-class 


126 
Heart of 
Darkness 
agent, young, gentlemanly, a bit reserved, with a forked little beard 
and a hooked nose. He was stand-offish with the other agents, and 
they on their side said he was the manager’s spy upon them. As to 
me, I 
had hardly ever spoken to him before. We got into talk, and by- 
and-by we strolled away from the hissing ruins. Then he asked me to 
his room, which was in the main building of the station. He struck a 
match, and I perceived that this young aristocrat had not only a 
silver-mounted dressing-case but also a whole candle all to himself. 
Just at that time the manager was the only man supposed to have any 
right to candles. Native mats covered the clay walls; a collection of 
spears, assegais, shields, knives was hung up in trophies. The busi- 
ness intrusted to this fellow was the making of bricks—so I 
had been 
informed; but there wasn’t a fragment of a brick anywhere in the 
station, and he had been there more than a year—waiting. It seems 
he could not make bricks without something, I don’t know what— 
straw maybe.* Anyway, it could not be found there, and as it was not 
likely to be sent from Europe, it did not appear clear to me what he 
was waiting for. An act of special creation perhaps.* However, they 
were all waiting—all the sixteen or twenty pilgrims of them—for 
something; and upon my word it did not seem an uncongenial occu- 
pation, from the way they took it, though the only thing that ever 
came to them was disease—as far as I could see. They beguiled the 
time by backbiting and intriguing against each other in a foolish kind 
of way. There was an air of plotting about that station, but nothing 
came of it, of course. It was as unreal as everything else—as the 
philanthropic pretence of the whole concern, as their talk, as their 
government, as their show of work. The only real feeling was a desire 
to get appointed to a trading-post where ivory was to be had, so that 
they could earn percentages.* They intrigued and slandered and 
hated each other only on that account, —but as to effectually lifting a 
little finger—oh, no. By heavens! there is something after all in the 
world allowing one man to steal a horse while another must not look 
at a halter.* Steal a horse straight out. Very well. He has done it. 
Perhaps he can ride. But there is a way of looking at a halter that 
would provoke the most charitable of saints into a kick. 
“T had no idea why he wanted to be sociable, but as we chatted in 
there it suddenly occurred to me the fellow was trying to get at 
something—in fact, pumping me. He alluded constantly to Europe, 
to the people I was supposed to know there—putting leading 


Heart of 
Darkness 
127 
questions as to my acquaintances in the sepulchral city, and so on. 
His little eyes glittered like mica discs—with curiosity,—though he 
tried to keep up a 
bit of superciliousness. At first I 
was astonished, 
but very soon I became awfully curious to see what he would find 
out from me. I couldn’t possibly imagine what I had in me to make 
it worth his while.* It was very pretty to see how he baffled him- 
self, for in truth my body was full of chills, and my head had 
nothing in it but that wretched steamboat business. It was evident 
he took me for a perfectly shameless prevaricator. At last he got 
angry, and, to conceal 
a movement 
of furious annoyance, 
he 
yawned. I rose. Then I noticed a small sketch in oils, on a panel, 
representing a woman, draped and blindfolded, carrying a lighted 
torch.* The background was sombre—almost black. The move- 
ment of the woman was stately, and the effect of the torchlight 
the face was sinister. 
“It arrested me, and he stood by civilly, holding a half-pint cham- 
pagne bottle (medical comforts) with the candle stuck in it. To my 
question he said Mr Kurtz had painted this—in this very station 
more than a year ago—while waiting for means to go to histrading- 
post. “Tell me, pray,’ said I, ‘who is this Mr Kurtz?’ 
“°The chief of the Inner Station,’ he answered in a short tone, 
looking away. ‘Much obliged,’ I said, laughing. ‘And you are the 
brickmaker of the Central Station. Every one knows that.’ He was 
silent for a while. ‘He is a prodigy,’ he said at last. ‘He is an emissary 
of pity, and science, and progress, and devil knows what else.* We 
want,’ he began to declaim suddenly, ‘for the guidance of the cause 
intrusted to us by Europe, so to speak, higher intelligence, wide 
sympathies, a singleness of purpose.’ ‘Who says that?’ I 
asked. ‘Lots 
of them,’ he replied. ‘Some even write that; and so he comes here, a 
special being, as you ought to know.’ ‘Why ought I to know?’ I 
interrupted, really surprised. He paid no attention. ‘Yes. Today he is 
chief of the best station, next year he will be assistant-manager, 
two years more and. . 
. but I 
daresay you know what he will be in two 
years’ time. You are of the new 
gang—the gang of virtue. The ae 
people who sent Sd BESS rrr perme 
Oh, don’tsay 
no. I’ve my own eyes to trust.’ Light dawned upon me. My dear 
aunt’s influential acquaintances were producing an unexpected effect 
upon that young man. I 
nearly burst into a laugh. “Do you read the 
Company’s confidential correspondence?’ I 
asked. He hadn’t a word 


\ 
128 
Heart of 
Darkness 
to say. It was great fun. ‘When Mr Kurtz,’ I continued severely, ‘is 
General Manager, you won’t have the opportunity.’ 
“He blew the candle out suddenly, and we went outside. The 
moon had risen. Black figures strolled about listlessly, pouring water 
on the glow, whence proceeded a sound of hissing; steam ascended in 
the moonlight; the beaten nigger groaned somewhere. ‘What a row 
the brute makes!’ said the indefatigable man with the moustaches, 
appearing near us. ‘Serve him right. Transgression— punishment — 
bang! Pitiless, pitiless. That’s the only way. This will prevent all 
conflagrations for the future. I was just telling the manager 
. 
. .’ He 
noticed my companion, and became crestfallen all at once. ‘Not in 
bed yet,’ he said, with a kind of servile heartiness; ‘it’s so natural. 
Ha! Danger—agitation.’ He vanished. I went on to the river-side, 
and the other followed me. I heard a scathing murmur at my ear, 
‘Heap of muffs—go to.’ The pilgrims could be seen in knots gesticu- 
lating, discussing. Several had still their staves in their hands. I 
verily 
believe they took these sticks to bed with them. Beyond the fence the 
forest stood up spectrally in the moonlight, and through the dim stir, 
through the faint sounds of that lamentable courtyard, the silence of 
the land went home to one’s very heart,—its mystery, its greatness, 
the amazing reality of its concealed life. The hurt nigger moaned 
feebly somewhere near by, and then fetched a deep sigh that made 
me mend my pace away from there. I felt a hand introducing itself 
under my arm. ‘My dear sir,’ said the fellow, ‘I don’t want to be 
misunderstood, and especially by you, who will see Mr Kurtz long 
before I 
can have that pleasure. I 
wouldn’t like him to get a false idea 
of my disposition. .. .” 
“I let him run on, this papier-maché Mephistopheles,* and it 
seemed to me that if I 
tried I could poke my forefinger through him, 
and would find nothing inside but a 
little loose dirt, maybe. He 
don’t you see, had been 
planning to be assistant-manager by-and-by 
(lester a 
dele, cede ee ae 
a 
present man, 
and 
I 
could see that the 
coming of 
that Kurtz 
had upset them both not a 
little. He talked precipitately, and I did 
not try to stop him. I had my shoulders against the wreck of my 
steamer, hauled up on the slope like a carcass of some big river 
animal. The smell of mud, of primeval mud, by Jove! was in my 
nostrils, the high stillness of primeval forest was before my eyes; 
there were shiny patches on the black creek. The moon had spread 
over everything a thin layer of silver—over the rank grass, over the 


Heart of 
Darkness 
129 
mud, upon the wall of matted vegetation standing higher than the 
wall of a temple, over the great river I could see through a sombre 
gap glittering, glittering, as it flowed broadly by without a murmur. 
All this was great, expectant, mute, while the man jabbered about 
himself. I 
wondered whether the stillness on the face of the immens- 
ity looking at us two were meant as an appeal or as a menace. What 
were we who had strayed in here? Could we handle that dumb thing, 
or would it handle us? I 
felt how big, how confoundedly big, was that 
thing that couldn’t talk, and perhaps was 
deat as well. What was in 
there? T 
could 
see-a 
tittle ivory coming out from there, and I had 
heard Mr Kurtz was in there. I 
had heard enough about it too—God 
knows! Yet somehow it didn’t bring any image with it—no more 
than if 
I 
had been told an angel or a 
fiend was in there. I 
believed it in 
the same way one of you might believe there are inhabitants in the 
planet Mars. I knew once a Scotch sailmaker who was certain, dead 
sure, there were people in Mars. If you asked him for some idea how 
they looked and behaved, he would get shy and mutter something 
about ‘walking on all-fours.’ If you as much as smiled, he would— 
though a man of sixty—offer to fight you. I would not have gone so 
far as to fight for Kurtz, but I 
went for him near enough to a 
lie. You 
Ste 
cae 
en eee ene 
oS 
ee 
ee 
There 
is 
a 
taint 
of death, a flavour of mortality 
in lies,—which is exactly what I hate 
and detest in the world—what I want to forget. 
It makes me miser- 
able and sick, like biting something rotten would do. Temperament, 
I suppose. Well, I 
went near enough to it by letting the young fool 
there believe anything he liked to imagine as to my influence in 
Europe. I became in an instant as much of a pretence as the rest of 
the bewitched pilgrims. This simply because I had a notion it some- 
how would be of help to that Kurtz whom at the time I 
did not see— 
you understand. He was just a word for’ 
me. I did 
not see the man in 
aN 
a eeenmuemien 
no 
piekstion! 
of 
a dream can 
Sa 
ata of absurdity, sur- 
ment 
in a 
tremor 
of 
struggling 
revolt, that notion 
the incredible 
which is 
of 
the 
very essence of 
' He was silent for a while. 


130 
Heart of 
Darkness 
“ 
No, it is impossible; it is impossible to convey the life- 
sensation of any given epoch of one’s existence,—that which makes 
its truth, its meaning—its subtle and penetrating essence. It is 
impossible. We live, as we dream—alone. 
. 
. .”* 
€ paused again as if reflecting, 
“Of course in this you fellows see more than I 
could then. You see 
me, whom you know. 
. 
. .” 
It had become so pitch dark that we listeners could hardly see one 
another. For a long time already he, sitting apart, had been no more 
to us than a.vgice. There was not a word from anybody. The others 
might have been asleep, but I was awake. I listened, I 
listened on the 
watch for the sentence, for the word, that would give me the clue to 
the faint uneasiness inspired by this narrative that seemed to shape 
itself without human lips in the heavy night-air of the river. 
“.. Yes—I let him run on,” Marlow began again, “and think 
what he pleased about the powers that were behind me. I did! And 
there was nothing behind me! There was nothing but that wretched, 
old, mangled steamboat I was leaning against, while he talked flu- 
ently about ‘the necessity for every man to get on.’ ‘And when one 
comes out here, you conceive, it is not to gaze at the moon.’ Mr 
Kurtz was a ‘universal genius,’ but even a genius would find it easier 
to work with ‘adequate tools—intelligent men.’ He did not make 
bricks—why, there was a physical impossibility in the way—as I was 
well aware; and if he did secretarial work for the manager, it was 
because ‘no sensible man rejects wantonly the confidence of his 
superiors.’ Did I see it? I saw it. What more did I want? What I 
really wanted was rivets, by heaven! Rivets. To get on with the 
work—to stop the hole. Rivets I 
wanted. There were cases of them 
down at the coast—cases—piled up—burst—split! You kicked a 
loose rivet at every second step in that station yard on the hillside. 
Rivets had rolled into the grove of death. You could fill your 
pockets with rivets for the trouble of stooping down—and there 
wasn’t one rivet to be found where it was wanted. We had plates 
that would do, but nothing to fasten them with. And every week the 
messenger, a lone negro, letter-bag on shoulder and staff in hand, 
left our station for the coast. And several times a week a coast 
caravan came in with trade goods, —ghastly glazed calico that made 
you shudder only to look at it, glass beads value about a penny a 
quart, confounded spotted cotton handkerchiefs. And no rivets. 


Heart of 
Darkness 
131 
Three carriers could have brought all that was wanted to set that 
steamboat afloat. 
“He was becoming confidential now, but I 
fancy my unresponsive 
attitude must have exasperated him at last, for he judged it necessary 
to inform me he feared neither God nor devil, let alone any mere 
man. I 
said I 
could see that very well, but what I 
wanted was a certain 
quantity of rivets—and rivets were what really Mr Kurtz wanted, if 
he had only known it. Now letters went to the coast every week. 
. 
. 
. 
‘My dear sir,’ he cried, ‘I write from dictation.’ | 
demanded rivets. 
There was a way—for an intelligent man. He changed his manner; 
became very cold, and suddenly began to talk about a hippopotamus;* 
wondered whether sleeping on board the steamer (I stuck to my 
salvage night and day) I wasn’t disturbed. There was an old hippo 
that had the bad habit of getting out on the bank and roaming at 
night over the station grounds. The pilgrims used to turn out in a 
body and empty every rifle they could lay hands on at him. Some 
even had sat up o’ nights for him. All this energy was wasted, 
though. ‘That animal has a charmed life,’ he said; “but you can say 
this only of brutes in this country. No man—you apprehend me? 
— 
no man here bears a charmed life.’ He stood there for a moment in 
the moonlight with his delicate hooked nose set a little askew, and his 
mica eyes glittering without a wink, then, with a curt Good night, he 
strode off. I could see he was disturbed and considerably puzzled, 
which made me feel more hopeful than I 
had been for days. It was a 
great comfort to turn from that chap to my influential friend, the 
battered, twisted, ruined, tin-pot steamboat. I clambered on board. 
She rang under my feet like an empty Huntley & Palmer biscuit-tin* 
kicked along a gutter; she was nothing so solid in make, and rather 
less pretty in shape, but I 
had expended enough hard work on her to 
make me love her. No influential friend would have served me better. 
She had given me a chance to come out a bit—to find out what I 
could do. No, I don’t like work. I had rather laze about and think of 
all the fine things that can be done. I don’t like work—no man 
does—but I like what is in the work,—the chance to find yourself. 
Your own reality—for yourself, not for others—what no other man 
can ever know. They can only see the mere show, and never can tell 
what it really means. 
“J was not surprised to see somebody sitting aft, on the deck, with 
his legs dangling over the mud. You see I 
rather chummed with the 


132 
Heart of 
Darkness 
few mechanics there were in that station, whom the other pilgrims 
naturally despised—on account of their imperfect manners, I sup- 
pose. This was the foreman—a boiler-maker by trade—a good 
worker. He was a 
lank, bony, yellow-faced man, with big intense eyes. 
His aspect was worried, and his head was as bald as the palm of my 
hand; but his hair in falling seemed to have stuck to his chin, and had 
prospered in the new locality, for his beard hung down to his waist. 
He was a widower with six young children (he had left them in 
charge of a sister of his to come out there), and the passion of his life 
was pigeon-flying. He was an enthusiast and a connoisseur. He 
would rave about pigeons. After work hours he used sometimes to 
come over from his hut for a talk about his children and his pigeons; 
at work, when he had to crawl in the mud under the bottom of the 
steamboat, he would tie up that beard of his in a kind of white 
serviette he brought for the purpose. It had loops to go over his ears. 
In the evening he could be seen squatted on the bank rinsing that 
wrapper in the creek with great care, then spreading it solemnly ona 
bush to dry. 
“T slapped him on the back and shouted ‘We shall have rivets!’ He 
scrambled to his feet exclaiming. ‘No! Rivets!’ as though he couldn’t 
believe his ears. Then in a low voice, ‘You . 
. 
. eh?’ I 
don’t know why 
we behaved like lunatics. I put my finger to the side of my nose’and 
nodded mysteriously. ‘Good for you!’ he cried, snapped his fingers 
above his head, lifting one foot. I tried a jig. We capered on the iron 
deck. A frightful clatter came out of that hulk, and the virgin forest 
on the other bank of the creek sent it back in a thundering roll upon 
the sleeping station. It must have made some of the pilgrims sit up in 
their hovels. A dark figure obscured the lighted doorway of the man- 
ager’s hut, vanished, then, a second or so after, the doorway itself 
vanished too. We stopped, and the silence driven away by the stamp- 
ing of our feet flowed back again from the recesses of the land. The 
great wall of vegetation, an exuberant and entangled mass of trunks, 
branches, leaves, boughs, festoons, motionless in the moonlight, was 
like a rioting invasion of soundless life, a rolling wave of plants, piled 
up, crested, ready to topple over the creek, to sweep every little man 
of us out of his little existence. And it moved not. A deadened burst 
of mighty splashes and snorts reached us from afar, as though an 
ichthyosaurus had been taking a bath of glitter in the great river. 
“After all,’ said the boiler-maker in a reasonable tone, ‘why shouldn’t 


Heart of 
Darkness 
133 
we get the rivets?’ Why not, indeed! I did not know of any reason 
why we shouldn’t. “They'll come in three weeks,’ I 
said, confidently. 
“But they didn’t. Instead of rivets there came an invasion, an 
infliction, a visitation. It came in sections during the next three 
weeks, each section headed by a donkey carrying a white man in new 
clothes and tan shoes, bowing from that elevation right and left to 
the impressed pilgrims. A quarrelsome band of footsore sulky nig- 
gers trod on the heels of the donkey; a lot of tents, camp-stools, tin 
boxes, white cases, brown bales would be shot down in the courtyard, 
and the air of mystery would deepen a little over the muddle of the 
station. Five such instalments came, with their absurd air of dis- 
orderly flight with the loot of innumerable outfit shops and provision 
stores, that, one would think, they were lugging, after a raid, into the 
wilderness for equitable division. It was an inextricable mess of 
things decent in themselves but that human folly made look like the 
spoils of thieving. 
“This devoted band called itself the Eldorado Exploring Expedi- 
tion,* and I believe they were sworn to secrecy. Their talk, however, 
was the talk of sordid buccaneers: it was reckless without hardihood, 
greedy without audacity, and cruel without courage; there was not an 
atom of foresight or of serious intention in the whole batch of them, 
and they did not seem aware these things are wanted for the work of 
the 
world. To tear treasure out of the bowels of the land was their desire, 
with no more moral purpose at the back of it than there is in burglars 
breaking into a safe. Who paid the expenses of the noble enterprise I 
don’t know; but the uncle of our manager was leader of that lot. 
“In exterior he resembled a butcher in a poor neighbourhood, and 
his eyes had a look of sleepy cunning. He carried his fat paunch with 
ostentation on his short legs, and during the time his gang infested 
the station spoke to no one but his nephew. You could see these two 
roaming about all day long with their heads close together in an 
everlasting confab. 
“J had given up worrying myself about the rivets. One’s capacity for 
that kind of folly is more limited than you would suppose. I said 
Hang! —and let things slide. I 
had plenty of time for meditation, and 
now and then I would give some thought to Kurtz. I wasn’t very 
interested in him. No. Still, I 
was curious to see whether this man, who 
had come out equipped with moral ideas of some sort, would climb to 
the top after all, and how he would set about his work when there.” 


I] 
“ONE 
evening as I was lying flat on the deck of my steamboat, I 
heard voices approaching—and there were the nephew and the uncle 
strolling along the bank. I laid my head on my arm again, and had 
nearly lost myself in a doze, when somebody said in my ear, as it 
were: ‘I am as harmless as a 
little child, but I 
don’t like to be dictated 
to. Am I 
the manager—or am I 
not? I 
was ordered to send him there. 
It’s incredible.’ 
. 
. 
. | 
became aware that the two were standing on the 
shore alongside the forepart of the steamboat, just below my head. I 
did not move; it did not occur to me to move: I was sleepy. ‘It is 
unpleasant,’ grunted the uncle. ‘He has asked the Administration to 
be sent there,’ said the other, ‘with the idea of showing what he could 
do; and I was instructed accordingly. Look at the influence that man 
must have. Is it not frightful?’ They both agreed it was frightful, 
then made several bizarre remarks: ‘Make rain and fine weather— 
one man—the Council—by the nose’ —bits of absurd sentences that 
got the better of my drowsiness, so that I had pretty near the whole 
of my wits about me when the uncle said, ‘The climate may do away 
with this difficulty for you. Is he alone there?’ ‘Yes,’ answered’ the 
manager; ‘he sent his assistant down the river with a note to me in 
these terms: “Clear this poor devil out of the country, and don’t 
bother sending more of that sort. I 
had rather be alone than have the 
kind of men you can dispose of with me.” It was more than a year 
ago. Can you imagine such impudence!’ ‘Anything since then?’ asked 
the other, hoarsely. ‘Tyory,’ jerked the nephew; ‘lots of it—prime 
sort—lots—most annoying, 
from him.’ ‘And with that?’ questioned 
the heavy rumble. @ 
nvoice? was the reply fired out, so to speak. 
Then silence. They had been talking about Kurtz. 
“I was broad awake by this time, but, lying perfectly at ease, 
remained still, having no inducement to change my position. ‘How 
did that ivory come all this way?’ growled the elder man, who 
seemed very vexed. The other explained that it had come with a 
fleet 
of canoes in charge of an English half-caste clerk Kurtz had with 
him; that Kurtz had apparently intended to return himself, the 
station being by that time bare of goods and stores, but after coming 
three hundred miles, had suddenly decided to go back, which he 


Heart of 
Darkness 
135 
started to do alone in a small dug-out with four paddlers, leaving the 
half-caste to continue down the river with the ivory. The two fellows 
there seemed astounded at anybody attempting such a thing. They 
were at a loss for an adequate motive. As to me, I seemed to see 
Kurtz for the first time. It was a distinct glimpse: the dug-out, four 
paddling savages, and the Ione white man turning his back suddenly 
on thé 
headquar 
‘ 
ief, on thoughts of home—perhaps; set- 
ting his face tow 
and 
desolate station. I 
did not know the motive. 
simply a 
fine fellow who stuck to his work for its own sake. His name, 
you understand, had not been pronounced once. He was ‘that man.’ 
The half-caste, who, as far as I could see, had conducted a difficult 
trip with great prudence and pluck, was invariably alluded to as ‘that 
scoundrel.’ The ‘scoundrel’ had reported that the ‘man’ had been 
very ill—had recovered imperfectly. 
... The two below me moved 
away then a few paces, and strolled back and forth at some little 
distance. I heard: ‘Military post—doctor—two hundred miles— 
quite alone now—unavoidable delays—nine months—no news— 
strange rumours.’ They approached again, just as the manager was 
saying, ‘No one, as far as I know, unless a species of wandering 
trader—a pestilential fellow, snapping ivory from the natives.’ Who 
was it they were talking about now? I gathered in snatches that this 
was some man supposed to be in Kurtz’s district, and of whom the 
manager did not approve. ‘We will not be free from unfair competi- 
tion till one of these fellows is hanged for an example,’ he said. 
‘Certainly,’ 
grunted 
the other; 
‘get him hanged! Why not?* 
Anything—anything can be done in this country. That’s what I say; 
nobody here, you understand, here, can endanger your position. And 
why? You stand the climate—you outlast them all. The danger is in 
Europe; but there before I left I took care to 
> They moved off 
and whispered, then their voices rose again. “The extraordinary ser- 
ies of delays is not my fault. I 
did my possible.’* The fat man sighed, 
‘Very sad.’ ‘And the pestiferous absurdity of his talk,’ continued the 
other; ‘he bothered me enough when he was here. “Each station 
should be like a beacon on the road towards better things, a centre 
for trade of course, but also for humanising, improving, instructing.” 
Conceive you—that ass! And he wants to be manager! No, it’s——’ 
Here he got choked by excessive indignation, and I 
lifted my head 
the least bit. I 
was surprised to see how near they were—right under 


136 
Heart of 
Darkness 
me. I could have spat upon their hats. They were looking on the 
ground, absorbed in thought. The manager was switching his leg 
with a slender twig: his sagacious relative lifted his head. ‘You have 
been well since you came out this time?’ he asked. The other gave a 
start. ‘Who? I? Oh! Like a charm—like a charm. But the rest—oh, 
my goodness! All sick. They die so quick, too, that I 
haven’t the time 
to send them out of the country—it’s incredible!’ ‘H’m. Just so,’ 
grunted the uncle. ‘Ah! my boy, trust to this—I say, trust to this.’ I 
saw him extend his short flipper of an arm for a gesture that took in 
the forest, the creek, the mud, the river,—seemed to beckon with a 
dishonouring flourish before the sunlit face of the land a treacherous 
appeal to the lurking death, to the hidden evil, to the profound 
darkness of its heart. It was so startling that I leaped to my feet and 
looked back at the edge of the forest, as though I had expected an 
answer of some sort to that black display of confidence. You know 
the foolish notions that come to one sometimes. The high stillness 
confronted these two figures with its ominous patience, waiting for 
the passing away of a fantastic invasion. 
“They swore aloud together—out of sheer fright, I 
believe—then 
pretending not to know anything of my existence, turned back to the 
station. The sun was low; and leaning forward side by side, they 
seemed to be tugging painfully uphill their two ridiculous shadows 
of unequal length, that trailed behind them slowly over the tall grass 
without bending a 
single blade. 
“In a few days the Eldorado Expedition went into the patient 
wilderness, that closed upon it as the sea closes over a diver. Long 
afterwards the news came that all the donkeys were dead. I know 
nothing as to the fate of the less valuable animals. They, no doubt, 
like the rest of us, found what they deserved. I 
did not inquire. I 
was 
then rather excited at the prospect of meeting Kurtz very soon. 
When I say very soon I mean it comparatively. It was just two 
months from the day we left the creek when we came to the bank 
below Kurtz’s station. 
“Going up that river was like travelling back to the earliest begin- 
nings of the world, when vegetation rioted on the earth and the big 
trees were kings. An empty stream, a great silence, an impenetrable 
forest. ‘The air was warm, thick, heavy, sluggish. There was no joy in 
the brilliance of sunshine. The long stretches of the waterway ran 
on, deserted, into the gloom of overshadowed distances. On silvery 


Heart of 
Darkness 
137 
sandbanks hippos and alligators sunned themselves side by side. The 
broadening waters flowed through a mob of wooded islands; you lost 
your way on that river as you would in a desert, and butted all day 
long against shoals, trying to find the channel, till you thought your- 
self bewitched and cut off for ever from everything you had known 
once—somewhere—far away—in another existence perhaps. ‘Chere» 
were moments when one’s 
past came back to one, 
as it will some- 
plants;and water, and silence. And this stillness of life did not in the 
least 
TESGmbIe a 
peace, 
It 
was 
the stillness of an implacable force 
brooding over an inscrutable 
intention. It looked at you with a venge- 
ful aspect. I 
got used to it afterwards; I 
did not see it any more; I 
had 
no time. I had to keep guessing at the channel; I had to discern, 
mostly by inspiration, the signs of hidden banks; I watched for 
sunken stones; I was learning to clap my teeth smartly before my 
heart flew out, when I shaved by a fluke some infernal sly old snag 
that would have ripped the life out of the tin-pot steamboat and 
drowned all the pilgrims; I had to keep a look-out for the signs of 
dead wood we could cut up in the night for next day’s steaming.* 
When you have to attend to things of that sort, to the mere incidents 
of the surface, the reality—the reality, I tell you—fades. The inner 
truth is hidden—luckily, luckily. But I 
felt it all the same; I 
felt often 
its mysterious stillness watching me at my monkey tricks, just as it 
watches you fellows performing on your respective tight-ropes for— 
what is it? half-a-crown a tumble 
z 
“Try to be civil, Marlow,” growled a 
voice, and I 
knew there was at 
least one listener awake besides myself. 
“J beg your pardon. I forgot the heartache which makes up the 
rest of the price. And indeed what does the price matter, if the trick 
be well done? You do your tricks very well. And I didn’t do badly 
either, since I managed not to sink that steamboat on my first trip. 
It’s a wonder to me yet. Imagine a blindfolded man set to drive a van 
over a bad road. I sweated and shivered over that business consider- 
ably, I can tell you. After all, for a seaman, to scrape the bottom of 
the thing that’s supposed to float all the time under his care is the 
unpardonable sin. No one may know of it, but you never forget the 
thump—ch? A blow on the very heart. You remember it, you dream 


138 
Heart of 
Darkness 
of it, you wake up at night and think of it—years after—and go hot 
and cold all over. I 
don’t pretend to say that steamboat floated all the 
time. More than once she had to wade for a bit, with twenty canni- 
bals splashing around and pushing.* We had enlisted some of these 
chaps on the way for a crew. Fine fellows—cannibals—in their place. 
They were men one could work with, and I am grateful to them. 
And, after all, they did not eat each other before my face: they had 
brought along a provision of hippo-meat which went rotten, and 
made the mystery of the wilderness stink in my nostrils. Phoo! I 
can 
sniff it now. I had the manager on board and three or four pilgrims 
with their staves—all complete.* Sometimes we came upon a 
station 
close by the bank, clinging to the skirts of the unknown, and the 
white men rushing out of a tumble-down hovel, with great gestures 
of joy and surprise and welcome, seemed very strange,—had the 
appearance of being held there captive by a spell. The word ‘ivory’ 
would ring in the air for a while—and on we went again into the 
silence, along empty reaches, round the still bends, between the high 
walls of our winding way, reverberating in hollow claps the ponder- 
ous beat of the stern-wheel. Trees, trees, millions of trees, massive, 
immense, running up high; and at their foot, hugging the bank 
against the stream, crept the little begrimed steamboat, like a slug- 
gish beetle crawling on the floor of a lofty portico. It made you feel 
very small, very lost, and yet it was not altogether depressing that 
feeling. After all, if you were small, the grimy beetle crawled on— 
which was just what you wanted it to do. Where the pilgrims 
imagined it crawled to I don’t know. To some place where they 
expected to get something, I 
bet! Formeitcrawled towards 
Kurte— 
exclusively;* 
en the 
st 
2: 
Tawled 
very slow. The reaches opened ee us and closed behind, as if the 
forest had 
stepped leisurely across the water to bar the way for our 
return. We penetrated deeper and deer 
er into the heart of dark 
the TicHfEof 
trees 
‘Would 
1um-tp 
she 
cig aTomeia 
SAN 
faintly, as if 
hover 
ic 
high over our heads, till the first break 
of day. Whether it meant war, peace, or prayer we could 
not tell. The 
dawns were heralded by the descent of a chill stillness; the wood- 
cutters slept, their fires burned low; the snapping of a twig would 
make you start. We were wanderers on a prehistoric earth, on an 
earth that wore the aspect of an unknown planet. We could have 


Heart of 
Darkness 
139 
fancied ourselves the first of men taking possession of an accursed 
inheritance, to be subdued at the cost of profound anguish and of 
excessive toil. But suddenly, as we struggled round a bend, there 
would be a glimpse of rush walls, of peaked grass-roofs, a burst of 
yells, a whirl of black limbs, a mass of hands clapping, of feet stamp- 
ing, of bodies swaying, of eyes rolling, under the droop of heavy and 
motionless foliage. The steamer toiled along slowly on the edge of a 
black and incomprehensible frenzy. The prehistoric man was cursing 
us, praying to us, welcoming us—who could tell? We were cut off 
from the comprehension of our surroundings; we glided past like 
phantoms, wondering and secretly appalled, as sane men would be 
before an enthusiastic outbreak in a madhouse. We could not under- 
stand, because we were too far and could not remember, because we 
were travelling in the night of 
first ages, of those ages that are gone, 
pearing hardly a sign—and no memories. 
“The earth seemed unearthly. We are accustomed to look upon 
the shackled form of a conquered monster, but there—there you 
could look at a thing monstrous and free. It was unearthly, and the 
men were 
No, they were not inhuman. Well, you know, that was 
the worst of it—this suspicion of their not being inhuman. It would 
come slowly to one. They howled, and leaped, and spun, and made 
horrid faces; but what thrilled you was just the thought of their 
humanity—like yours—the thought of your remote kinship with 
this wild and passionate uproar. Ugly. Yes, it was ugly enough; but if 
you were man enough you would admit to yourself that there was in 
you just the faintest trace of a response to the terrible frankness of 
that noise, a dim suspicion of there being a meaning in it which 
you—you so remote from the night of first ages—could compre- 
hend. And why not? The mind of man is capable of anything*— 
because everything is in it, all the past as well as all the future. What 
was there after all? Joy, fear, sorrow, devotion, valour, rage—who can 
tell?—but truth—truth stripped of its cloak of time. Let the fool 
gape and shudder—the man knows, and can look on without a wink. 
But he must at least be as much of a man as these on the shore. He 
must meet that truth with his own true stuff—with his own inborn 
strength. Principles? Principles won’t do. 
Acquisitions, clothes, 
pretty rags—rags that would fly off at the first good shake. No; you 
want a deliberate belief. An appeal to me in this fiendish row—is 
there? Very well; I 
hear; I 
admit, but I 
have a voice too, and for good 


140 
Heart of 
Darkness 
or evil mine is the speech that cannot be 
silenced. Of course, a fool, 
what with sheer fright 
and fine sentiments, is always safe. Who’s that 
grunting? You wonder I didn’t go ashore for a howl and a 
dance? 
Well, no—I didn’t. Fine sentiments, you say? Fine sentiments, 
be 
“hanged! I 
had no time. I 
had to mess about with white-lead 
and strips 
a 
of woollen blanket helping to put bandages on those leaky steam- 
pipes—I tell you. I had to watch the steering, and circumvent those 
snags, and 
get the tin-pot along by hook or by crook. There was 
[osiatenenth) enough in these things to save a wiser man. And 
etween wires I had to look after the savage who was fireman. He 
was an improved specimen; he could fire up a vertical boiler. He was 
there below me, and, upon my word, to look at him was as edifying as 
seeing a dog in a parody of breeches and a 
feather hat, walking on his 
hind-legs. A few months of training had done for that really fine 
chap. He squinted at the steam-gauge and at the water-gauge with an 
evident effort of intrepidity—and he had filed teeth too, the poor 
devil, and the wool of his pate shaved into queer patterns, and three 
ornamental scars on each of his cheeks. He ought to have been 
clapping his hands and stamping his feet on the bank, instead of 
which he was hard at work, a thrall to strange witchcraft, full of 
improving 
knowledge. 
He was 
useful 
because 
he had been 
instructed; and what he knew was this—that should the water in that 
transparent thing disappear, the evil spirit inside the boiler would get 
angry through the greatness of his thirst, and take a terrible ven- 
geance. So he sweated and fired up and watched the glass fearfully 
(with an impromptu charm, made of rags, tied to his arm, and a 
piece of polished bone, as big as a watch, stuck flatways through his 
lower lip), while the wooded banks slipped past us slowly, the short 
noise was left behind, the interminable miles of silence—and we 
crept on, towards Kurtz. But the snags were thick, the water was 
treacherous and shallow, the boiler seemed indeed to have a sulky 
devil in it, and thus neither that fireman nor I had any time to peer 
into our creepy thoughts. 
“Some fifty miles below the Inner Station we came upon a 
hut of 
reeds, an inclined and melancholy pole, with the unrecognisable tat- 
ters of what had been a 
flag of some sort flying from it, and a neatly 
stacked wood-pile. This was unexpected. We came to the bank, and 
on the stack of firewood found a 
flat piece of board with some faded 
pencil-writing on it. When deciphered it said: ‘Wood for you. Hurry 


Heart of 
Darkness 
141 
up. Approach cautiously.’ There was 
a signature, but it was 
illegible—not Kurtz—a much longer word. Hurry up. Where? Up 
the river? ‘Approach cautiously.’ We had not done so. But the warn- 
ing could not have been meant for the place where it could be only 
found after approach. Something was wrong above. But what—and 
how much? That was the question. We commented adversely upon 
the imbecility of that telegraphic style. The bush around said noth- 
ing, and would not let us look very far, either. A torn curtain of red 
twill hung in the doorway of the hut, and flapped sadly in our faces. 
The dwelling was dismantled; but we could see a white man had 
lived there not very long ago. There remained a rude table—a plank 
on two posts; a heap of rubbish reposed in a dark corner, and by the 
door I 
picked up a book. It had lost its covers, and the pages had been 
thumbed into a state of extremely dirty softness; but the back had 
been lovingly stitched afresh with white cotton thread, which looked 
clean yet. It was an extraordinary find. Its title was, An Inquiry into 
Some Points of 
Seamanship, by a man Towser, Towson—some such 
name— Master in his Majesty’s Navy.* The matter looked dreary 
reading enough, with illustrative diagrams and repulsive tables of 
figures, and the copy was sixty years old. I handled this amazing 
antiquity with the greatest possible tenderness, lest it should dissolve 
in my hands. Within, Towson or Towser was inquiring earnestly into 
the breaking strain of ships’ chains and tackle, and other such mat- 
ters. Not a very enthralling book; but at the first glance you could see 
there 
asi 
of intentio 
cern for the right way 
of going to work, which made these humble pages, thought 
out, so 
many years ago, luminous with another than 
a 
professional light. 
The simple old sailor, with 
his 
talk 
of chains and purchases, made me 
forget the jungle and 
| 
the 
pilgrims in.a 
delicious sensation of having 
come upon something unmistakably rea) 
Such a book being there 
was wonderful enough; 
but still more astounding were the notes 
pencilled in the margin, and plainly referring to the text. I 
couldn’t 
believe my eyes! They were in cipher! Yes, it looked like cipher. 
Fancy a man lugging with him a book of that description into this 
nowhere and studying it—and making notes—in cipher at that! It 
was an extravagant mystery. 
“T had been dimly aware for some time of a worrying noise, and 
when I 
lifted my eyes I 
saw the wood-pile was gone, and the manager, 
aided by all the pilgrims, was shouting at me from the river-side. I 


142 
Heart of 
Darkness 
slipped the book into my pocket. I 
assure you to leave off reading was 
like tearing myself away from the shelter of an old and solid 
friendship. 
“T started the lame engine ahead. ‘It must be this miserable 
trader—this intruder,’ exclaimed the manager, looking back malevo- 
lently at the place we had left. ‘He must be English,’ I said. ‘It will 
not save him from getting into trouble if he is not careful,’ muttered 
the manager darkly. I 
observed with assumed innocence that no man 
was safe from trouble in this world. 
“The current was more rapid now, the steamer seemed at her last 
gasp, the stern-wheel flopped languidly, and I caught myself listen- 
ing on tiptoe for the next beat of the float, for in sober truth I 
expected the wretched thing to give up every moment. It was like 
watching the last flickers of a life. But still we crawled. Sometimes I 
would pick out a tree a little way ahead to measure our progress 
towards Kurtz by, but I lost it invariably before we got abreast. To 
keep the eyes so long on one thing was too much for human patience. 
The manager displayed a beautiful resignation. I fretted and fumed 
and took to arguing with myself whether or no I would talk openly 
with Kurtz; but before I 
could come to any conclusion it occurred to 
me that my speech or my silence, indeed any action of mine, would 
be a mere futility. What did it matter what any one knew or ignored? 
What did it matter who was manager? One gets sometimes such a 
flash of insight. The essentials of this affair lay deep under the 
surface, beyond my reach, and beyond my power of meddling. 
“Towards the evening of the second day we judged ourselves 
about eight miles from Kurtz’s station. I wanted to push on; but the 
manager looked grave, and told me the navigation up there was so 
dangerous that it would be advisable, the sun being very low already, 
to wait where we were till next morning. Moreover, he pointed out 
that if the warning to approach cautiously were to be followed, we 
must approach in daylight—not at dusk, or in the dark. This was 
sensible enough. Eight miles meant nearly three hours’ steaming for 
us, and [I could also see suspicious ripples at the upper end of the 
reach. Nevertheless, I was annoyed beyond expression at the delay, 
and most unreasonably too, since one night more could not matter 
much after so many months. As we had plenty of wood, and caution 
was the word, I brought up in the middle of the stream. The reach 
was narrow, straight, with high sides like a railway cutting. The dusk 


Heart of 
Darkness 
143 
came gliding into it long before the sun had set. The current ran 
smooth and swift, but a dumb immobility sat on the banks. The 
living trees, lashed together by the creepers and every living bush of 
the undergrowth, might have been changed into stone, even to the 
slenderest twig, to the lightest leaf. It was not sleep—it seemed 
unnatural, like a state of trance. Not the faintest sound of any kind 
could be heard. You looked on amazed, and began to suspect your- 
self of being deaf—then the night came suddenly, and struck you 
blind as well. About three in the morning some large fish leaped, and 
the loud splash made me jump as though a gun had been fired. When 
the sun rose there was a white fog, very warm and clammy, and more 
blinding than the night. It did not shift or drive; it was just there, 
standing all round you like something solid. At eight or nine, per- 
haps, it lifted as a shutter lifts. We had a glimpse of the towering 
multitude of trees, of the immense matted jungle, with the blazing 
little ball of the sun hanging over it—all perfectly still—and then the 
white shutter came down again, smoothly, as if sliding in greased 
grooves. I ordered the chain, which we had begun to heave in, to be 
paid out again. Before it stopped running with a muffled rattle, a cry, 
a very loud cry, as of infinite desolation, soared slowly in the opaque 
air. It ceased. A complaining clamour, modulated in savage discords, 
filled our ears. The sheer unexpectedness of it made my hair stir 
under my cap. I 
don’t know how it struck the others: to me it seemed 
as though the mist itself had screamed, so suddenly, and apparently 
from all sides at once, did this tumultuous and mournful uproar 
arise. It culminated in a hurried outbreak of almost intolerably 
excessive shrieking, which stopped short, leaving us stiffened in a 
variety of silly attitudes, and obstinately listening to the nearly as 
appalling 
and 
excessive 
silence. 
‘Good 
God! 
What 
is_ the 
meaning?’ stammered at my elbow one of the pilgrims, 
—a little 
fat man, with sandy hair and red whiskers, who wore side-spring 
boots, and pink pyjamas tucked into his socks. Two others remained 
open-mouthed a whole minute, then dashed into the little cabin, to 
rush out incontinently and stand darting scared glances, with Win- 
chesters at ‘ready’ in their hands. What we could see was just the 
steamer we were on, her outlines blurred as though she had been on 
the point of dissolving, and a misty strip of water, perhaps two feet 
broad, around her—and that was all. The rest of the world was 
nowhere, as far as our eyes and ears were concerned. Just nowhere. 


144 
Heart of 
Darkness 
Gone, disappeared; swept off without leaving a whisper or a shadow 
behind. 
“T went forward, and ordered the chain to be hauled in short, so as 
to be ready to trip the anchor and move the steamboat at once if 
necessary. ‘Will they attack?’ whispered an awed voice. ‘We will be all 
butchered in this fog,’ murmured another. The faces twitched with 
the strain, the hands trembled slightly, the eyes forgot to wink. It was 
very curious to see the contrast of expressions of the white men and 
of the black fellows of our crew, who were as much strangers to that 
part of the river as we, though their homes were only eight hundred 
miles away. The whites, of course greatly discomposed, had besides a 
curious look of being painfully shocked by such an outrageous row. 
The others had an alert, naturally interested expression; but their 
faces were essentially quiet, even those of the one or two who 
grinned as they hauled at the chain. Several exchanged short, grunt- 
ing phrases, which seemed to settle the matter to their satisfaction. 
Their headman, a young, broad-chested black, severely draped in 
dark-blue fringed cloths, with fierce nostrils and his hair all done up 
artfully in oily ringlets, stood near me. ‘Aha!’ I said, just for good 
fellowship’s sake. ‘Catch ’im,’ he snapped, with a bloodshot widen- 
ing of his eyes and a 
flash of sharp teeth—‘catch ?im. Give ’im to us.’ 
“To you, eh?’ I asked; ‘what would you do with them?’ ‘Eat ’im!’ he 
said, curtly, and, leaning his elbow on the rail, looked out into the fog 
in a dignified and profoundly pensive attitude. I would no doubt 
have been properly horrified, had it not occurred to me that he and 
his chaps must be very hungry: that they must have been growing 
increasingly hungry for at least this month past. They had been 
engaged for six months (I don’t think a single one of them had any 
clear idea of time, as we at the end of countless ages have. They still 
belonged to the beginnings of time—had no inherited experience to 
teach them as it were), and of course, as long as there was a piece of 
paper written over in accordance with some farcical law or other 
made down the river, it didn’t enter anybody’s head to trouble how 
they would live. Certainly they had brought with them some rotten 
hippo-meat, which couldn’t have lasted very long, anyway, even if 
the pilgrims hadn’t, in the midst of a shocking hullabaloo, thrown a 
considerable quantity of it overboard. It looked like a high-handed 
proceeding; but it was really a case of legitimate self-defence. You 
can’t breathe dead hippo waking, sleeping, and eating, and at the 


Heart of 
Darkness 
145 
same time keep your precarious grip on existence. Besides that, they 
had given them every week three pieces of brass wire, each about 
nine inches long; and the theory was they were to buy their provi- 
sions with that currency in river-side villages.* You can see how that 
worked. There were either no villages, or the people were hostile, or 
the director, who like the rest of us fed out of tins, with an occasional 
old he-goat thrown in, didn’t want to stop the steamer for some more 
or less recondite reason. So, unless they swallowed the wire itself, or 
made loops of it to snare the fishes with, I 
don’t see what good their 
extravagant salary could be to them. I must say it was paid with a 
regularity worthy of a large and honourable trading company. For 
the rest, the only thing to eat—though it didn’t look eatable in the 
least—I saw in their possession was a few lumps of some stuff like 
half-cooked dough,* of a dirty lavender colour, they kept wrapped in 
leaves, and now and then swallowed a 
piece of, but so small that it 
seemed done more for the looks of the thing than for any serious 
purpose of sustenance. Why in the name of all the gnawing devils of 
hunger they didn’t go for us—they were thirty to five—and have a 
good tuck-in for once, amazes me now when I 
think of it. They were 
big powerful men, with not much capacity to weigh the con- 
sequences, with courage, with strength, even yet, though their skins 
were no longer glossy and their muscles no longer hard. And I saw 
that something 
restraining, one of those human_s 
at_baffle 
probability, 
had come into 
ooked at them with a swift 
quickening of interest—not because it occurred to me I might be 
eaten by them before very long, though I 
own to you that just then I 
perceived—in a new light, as it were—how unwholesome the pil- 
grims looked, and I hoped, yes, I positively hoped, that my aspect 
was not so—what shall I say?—so—unappetising: a touch of fan- 
tastic vanity which fitted_well with the dream-sensation_ that_per- 
vaded all my days at that time. Perhaps I had a 
little fever too. One 
can’t live with 
one’s 
finger everlastingly on one’s pulse. I 
had often ‘a 
little fever, or a little touch of other things—the playful paw-strokes 
of the wilderness, the preliminary trifling before the more serious 
onslaught which came in due course. Yes; I looked at them as you 
would on any human being, with a curiosity of their impulses, 
motives, capacities, weaknesses, when brought to the test of an 
inexorable physical necessity. (Restraint) What possible restraint? 
Was it superstition, 
disgust, patience, fear—or some 
kind of 


146 
Heart of 
Darkness 
primitive honour? No fear can stand up to hunger, no patience can 
wear it out, disgust simply does not exist where hunger is; and as to 
than chaff in a breeze. Don’t you know the devilry of lingering 
starvation, its exasperating torment, its black thoughts, its sombre 
d 
superstition, beliefs, and what you may call principles, they are less 
ge brooding ferocity? Well, I do. It takes a man all his inborn 
Ns 
= 
strength to fight hunger properly. It’s really easier to face bereave- 
ment, dishonour, and the perdition of one’s soul—than this kind of 
prolonged hunger. Sad, but true. And these chaps too had no earthly 
~ reason for any kind of scruple. Restraint! I 
would just as soon have 
N 
a 
eS expected restraint from a hyena prowling amongst the corpses of a 
battlefield. But there was the fact facing me—the fact dazzling, to be 
seen, like the foam on the depths of the sea, like a ripple on an 
unfathomable enigma, a mystery greater—when I thought of it— 
whiteness of the fog. 
“Two pilgrims were quarrelling in hurried whispers as to which 
bank. ‘Left.’ ‘No, no; how can you? Right, right, of course.’ ‘It is very 
serious,’ said the manager’s voice behind me; ‘I would be desolated if 
anything should happen to Mr Kurtz before we came up.’ I 
looked at 
him, and had not the slightest doubt he was sincere. He was just the 
kind of man who would wish to preserve appearances. That was his 
restraint. But when he muttered something about going on at once, 
“did not even take the trouble to answer him. I knew, and he knew, 
that it was impossible. Were we to let go our hold of the bottom, we 
would be absolutely in the air—in space. We wouldn’t be able to tell 
where we were going to—whether up or down stream, or across—till 
we fetched against one bank or the other,—and then we wouldn’t 
know at first which it was. Of course I 
made no move. I 
had no mind 
for a smash-up. You couldn’t imagine a more deadly place for a 
shipwreck. Whether drowned at once or not, we were sure to perish 
speedily in one way or another. ‘I authorise you to take all the risks,’ 
he said, after a short silence. ‘I refuse to take any,’ I said shortly; 
which was just the answer he expected, though its tone might have 
surprised him. ‘Well, I must defer to your judgment. You are cap- 
tain,’ he said, with marked civility. I 
turned my shoulder to him in 
sign of my appreciation, and looked into the fog. How long would it 
last? It was the most hopeless look-out. The approach to this Kurtz 
than the curious, inexplicable note of desperate grief in this savage 
clamour that had swept by us on the river-bank, behind the blind 
= 


Heart of 
Darkness 
147 
grubbing for ivory in the wretched bush was beset by as many dan- 
gers as though he had been an enchanted princess sleeping in a 
fabulous castle.* ‘Will they attack, do you think?’ asked the manager, 
in a confidential tone. 
“T did not think they would attack, for several obvious reasons. 
The thick fog was one. If they left the bank in their canoes they 
would get lost in it, as we would be if we attempted to move. Still, I 
had also judged the jungle of both banks quite impenetrable—and 
yet eyes were in it, eyes that had seen us. The river-side bushes were 
certainly very thick; but the undergrowth behind was evidently 
penetrable. However, during the short lift I 
had seen no canoes any- 
where in the reach—certainly not abreast of the steamer. But what 
made the idea of attack inconceivable to me was the nature of the 
noise—of the cries we had heard. They had not the fierce character 
boding of immediate hostile intention. Unexpected, wild, and vio- 
lent as they had been, they had given me anirresistible impression of 
sorrow. The glimpse of the steamboat had for some reason filled 
those savages with 
The danger, 
if any, I 
expounded, was from our proximity 
to a great human passion let 
loose. Even extreme grief may ultimately vent itself in violence—but 
more generally takes the form of apathy. . 
. 
. 
“You should have seen the pilgrims stare! They had no heart to 
grin, or even to revile me; but I 
believe they thought me gone mad— 
with fright, maybe. I 
delivered a regular lecture. My dear boys, it was 
no good bothering. Keep a look-out? Well, you may guess I watched 
the fog for the signs of lifting as a cat watches a mouse; but for 
anything else our eyes were of no more use to us than if we had been 
buried miles deep in a heap of cotton-wool. It felt like it too— 
choking, warm, 
stifling. Besides, all I said, though it sounded 
extravagant, was absolutely true to fact. What we afterwards alluded 
to as an attack was really an attempt at repulse. The action was very 
far from being aggressive—it was not even defensive, in the usual 
sense: it was undertaken under the stress of desperation, and in its 
essence was purely protective. 
“Tt developed itself, I 
should say, two hours after the fog lifted, 
and its commencement was at a spot, roughly speaking, about a mile 
and a half below Kurtz’s station. We had just floundered and flopped 
round a bend, when I 
saw an islet, a mere grassy hummock of bright 
green, in the middle of the stream. It was the only thing of the kind; 


148 
Heart of 
Darkness 
but as we opened the reach more, I perceived it was the head of a 
long sandbank, or rather of a chain of shallow patches stretching 
down the middle of the river. They were discoloured, just awash, and 
the whole lot was seen just under the water, exactly as a man’s 
backbone is seen running down the middle of his back under the 
skin. Now, as far as I did see, I could go to the right or to the left of 
this. I didn’t know either channel, of course. The banks looked 
pretty well alike, the depth appeared the same; but as I had been 
informed the station was on the west side, I 
naturally headed for the 
western passage. 
“No sooner had we fairly entered it than I became aware it was 
much narrower than I had supposed. To the left of us there was the 
long uninterrupted shoal, and to the right a high, steep bank heavily 
overgrown with bushes. Above the bush the trees stood in serried 
ranks. The twigs overhung the current thickly, and from distance to 
distance a 
large limb of some tree projected rigidly over the stream. 
It was then well on in the afternoon, the face of the forest was 
gloomy, and a broad strip of shadow had already fallen on the water. 
In this shadow we steamed up—very slowly, as you may imagine. I 
sheered her well inshore—the water being a 
near the bank, as 
the sounding-pole informed me. 
“One of my hungry and forbearing friends was sounding 
in the 
bows 
just below me. This steamboat was exactly like a decked scow. 
On the deck there were two little teak-wood houses, with doors and 
windows. The boiler was in the fore-end, and the machinery right 
astern. Over the whole there was a 
light roof, supported on stan- 
chions. The funnel projected through that roof, and in front of the 
funnel a small cabin built of light planks served for a pilot-house. It 
contained a couch, two camp-stools, a loaded Martini-Henry lean- 
ing in one corner, a tiny table, and the steering-wheel. It had a wide 
door in front and a broad shutter at each side. All these were always 
thrown open, of course. I spent my days perched up there on the 
extreme fore-end of that roof, before the door. At night I slept, or 
tried to, on the couch. An athletic black belonging to some coast 
tribe, and educated by my poor predecessor, was the helmsman. He 
sported a 
pair of brass earrings, wore a 
blue cloth wrapper from the 
waist to the ankles, and thought all the world of himself. He was the 
most unstable kind of fool I 
had ever seen. He steered with no end of 
a swagger while you were by; but if he lost sight of you, he became 


Heart of 
Darkness 
149 
instantly the prey of an abject funk, and would let that cripple of a 
steamboat get the upper hand of him in a minute. 
“I was looking down at the sounding-pole, and feeling much 
annoyed to see at each try a 
little more of it stick out of that river, 
when I saw my poleman give up the business suddenly, and stretch 
himself flat on the deck, without even taking the trouble to haul his 
pole in. He kept hold on it though, and it trailed in the water. At the 
same time the fireman, whom I 
could also see below me, sat down 
abruptly before his furnace and ducked his head. I was amazed. 
Then I had to look at the river mighty quick, because there was a 
snag in the fairway. Sticks, little sticks, were flying about—thick: 
they were whizzing before my nose, dropping below me, striking 
behind me against my pilot-house. All this time the river, the shore, 
the woods, were very quiet—perfectly quiet. I could only hear the 
heavy splashing thump of the stern-wheel and the patter of these 
things. We cleared the snag clumsily. Arrows, by 
Jove! We were being 
shot at! I stepped in quickly to close the shutter on the land-side. 
That fool-helmsman, his hands on the spokes, was lifting his knees 
high, stamping his feet, champing his mouth, like a reined-in horse. 
Confound him! And we were staggering within ten feet of the bank. I 
had to lean right out to swing the heavy shutter, and I saw a face 
amongst the leaves on the level with my own, looking at me very 
fierce and steady; and then suddenly, as though a veil had been 
removed from my eyes, I 
made out, deep in the tangled gloom, naked 
breasts, arms, legs, glaring eyes,—the bush was swarming with 
human limbs in movement, glistening, of bronze colour. The twigs 
shook, swayed, and rustled, the arrows flew out of them, and then 
the shutter came to. ‘Steer her straight,’ I 
said to the helmsman. He 
held his head rigid, face forward; but his eyes rolled, he kept on 
lifting and setting down his feet gently, his mouth foamed a little. 
‘Keep quiet!’ I 
said in a fury. I 
might just as well have ordered a 
tree 
not to sway in the wind. I darted out. Below me there was a great 
scuffle of feet on the iron deck; confused exclamations; a voice 
screamed, ‘Can you turn back?’ I caught sight of a V-shaped ripple 
on the water ahead. What? Another snag! A fusillade burst out under 
my feet. The pilgrims had opened with their Winchesters, and were 
simply squirting lead into that bush. A deuce of a lot of smoke came 
up and drove slowly forward. I swore at it. Now I couldn’t see 
the ripple or the snag either. I 
stood in the doorway, peering, and the 


150 
Heart of 
Darkness 
arrows came in swarms. They might have been poisoned, but they 
looked as though they wouldn’t kill a cat. The bush began to howl. 
Our wood-cutters raised a warlike whoop; the report of 
a 
rifle just at 
my back deafened me. I glanced over my shoulder, and the pilot- 
house was yet full of noise and smoke when I made a 
dash at the 
wheel. The fool-nigger had dropped everything, to throw the shutter 
open and let off that Martini-Henry. He stood before the wide open- 
ing, glaring, and I yelled at him to come back, while I straightened 
the sudden twist out of that steamboat. There was no room to turn 
even if I 
had wanted to, the snag was somewhere very near ahead in 
that confounded smoke, there was no time to lose, so I 
just crowded 
her into the bank—right into the bank, where I knew the water was 
deep. 
“We tore slowly along the overhanging bushes in a whirl of broken 
twigs and flying leaves. The fusillade below stopped short, as I had 
foreseen it would when the squirts got empty. I threw my head back 
to a glinting whizz that traversed the pilot-house, in at one shutter- 
hole and out at the other. Looking past that mad helmsman, who was 
shaking the empty rifle and yelling at the shore, I 
saw vague forms of 
men running bent double, leaping, gliding, distinct, incomplete, 
evanescent. Something big appeared in the air before the shutter, the 
rifle went overboard, and the man stepped back swiftly, looked at 
me 
over his shoulder in an extraordinary, profound, familiar manner, 
and fell upon iny feet. The side of his head hit the wheel twice, and 
the end of what appeared a 
long cane clattered round and knocked 
over a 
little camp-stool. It looked as though after wrenching that 
thing from somebody ashore he had lost his balance in the effort. 
The thin smoke had blown away, we were clear of the snag, and 
looking ahead I could see that in another hundred yards or so I 
would be free to sheer off, away from the bank; but my feet felt so 
very warm and wet that I had to look down. The man had rolled on 
his back and stared straight up at me; both his hands clutched that 
cane. It was the shaft of a spear that, either thrown or lounged* 
through the opening, had caught him in the side just below the ribs; 
the blade had gone in out of sight, after making a 
frightful gash; my 
shoes were full; a pool of blood lay very still, gleaming dark-red 
under the wheel; his eyes shone with an amazing lustre. The fusil- 
lade burst out again. He looked at me anxiously, gripping the spear 
like something precious, with an air of being afraid I would try to 


Heart of 
Darkness 
I51 
take it away from him. I had to make an effort to free my eyes from 
his gaze and attend to the steering. With one hand I 
felt above my 
head for the line of the steam-whistle, and jerked out screech after 
screech hurriedly.* The tumult of angry and warlike yells was 
checked instantly, and then from the depths of the woods went out 
such a tremulous and prolonged wail of mournful fear and utter 
despair as may be imagined to follow the flight of the last hope from 
the earth. There was a great commotion in the bush; the shower of 
arrows stopped, a few dropping shots rang out sharply—then 
silence, in which the languid beat of the stern-wheel came plainly to 
my ears. I put the helm hard a-starboard at the moment when the 
pilgrim in pink pyjamas, very hot and agitated, appeared in the 
doorway. ‘The manager sends me 
’ he began in an official tone, 
and stopped short. ‘Good God!’ he said, glaring at the wounded 
man. 
“We two whites stood over him, and his lustrous and inquiring 
glance enveloped us both. I declare it looked as though he would 
presently put to us some question in an understandable language; 
but he died without uttering a sound, without moving a 
limb, with- 
out twitching a muscle. Only in the very last moment, as though in 
response to some sign we could not see, to some whisper we could 
not hear, he frowned heavily, and that frown gave to his black death- 
mask an inconceivably sombre, brooding, and menacing expression. 
The lustre of inquiring glance faded swiftly into vacant glassiness. 
‘Can you steer?’ I asked the agent eagerly. He looked very dubious; 
but I 
made a 
grab at his arm, and he understood at once I 
meant him 
to steer whether or no. To tell you the truth, I 
was morbidly anxious 
to change my shoes and socks. ‘He is dead,’ murmured the fellow, 
immensely impressed. ‘No doubt about it,’ said I, tugging like mad 
at the shoe-laces. ‘And, by the way, I suppose Mr Kurtz is dead as 
well by this time.’ 
“For the moment that was the dominant thought. There was a 
sense of extreme disappointment, as though I had found out I had 
been striving after something altogether without a substance. [ 
couldn’t have been more disgusted if I had travelled all this way for 
the sole purpose of talking with Mr Kurtz. Talking with. 
. 
. 
. I 
flung 
one shoe overboard, and became aware that that was exactly what I 
had been looking forward to—a talk with Kurtz. I made the strange 
discovery that I had never imagined him as 
doing, you know, but as 


152 
Heart of 
Darkness 
discoursing. I didn’t say to myself, ‘Now I will never see him,’ or 
‘Now I 
will never shake him by the hand,’ but, ‘Now I will never 
hear him.’ The man presented himself as a voice. Not of course that 
I 
did not connect him with 
some sort 
of action. 
Hadn’t I 
been told in 
all the tones of jealousy and admiration that he had collected, bar- 
tered, swindled, or stolen more ivory than all the other agents 
together. That was not the point. The point was in his being a 
gifted 
creature, and that of all his gifts the one that stood out pre- 
eminently, that carried with it a sense of real presence, was his ability 
to talk, his words—the 
gift of expression, the_bewildering, 
the 
pulsating stream of light, 
or the deceitful flow from the 
heart 
of 
an 
Coil 
lag ae 
€ Other shoe went flying unto the devil-god of that river. I 
thought, By Jove! it’s all over. We are too late; he has vanished —the 
gift has vanished, by means of some spear, arrow, or club. I 
will never 
hear that chap speak after all,—and my sorrow had a startling 
extravagance of emotion, even such as IJ had noticed in the howling 
sorrow of these savages in the bush. I couldn’t have felt more of 
lonely desolation somehow, had I been robbed of a 
belief or had 
missed my destiny in life.* ... Why do you sigh.in this beastly way, 
somebody? Absurd? Well, absurd. Good Lord! mustn’t a man 
ever 
Here, give me some tobacco.” 
. 
. 
. 
There was a pause of profound stillness, then a match flared, and 
Marlow’s lean face appeared, worn, hollow, with downward folds 
and dropped eyelids, with an aspect of concentrated attention; and as 
he took vigorous draws at his pipe, it seemed to retreat and advance 
out of the night in the regular flicker of the tiny flame. The match 
went out. 
“Absurd!” he cried. “This is the worst of trying to tell... 
. Here 
you all are, each moored with two good addresses, like a hulk with 
two anchors, a butcher round one corner, 
a policeman round 
another, excellent appetites, and temperature normal—you hear— 
normal from year’s end to year’s end. And you say, Absurd! Absurd 
be—exploded! Absurd! My dear boys, what can you expect from a 
man who out of sheer nervousness had just flung overboard a pair of 
new shoes? Now I 
think of it, it is amazing I 
did not shed tears. I 
am, 
upon the whole, proud of my fortitude. I 
was cut to the quick at the 
idea of having lost the inestimable privilege of listening to the gifted 


Heart of 
Darkness 
153 
Kurtz. Of course I 
was wrong. The privilege was waiting for me. Oh 
yes, I 
heard more than enough. And I 
was right, too. A voice. He was 
very little more than a voice. And I heard —him—it—this voice— 
other voices—all of them were so little more than voices—and the 
memory of that time itself lingers around me, impalpable, like a 
dying vibration of one immense jabber, silly, atrocious, sordid, sav- 
age, or simply mean, without any kind of sense. Voices, voices—even 
the girl herself—now——” 
He was silent for a long time. ms) 
“T laid the ghost of his gifts at last with a 
lie,” he began suddenly. 
“Girl! What? Did I mention a 
girl? Oh, she is out of it—completely. 
‘They—the women I mean—are out of it—should be out of it. We 
must help them to stay in that beautiful world of their own, lest ours 
gets worse. Oh, she had to be out of it. You should have heard the 
disinterred body of Mr Kurtz saying, ‘My Intended.’ You would 
have perceived directly then how completely she was out of it. And 
the lofty frontal bone of Mr Kurtz! They say the hair goes on grow- 
ing sometimes,* but this—ah—specimen, was impressively bald. The 
wilderness had patted him on the head, and, behold, it was like a 
ball—an ivory ball; it had caressed him, and—lo!—he had withered; 
it had taken him, loved him, embraced him, got into his veins, con- 
sumed his flesh, and sealed his soul to its own by the inconceivable 
ceremonies of some devilish initiation. He was its spoiled and pam- 
pered favourite. Ivory? I should think so. Heaps of it, stacks of it. 
The old mud shanty was bursting with it. You would think there was 
not a 
single tusk left either above or below the ground in the whole 
country. ‘Mostly fossil,’ the manager had remarked disparagingly. It 
was no more fossil than I 
am; but they call it fossil when it is dug up. 
It appears these niggers do bury the tusks sometimes—but evidently 
they couldn’t bury this parcel deep enough to save the gifted Mr 
Kurtz from his fate. We filled the steamboat with it, and had to pile a 
lot on the deck. Thus he could see and enjoy as long as he could see, 
because the appreciation of this favour had remained with him to the 
last. You should have heard him say, ‘My ivory.’ Oh yes, I 
heard him. 
‘My Intended, my ivory, my station, my river, my 
’ everything 
belonged to him. It made me hold my breath in expectation of hear- 
ing the wilderness burst into a prodigious peal of laughter that 
would shake the fixed stars in their places. Everything belonged to 
him—but that was a 
trifle. The thing was to know what he belonged 


154 
Heart of 
Darkness 
to, how many powers of darkness claimed him for their own. That 
was the reflection that made you creepy all over. It was impossible— 
it was not good for one either—trying to imagine. He had taken a 
high seat amongst the devils of the land—I mean literally. You can’t 
understand. How could you?—with solid pavement under your feet, 
surrounded by kind neighbours ready to cheer you or to fall on you, 
stepping delicately between the butcher and the policeman, in the 
holy terror of scandal and gallows and lunatic asylums—how can 
you imagine what particular region of the first ages a man’s 
untrammelled feet may take him into by the way of solitude—utter 
solitude without a policeman — by 
the 
way 
of 
silence—utter silence, 
where no warning 
voice of a kind neighbour can be 
heard 
| whispering 
of 
public opinion? These little things make 
all the great difference. 
ah 
eget 
strength, 
upon your own capacity 
for faithfulness. Of course you 
SER eas wey 
rea eT to know you 
sir 
_ 
are being assaulted by the powers of darkness. I take it, no fool ever 
made a bargain for his soul with the devil: the fool is too much of a 
fool, or the devil too much of a devil—I don’t know which. Or you 
may be such a thunderingly exalted creature as to be altogether deaf 
and blind to anything but heavenly sights and- sounds. Then the 
earth for you is only a standing place—and whether to be like this is 
your loss or your gain I won’t pretend to say. But most of us are 
neither one nor the other. The earth for us is a place to live in, where 
we must put up with sights, with sounds, with smells too, by 
Jove! 
— 
breathe dead hippo, so to speak, and not be contaminated. And 
there, don’t you see? your 
strength comes:in, the 
faith 
im 
your 
ability 
for the digging 
o 
the stuff in—your 
power of dewotion; not to yourself_ 
but 
2bscure, back- 
breaking 
busitie 
Arid 
at's difficult ee Mind: I am not trying to 
excus€é 
or 
even explain—I am trying to account to myself for—for— 
Mr Kurtz—for the shade of Mr Kurtz. This initiated wraith from 
the back of Nowhere honoured me with its amazing confidence 
before it vanished altogether. This was because it could speak Eng-. 
lish to me. The original Kurtz had been educated partly 
in England, 
and—as he was good enough to say himself—his sympathies were in 
the right place. His mother was half-English, his father was half- 
French.* All Europe contributed to the making of 
Kurtz; and by-and- 
—
by I learned that, most appropriately, the itch Society for 


Heart of 
Darkness 
155 
the Suppression of Savage Customs* had intrusted him with the 
making of a report, for its future guidance. And he had written it too. 
DPve seen it. I’ve read it. It was eloquent, vibrating with eloquence, 
but too high-strung, I 
think. Seventeen pages of close writing he had 
found time for! But this must have been before his—let us say— 
nerves, went wrong, and caused him to preside at certain midnight 
dances ending with unspeakable rites, which—as far as I reluctantly 
gathered from what I heard at various times—were offered up to 
him—do you understand?— 
to 
Mr Kurtz himself.* But it was a beau- 
tiful piece of writing. The opening paragraph, however, in the light 
of later information, strikes me now as ominous. He began with the 
argument that we whites, from the point of development we had 
arrived at, ‘must necessarily appear to them [savages] in the nature of 
supernatural beings—we approach them with the might as of a 
deity,’ and so on, and so on. ‘By the simple exercise of our will we 
can exert a power for good practically unbounded,’ &c., &c. From 
that point he soared and took me with him. The peroration was 
magnificent, though difficult to remember, you know. It gave me the 
notion of an exotic Immensity ruled by an august Benevolence. It 
made me tingle with enthusiasm. This was the unbounded power of 
eloquence 
—of words—of burning noble words. There were no prac- 
tical hints to interrupt the magic current of phrases, unless a kind of 
note at the foot of the last page, scrawled evidently much later, in an 
unsteady hand, may be regarded as the exposition of a method. It 
was very simple, and at the end of that moving appeal to every 
altruistic sentiment it blazed at you, luminous and terrifying, like a 
flash of lightning in a serene sky: ‘Exterminate all the brutes!’ The 
curious part was that he had apparently forgotten all about that 
valuable postscriptum, because, later on, when he in a sense came to 
himself, he repeatedly entreated me to take good care of ‘my pamph- 
let’ (he called it), as it was sure to have in the future a good influence 
upon his career. I had full information about all these things, and, 
besides, as it turned out, I was to have the care of his memory. I’ve 
done enough for it to give me the indisputable right to lay it, if I 
choose, for an everlasting rest in the dust-bin of progress, amongst 
all the sweepings and, figuratively speaking, all the dead cats of 
civilisation. But then, you see, I 
can’t choose. He won’t be forgotten. 
Whatever he was, he was not common. He had the power ‘to charm 
or frighten rudimentary souls into an aggravated witch-dance in his 


156 
Heart of 
Darkness 
honour; he could also fill the small souls of the pilgrims with bitter 
misgivings: he had one devoted friend at least, and he had conquered 
one soul in the world that was neither rudimentary nor tainted with 
self-seeking. No; I can’t forget him, though I am not prepared to 
affirm the fellow was exactly worth the life we lost in getting to him. 
I missed my late helmsman awfully,—I missed him even while his 
body was still lying in the pilot-house. Perhaps you will think it 
passing strange this regret for a savage who was no more account 
than a grain of sand in a black Sahara. Well, don’t you see, he had 
done something, he had steered; for months I 
had him at my back—a 
help—an instrument. It was a kind of partnership. He steered for 
me—lI had to look after him, I worried about his deficiencies, and 
thus a subtle bond had been created, of which I only became aware 
when it was suddenly broken. And the intimate profundity of that 
look he gave me when he received his hurt remains to this day in my 
memory—like a claim of distant kinship affirmed in a supreme 
moment. 
“Poor fool! If he had only left that shutter alone. He had no 
restraint, no restraint—just 
like Kurtz—a tree swayed by the wind. 
after first jerking the spear out of his side, which operation I 
confess I 
performed with my eyes shut tight. His heels leaped together over the 
little door-step; his shoulders were pressed to my breast; I hugged 
him from behind desperately. Oh! he was heavy, heavy; heavier 
than any man on earth, I should imagine. Then without more ado I 
tipped him overboard. The current snatched him as though he had 
been a wisp of grass, and I saw the body roll over twice before I 
lost 
sight of it for ever. All the pilgrims and the manager were then 
congregated on the awning-deck about the pilot-house, chattering at 
each other like a flock of excited magpies, and there was a scandal- 
ised murmur at my heartless promptitude. What they wanted to 
keep that body hanging about for I can’t guess. Embalm it, maybe. 
But I had also heard another, and a very ominous, murmur on the 
deck below. My friends the wood-cutters were likewise scandalised, 
and with a better show of reason—though I admit that the reason 
itself was quite inadmissible. Oh, quite! I 
had made up my mind that 
if my late helmsman was to be eaten, the fishes alone should have 
him. He had been a very second-rate helmsman while alive, but now 
he was dead he might have become a 
first-class temptation, and 


Heart of 
Darkness 
157 
possibly cause some startling trouble. Besides, I was anxious to take 
the wheel, the man in pink pyjamas showing himself a hopeless 
duffer at the business. 
; 
“This I did directly the simple funeral was over. We were going 
half-speed, keeping right in the middle of the stream, and I listened 
to the talk about me. They had given up Kurtz, they had given up 
the station; Kurtz was dead, and the station had been burnt—and so 
on—and so on. The red-haired pilgrim was beside himself with the 
thought that at least this poor Kurtz had been properly revenged. 
‘Say! We must have made a 
glorious slaughter of them in the bush. 
Eh? What do you think? Say?’ He positively danced, the bloodthirsty 
little gingery beggar. And he had nearly fainted when he saw the 
wounded man! I could not help saying, ‘You made a 
glorious lot of 
smoke, anyhow.’ I had seen, from the way the tops of the bushes 
rustled and flew, that almost all the shots had gone too high. You 
can’t hit anything unless you take aim and fire from the shoulder; but 
these chaps fired from the hip with their eyes shut. The retreat, I 
maintained—and I was right—was caused by the screeching of the 
steam-whistle. Upon this they forgot Kurtz, and began to howl at me 
with indignant protests. 
“The manager stood by the wheel murmuring confidentially 
about the necessity of getting well away down the river before dark at 
all events, when I 
saw in the distance a clearing on the river-side and 
the outlines of some sort of building. ‘What’s this?’ I asked. He 
clapped his hands in wonder. “The station!’ he cried. I edged in at 
once, still going half-speed. 
“Through my glasses I saw the slope of a hill interspersed with 
rare trees and perfectly free from undergrowth. A long decaying 
building on the summit was half buried in the high grass; the large 
holes in the peaked roof gaped black from afar; the jungle and the 
woods made a background. There was no enclosure or fence of any 
kind; but there had been one apparently, for near the house half-a- 
dozen slim posts remained in a row, roughly trimmed, and with their 
upper ends ornamented with round carved balls. The rails, or what- 
ever there had been between, had disappeared. Of course the forest 
surrounded all that. The river-bank was clear, and on the water-side 
I saw a white man under a 
hat like a cart-wheel beckoning persist- 
ently with his whole arm. Examining the edge of the forest above 
and below, I was almost certain I could see movements—human 


158 
Heart of 
Darkness 
forms gliding here and there. I 
steamed past prudently, then stopped 
the engines and let her drift down. The man on the shore began to 
shout, urging us to land. ‘We have been attacked,’ screamed the 
manager. ‘I know—I know. It’s all right,’ yelled back the other, as 
cheerful as you please. ‘Come along. It’s all right. I 
am glad.’ 
“His aspect reminded me of something I had seen—something 
funny I 
had seen somewhere. As I 
manceuvred to get alongside, I 
was 
asking myself, ‘What does this fellow look like?’ Suddenly I 
got it. 
He looked like a harlequin.* His clothes had been made of some stuff 
that was brown holland probably, but it was covered with patches all 
over, with bright patches, blue, red, and yellow,—patches on the 
back, patches on front, patches on elbows, on knees; coloured bind- 
ing round his jacket, scarlet edging at the bottom of his trousers; and 
the sunshine made him look extremely gay and wonderfully neat 
withal, because you could see how beautifully all this patching had 
been done. A beardless, boyish face, very fair, no features to speak of, 
nose peeling, little blue eyes, smiles and frowns chasing each other 
over that open countenance like sunshine and shadow on a wind- 
swept plain. ‘Look out, captain!’ he cried; ‘there’s a snag lodged in 
here last night.’ What! Another snag? I 
confess I 
swore shamefully. I 
had nearly holed my cripple, to finish off that charming trip. The 
harlequin on the bank turned his little pug nose up to me. ‘You 
English?’ he asked, all smiles. ‘Are you?’ I shouted from the wheel. 
The smiles vanished, and he shook his head as if sorry for my disap- 
pointment. 
Then he brightened 
up. 
‘Never 
mind!’ 
he cried 
encouragingly. ‘Are we in time?’ I 
asked. ‘He is up there,’ he replied, 
with a toss of the head up the hill, and becoming gloomy all of a 
sudden. His face was like the autumn sky, overcast one moment and 
bright the next. 
“When the manager, escorted by the pilgrims, all of them armed 
to the teeth, had gone to the house, this chap came on board. ‘I say, I 
don’t like this. These natives are in the bush,’ I 
said. He assured me 
earnestly it was all right. “They are simple 
people,’ he added; ‘well, I 
am 
gl 
_It took me 
all my time to keep them off.’ ‘But you 
said it was all right,’ I 
cried. ‘Oh, they meant no harm,’ he said; and 
as I 
stared he corrected himself, ‘Not exactly.’ Then vivaciously, ‘My 
faith, your pilot-house wants a clean up!’ In the next breath he 
advised me to keep enough steam on the boiler to blow the whistle in 
case of any trouble. ‘One good screech will do more for you than all 


Heart of 
Darkness 
159 
your rifles. They are simple 
people,’ he repeated. He rattled away at 
such a rate he-quie-overwhelmed me. He seemed to be trying to 
make up for lots of silence, and actually hinted, laughing, that such 
was the case. ‘Don’t you talk with Mr Kurtz?’ I 
said. ‘You don’t talk 
with that man—you listen to him,’ he exclaimed with severe exalt- 
ation. ‘But now 
He waved his arm, and in the twinkling of an 
eye was in the uttermost depths of despondency. In a moment he 
came up again with a jump, possessed himself of both my hands, 
shook them continuously, while he gabbled: ‘Brother sailor . 
. 
. hon- 
our... pleasure ... delight ... introduce myself ... Russian 
. 
son of an arch-priest 
... Government of Tambov* 
... What? 
Tobacco! English tobacco; the excellent English tobacco! Now, that’s 
brotherly. Smoke? Where’s a 
sailor that does not smoke?’ 
“The pipe soothed him, and gradually I made out he had run 
away from school, had gone to sea in a Russian ship; ran away again; 
served some time in English ships; was now reconciled with the 
arch-priest. He made a point of that. ‘But when one is young one 
must see things, gather experience, ideas; enlarge the mind.’ ‘Here!’ 
I interrupted. ‘You can never tell! Here I have met Mr Kurtz,’ he 
said, youthfully solemn and reproachful. I 
held my tongue after that. 
It appears he had persuaded a Dutch trading-house on the coast* to 
fit him out with stores and goods, and had started for the interior 
with a light heart, and no more idea of what would happen to him 
than a baby. He had been wandering about that river for nearly two 
years alone, cut off from everybody and everything. ‘I am not so 
young as I 
look. I 
am twenty-five,’ he said. ‘At first old Van Shuyten* 
would tell me to go to the devil,’ he narrated with keen enjoyment; 
‘but I stuck to him, and talked and talked, till at last he got afraid I 
would talk the hind-leg off his favourite dog, so he gave me some 
cheap things and a few guns, and told me he hoped he would never 
see my face again. Good old Dutchman, Van Shuyten. I’ve sent him 
one small lot of ivory a year ago, so that he can’t call me a 
little thief 
when I 
get back. I hope he got it. And for the rest I 
don’t care. I 
had 
some wood stacked for you. That was my old house. Did you see?’ 
“T gave him Towson’s book. He made as though he would kiss me, 
but restrained himself. ‘The only book I 
had left, and I 
thought I 
had 
lost it,’ he said, looking at it ecstatically. ‘So many accidents happen 
to 
a man 
going about 
alone, 
you 
know. 
Canoes 
get upset 
sometimes—and sometimes you’ve got to clear out so quick when 


160 
Heart of 
Darkness 
the people get angry.’ He thumbed the pages. ‘You made notes 
in Russian?’ I asked. He nodded. ‘I thought they were written in 
cipher,’ I said. He laughed, then became serious. ‘I had lots of 
trouble to keep these people off,’ he said. ‘Did they want to kill you?’ 
I 
asked. ‘Oh no!’ he cried, and checked himself. ‘Why did they attack 
us?’ I pursued. He hesitated, then said shamefacedly, ‘They don’t 
want him to go.’ ‘Don’t they?’ I 
said, curiously. He nodded a nod full 
of 
mystery 
and wisdom. ‘I tell you,’ he cried, ‘this man 
_has 
enlarged _ 
mymind.’ 
He 
opened his arms wide, staring at me with his little blue 
eyes that were perfectly round.” 


Ill 
“I LOOKED at him, lost in astonishment. There he was before me, in 
motley, as though he had absconded from a troupe of mimes, 
enthusiastic, fabulous. His very existence was improbable, inexplic- 
able, and altogether bewildering. He was an insoluble problem. It was 
inconceivable how he had existed, how he had succeeded in getting 
so far, how he had managed to remain—why he did not instantly 
disappear. ‘I went a 
little farther,’ he said, ‘then still a little farther 
— 
till I 
had gone so far that I don’t know how I’ll ever get back. Never 
mind. Plenty time. I can manage. You take Kurtz away quick— 
quick—I tell you.’ The glamour of youth enveloped his parti- 
coloured rags, his destitution, his loneliness, the essential desolation 
of his futile wanderings. For months—for years—his life hadn’t 
been worth a day’s purchase; and there he was gallantly, thought- 
lessly alive, to all appearance indestructible solely by the virtue of his 
few years and of his unreflecting audacity. I 
was seduced into some- 
thing like admiration—like envy. Glamour urged him on, glamour 
kept him unscathed. He surely wanted nothing from the wilderness 
but space to breathe in and to push on through. His need was to 
exist, and to move onwards at the greatest possible risk, and with a 
maximum 
of privation. 
If the absolutely 
pure, 
uncalculating, 
unpractical spirit of adventure had ever ruled a human being, it ruled 
this be-patched youth. I almost envied him the possession of this 
modest and clear flame. It seemed to have consumed all thought of 
self so completely, that, even while he was talking to you, you forgot 
that it was he—the man before your eyes—who had gone through 
these things. I did not envy him his devotion to Kurtz, though. He 
had not meditated over it. It came to him, and he accepted it with a 
sort of eager fatalism. I must say that to me it appeared about the 
most dangerous thing in every way he had come upon so far. 
“They had come together unavoidably, like two ships becalmed 
near each other, and lay rubbing sides at last. I suppose Kurtz 
wanted an audience, because on a certain occasion, when encamped 
in the forest, they had talked all night, or more probably Kurtz had 
talked. ‘We talked of everything,’ he said, quite transported at the 
recollection. ‘I forgot there was such a 
thing as sleep. The night did 


162 
Heart of 
Darkness 
not seem to last an hour. Everything! Everything! 
. 
. 
. Of love too.’ 
‘Ah, he talked to you of love!’ I 
said, much amused. ‘It isn’t what you 
think,’ he cried, almost passionately. ‘It was in general. He made me 
see things—things.’ 
“He threw his arms up. We were on deck at the time, and the 
headman of my wood-cutters, lounging near by, turned upon him his 
heavy and glittering eyes. I 
looked around, and I 
don’t know why, but 
I assure you that never, never before, did this land, this river, this 
jungle, the very arch of this blazing sky, appear to me so hopeless and 
so dark, so impenetrable to human thought, so pitiless to human 
weakness. ‘And, ever since, you have been with him, of course?’ I 
said. 
“On the contrary. It appears their intercourse had been very much 
broken by various causes. He had, as he informed me proudly, man- 
aged to nurse Kurtz through two illnesses (he alluded to it as you 
would to some risky feat), but as a rule Kurtz wandered alone, far in 
the depths of the forest. ‘Very often coming to this station, I had to 
wait days and days before he would turn up,’ he said. ‘Ah, it was 
worth waiting for!—sometimes.’ ‘What was he doing? exploring or 
what?’ I 
asked. ‘Oh yes, of course’; he had discovered lots of villages, 
a lake too—he did not know exactly in what direction; it was danger- 
ous to inquire too much—but mostly his expeditions had been for 
ivory. ‘But he had no goods to trade with by that time,’ I objected. 
“There’s a good lot of cartridges left even yet,’ he answered, looking 
away. “To speak plainly, he raided the country,’ I said. He nodded. 
‘Not alone, surely!’ He muttered something about the villages round 
that lake. “Kurtz got the tribe to follow him, did he?’ I 
suggested. He 
fidgeted a 
little. ‘They adored him,’ he said. The tone of these words 
was so extraordinary that I looked at him searchingly. It was curious 
to see his mingled eagerness and reluctance to speak of Kurtz. The 
man filled his life, occupied his thoughts, swayed his emotions. 
‘What can you expect?’ he burst out; ‘he came to them with thunder 
and lightning, you know—and they had never seen anything like it— 
and very terrible. He could be very terrible. You can’t judge Mr 
Kurtz as you would an ordinary man. No, no, no! Now—just to give 
you an idea—I don’t mind telling you, he wanted to shoot me too 
one day—but I don’t judge him.’ ‘Shoot you!’ I cried. ‘What for?” 
“Well, I had a small lot of ivory the chief of that village near my 
house gave me. You see I used to shoot game for them. Well, he 


Heart of 
Darkness 
163 
wanted it, and wouldn’t hear reason. He declared he would shoot me 
unless I gave him the ivory and then cleared out of the country, 
because he could do so, and had a 
fancy for it, and there was nothing 
on earth to prevent him killing whom he jolly well pleased. And it 
- was true too. I 
gave him the ivory. What did I 
care! But I 
didn’t clear 
out. No, no. I couldn’t leave him. I had to be careful, of course, till 
we got friendly again for a time. He had his second illness then. 
Afterwards I had to keep out of the way; but I didn’t mind. He was 
living for the most part in those villages on the lake. When he came 
down to the river, sometimes he would take to me, and sometimes it 
was better for me to be careful. ca eae 
TrnaT 
a 
hated all this, and somehow he cow 
get away. When I had a 
chance I 
begged him 
to 
try 
and 
leave while there was time; I offered 
to go back with him. And he would say yes, and then he would 
remain; go off on another ivory hunt; disappear for weeks; forget 
himself amongst these people—forget himself—you know.’ ‘Why! 
he’s mad,’ I said. He protested indignantly. Mr Kurtz couldn’t be 
mad. If I 
had heard him talk, only two days ago, I 
wouldn’t dare hint 
at such a thing... 
. I had taken up my binoculars while we talked, 
and was looking at the shore, sweeping the limit of the forest at each 
side and at the back of the house. The consciousness of there being 
people in that bush, so silent, so quiet—as silent and quiet as the 
ruined house on the hill—made me uneasy. There was no sign on the 
face of nature of this amazing tale that was not so much told as 
suggested to me in desolate exclamations, completed by shrugs, in 
interrupted phrases, in hints ending in deep sighs. The woods were 
unmoved, like a mask—heavy, like the closed door of a prison—they 
looked with their air of hidden knowledge, of patient expectation, of 
unapproachable silence. The Russian was explaining to me that it 
was only lately that Mr Kurtz had come down to the river, bringing 
along with him all the fighting men of that lake tribe. He had been 
absent for several months—getting himself adored, I suppose—and 
had come down unexpectedly, with the intention to all appearance of 
making a 
raid either across the river or down stream. Evidently the 
appetite for more ivory had got the better of the—what shall I 
say? 
— 
less material aspirations. However he had got much worse suddenly. 
‘I heard he was lying helpless, and so I 
came up—took my chance,’ 
said the Russian. ‘Oh, he is bad, very bad.’ I 
directed my glass to the 
house. There were no signs of life, but there was the ruined roof, the 


164 
Heart of 
Darkness 
long mud wall peeping above the grass, with three little square 
window-holes, no two of the same size; all this brought within reach 
of my hand, as it were. And then I made a brusque movement, and 
one of the remaining posts of that vanished fence leaped up in the 
field of my glass. You remember I told you I had been struck at the 
distance by certain attempts at ornamentation, rather remarkable in 
the ruinous aspect of the place. Now I had suddenly a nearer view, 
and its first result was to make me throw my head back as if 
before a 
blow. Then I went carefully from post to post with my glass, and I 
saw my mistake. These round knobs were not ornamental but sym- 
bolic;* they were expressive and puzzling, striking and disturbing— 
food for thought and also for the vultures if there had been any 
looking down from the sky; but at all events for such ants as were 
industrious enough to ascend the pole. They would have been even 
more impressive, those heads on the stakes,* if their faces had not 
been turned to the house. Only one, the first I 
had made out, was 
facing my way. I 
was not so shocked as you may think. The start back 
I had given was really nothing but a movement of surprise. I had 
expected to see a knob of wood there, you know. I returned delib- 
erately to the first I 
had seen—and there it was, black, dried, sunken, 
with closed eyelids,—a head that seemed to sleep at the top of that 
pole, and, with the shrunken dry lips showing a narrow white line of 
the teeth, was smiling too, smiling continuously at some endless and 
jocose dream of that eternal slumber. 
“I am not disclosing any trade secrets. In fact the manager said 
afterwards that Mr Kurtz’s methods had ruined the district. I have 
no opinion on that point, but I want you clearly to understand that 
there was nothing exactly profitable in these heads being there. The 
only 
showed that Mr Kurtz lacked restraint in the gratification of his 
various lusts, that there was something wanting in him—some smal 
matter which 
ressing 
need arose, 
could not be found 
under 
his magnificent 
eloquence. 
Whether 
he knew 
of this 
deficiency 
himself 
I can’t say. I think the knowledge came to him at 
last—only at the very last. But the wilderness had found him out 
early, and had taken on him a 
terrible vengeance for the fantastic 
invasion.* I 
think it had whispered to him things about himself which 
he did not know, things of which he had no conception till he took 
counsel with this great solitude—and the whisper had proved 
irresistibly fascinating. It echoed_ 
loudly within 
him 
because he 
was 


Heart of 
Darkness 
165 
hollow 
at 
the core.* . 
. 
. I 
put down the glass, and the head that had 
appeared near enough to be spoken to seemed at once to have leaped 2 
away from me into inaccessible distance. 
: 
be 
e admirer of Mr Kurtz was a bit crestfallen. In a hurried, 
indistinct voice he began to assure me he had not dared to take 
these—say, symbols—down. He was not afraid of the natives; they 
would not stir till Mr Kurtz gave the word. His ascendancy was 
extraordinary. The camps of these people surrounded the place, and 
the chiefs came every day to see him. They would crawl. . 
. 
. ‘I don’t 
want to know anything of the ceremonies used when approaching 
Mr Kurtz,’ I shouted. Curious, this feeling that came over me that 
such details would be more intolerable than those heads drying on 
the stakes under Mr Kurtz’s windows. After all, that was only a 
savage sight, while I seemed at one bound to have been transported 
into 
some 
lightless 
region 
of subtle 
horrors, 
where 
pure, 
uncomplicated savagery was a positive relief, being something that 
had a right to exist—obviously—in the sunshine. The young man 
looked at me with surprise. I suppose it did not occur to him Mr 
Kurtz was no idol of mine. He forgot I hadn’t heard any of these 
splendid monologues on, what was it? on love, justice, conduct of 
life—or what not. If it had come to crawling before Mr Kurtz, he 
crawled as much as the veriest savage of them all. I 
had no idea of the 
conditions, he said: these heads were the heads of rebels. I shocked 
him excessively by laughing. Rebels! What would be the next defi- 
nition I was to hear? There had been enemies, criminals, workers— 
and these were rebels. Tee aieikotResdeooked-very.subiued 
to 
me on their sticks. ‘You don’t know how such a 
life tries a man like 
Kurtz,’ cried Kurtz’s last disciple. ‘Well, and you?’ I 
said. ‘I! I! lama 
simple man. I 
have no great thoughts. I want nothing from anybody. 
How can you compare me to ... ?’ His feelings were too much for 
speech, and suddenly he broke down. ‘I don’t understand,’ he 
groaned. ‘I’ve been doing my best to keep him alive, and that’s 
enough. I had no hand in all this. I have no abilities. There hasn’t 
been a drop of medicine or a mouthful of invalid food for months 
here. He was shamefully abandoned. A man like this, with such 
ideas. Shamefully! Shamefully! I—I—haven’t slept for the last ten 
nights... . 
“His voice lost itself in the calm of the evening. The long shadows 
of the forest had slipped down hill while we talked, had gone far 


166 
Heart of 
Darkness 
beyond the ruined hovel, beyond the symbolic row of stakes. All 
this was in the gloom, while we down there were yet in the sunshine, 
and the stretch of the river abreast of the clearing glittered in a 
still and dazzling splendour, with a murky and overshadowed bend 
above and below. Not a living soul was seen on the shore. The bushes 
did not rustle. 
“Suddenly round the corner of the house a group of men 
appeared, as though they had come up from the ground. They 
waded waist-deep in the grass, in a compact body, bearing an impro- 
vised stretcher in their midst. Instantly, in the emptiness of the 
landscape, a cry arose whose shrillness pierced the still air like a 
sharp arrow flying straight to the very heart of the land; and, as if 
by 
enchantment, streams of human beings—of naked human beings— 
with spears in their hands, with bows, with shields, with wild glances 
and savage movements, were poured into the clearing by the dark- 
faced and pensive forest. The bushes shook, the grass swayed for a 
time, and then everything stood still in attentive immobility. 
““Now, if he does not say the right thing to them we are all done 
for, said the Russian at my elbow. The knot of men with the 
stretcher had stopped too, half-way to the steamer, as if petrified. I 
saw the man on the stretcher sit up, lank and with an uplifted arm, 
above the shoulders of the bearers. ‘Let us hope that the man who 
can talk so well of love in general will find some particular reason to 
spare us this time,’ I 
said. I 
resented bitterly the absurd danger of our 
situation, as if 
to be at the mercy of that atrocious phantom had been 
a dishonouring necessity. I could not hear a sound, but through my 
glasses I saw the thin arm extended commandingly, the lower jaw 
moving, the eyes of that apparition shining darkly far in its bony 
head that nodded with grotesque jerks. Kurtz—Kurtz—that means 
‘short’ in German—don’t it? Well, the name was as true as every- 
thing else in his life—and death. He looked at least seven feet long. 
His covering had fallen off, and his body emerged from it pitiful and 
appalling as from a winding-sheet. I could see the cage of his ribs all 
astir, the bones of his arm waving. It was as though an animated 
image of death carved out of old ivory had been shaking its hand 
with menaces at a motionless crowd of men made of dark and glitter- 
ing bronze. I saw him open his mouth wide—it gave him a weirdly 
voracious aspect, as though he had wanted to swallow all the air, all 
the earth, all the men before him. A deep voice reached me faintly. 


Heart of 
Darkness 
167 
He must have been shouting. He fell back suddenly. The stretcher 
shook as the bearers staggered forward again, and almost at the same 
time I noticed that the crowd of savages was vanishing without any 
perceptible movement of retreat, as if the forest that had ejected 
these beings so suddenly had drawn them in again as the breath is 
drawn in 
a 
long aspiration. 
“Some of the pilgrims behind the stretcher carried his arms—two 
shot-guns, a heavy rifle, and a light revolver-carbine—the thunder- 
bolts of that pitiful Jupiter. The manager bent over him murmuring 
as he walked beside his head. They laid him down in one of the little 
cabins—just a room for a bed-place and a camp-stool or two, you 
know. We had brought his belated correspondence, and a 
lot of torn 
envelopes and open letters littered his bed. His hand roamed feebly 
amongst these papers. I was struck by the fire of his eyes and the 
composed languor of his expression. It was not so much the exhaus- 
tion of disease. He did not seem in pain. This shadow looked satiated 
and calm, as though for the moment it had had its fill of all the 
emotions. 
“He rustled one of the letters, and looking straight in my face said, 
‘I am glad.” Somebody had been writing to him about me. These 
special recommendations were turning up again. The volume of 
tone he emitted without effort, almost without the trouble of moving 
his lips, amazed me. A voice! a voice! It was grave, profound, vibrat- 
ing, while the man did not seem capable of a whisper. However, he 
had enough strength in him—factitious no doubt—to very nearly 
make an end of us, as you shall hear directly. 
“The manager appeared silently in the doorway; I stepped out at 
once and he drew the curtain after me. The Russian, eyed curiously 
by the pilgrims, was staring at the shore. I followed the direction of 
his glance. 
“Dark human shapes could be made out in the distance, flitting 
indistinctly against the gloomy border of the forest, and near the 
river two bronze figures, leaning on tall spears, stood in the sunlight 
under fantastic head-dresses of spotted skins, warlike and still in 
statuesque repose. And from right to left along the lighted shore 
moved a wild and gorgeous apparition of a woman. 
“She walked with measured steps, draped in striped and fringed 
cloths, treading the earth proudly, with a 
slight jingle and flash of 
barbarous ornaments. She carried her head high; her hair was done 


168 
Heart of 
Darkness 
in the shape of a helmet; she had brass leggings to the knee, brass 
wire gauntlets to the elbow, a crimson spot on her tawny cheek, 
innumerable necklaces of glass beads on her neck; bizarre things, 
charms, gifts of witch-men, that hung about her, glittered and 
trembled at every step. She must have had the value of several 
elephant tusks upon her. She was savage and superb, wild-eyed and 
magnificent; there was something ominous and stately in her delib- 
erate progress. And in the hush that had fallen suddenly upon the 
whole sorrowful land, the immense wilderness, the colossal body of 
the fecund and mysterious life seemed to look at her, pensive, as 
though it had been looking at the image of its own tenebrous and 
passionate soul. 
“She came abreast of the steamer, stood still, and faced us. Her 
long shadow fell to the water’s edge. Her face had a 
tragic and fierce 
aspect of wild sorrow and of dumb pain mingled with the fear of 
some struggling, half-shaped resolve. She stood looking at us with- 
out a 
stir, and like the wilderness itself, with an air of brooding over 
an inscrutable purpose. A whole minute passed, and then she made a 
step forward. There was a 
low jingle, a glint of yellow metal, a sway 
of fringed draperies, and she stopped as if her heart had failed her.* 
The young fellow by my side growled. The pilgrims murmured at 
my back. She looked at us all as if her life had depended upon the 
unswerving steadiness of her glance. Suddenly she opened her bared 
arms and threw them up rigid above her head, as though in an 
uncontrollable desire to touch the sky, and at the same time the swift 
shadows darted out on the earth, swept around on the river, gather- 
ing the steamer into a shadowy embrace. A formidable silence hung 
over the scene.* 
“She turned away slowly, walked on, following the bank, and 
passed into the bushes to the left. Once only her eyes gleamed back 
at us in the dusk of the thickets before she disappeared. 
““If she had offered to come aboard I 
really think I would have 
tried to shoot her,’ said the man of patches, nervously. ‘I had been 
risking my life every day for the last fortnight to keep her out of the 
house. She got in one day and kicked up a row about those miserable 
rags I picked up in the storeroom to mend my clothes with. I 
wasn’t 
decent. At least it must have been that, for she talked like a fury to 
Kurtz for an hour, pointing at me now and then. I 
don’t understand 
the dialect of this tribe. Luckily for me, I 
fancy Kurtz felt too ill that 


Heart of 
Darkness 
169 
day to care, or there would have been mischief. I don’t under- 
stand. 
. 
. 
. No—it’s too much for me. Ah, well, it’s all over now.’ 
“At this moment I heard Kurtz’s deep voice behind the curtain, 
‘Save me!—save the ivory, you mean. Don’t tell me. Save me! Why, 
Ive had to save you. You are interrupting my plans now. Sick! Sick! 
Not so sick as you would like to believe. Never mind. I’ll carry my 
ideas out yet—I will return. I'll show you what can be done. You 
with your little peddling notions—you are interfering with me. I 
will 
neturned 
4’ 
ws 
“The manager came out. He did me the honour to take me under 
the arm and lead me aside. ‘He is very low, very low,’ he said. He 
considered it necessary to sigh, but neglected to be consistently sor- 
rowful. ‘We have done all we could for him—haven’t we? But there is 
no disguising the fact, Mr Kurtz has done more harm than good to 
the Company. He did not see the time was not ripe for vigorous 
action. Cautiously, cautiously —that’s my principle. We must be cau- 
tious yet. The district is closed to us for a time. Deplorable! Upon 
the whole, the trade will suffer. I don’t deny there is a remarkable 
quantity of ivory—mostly fossil. We must save it, at all events—but 
look how precarious the position is—and why? Because the method 
is unsound.’ ‘Do you,’ said I, looking at the shore, ‘call it “unsound 
method”?’ ‘Without doubt,’ he exclaimed, hotly. ‘Don’t you?’ .. 
. 
‘No method at all,’ I 
murmured after a while. ‘Exactly,’ he exulted. ‘I 
anticipated this. Shows a complete want of judgment. It is my duty 
to point it out in the proper quarter.’ ‘Oh,’ said I, ‘that fellow— 
what’s his name? —the brickmaker, will make a readable report for 
you.’ He appeared confounded for a moment. It seemed to me I 
had never breathed an atmosphere so vile, and I turned mentally 
to 
tz for relief—positively 
for_relief. ‘Nevertheless 
I 
think Mr 
Kurtz is a remarkable man,’ I said with emphasis. He started, 
droppe 
€avy glance, said very quietly, ‘He mas,’ and 
turned his back on me. My 
hour 
of 
favour was 
over; I 
found myself 
lumped along with Kurtz as a partisan of methods for which the time 
hii 
balistoeePnigbubeness-* 
“T had turned to the wilderness really, not to Mr Kurtz, who, I 
was 
ready to admit, was as good as buried. And for a moment it seemed 
to me as if I also were buried in a vast grave full of unspeakable 
secrets. I 
felt an intolerable weight oppressing my breast, the smell of 


170 
Heart of 
Darkness 
the damp earth, the unseen presence of victorious corruption, the 
darkness of an impenetrable night. ... The Russian tapped me on 
the shoulder. I heard him mumbling and stammering something 
about ‘brother seaman—couldn’t conceal—knowledge of matters 
that would affect Mr Kurtz’s reputation.’ I waited. For him evi- 
dently Mr Kurtz was not in his grave; I suspect that for him Mr 
Kurtz was one of the immortals. ‘Well!’ said I 
at last, ‘speak out. As it 
happens, I 
am Mr Kurtz’s friend—in a way.’ 
“He stated with a good deal of formality that had we not been 
‘of the same profession,’ he would have kept the matter to himself 
without regard to consequences. He suspected there was an active 
ill-will towards him on the part of these white men that 
“You are 
right,’ I said, remembering a certain conversation I had overheard. 
“The manager thinks you ought to be hanged.’ He showed a concern 
at this intelligence which amused me at first. ‘I had better get out of 
the way quietly,’ he said, earnestly. ‘I can do no more for Kurtz now, 
and they would soon find some excuse. What’s to stop them? There’s 
a military post three hundred miles from here.’ ‘Well, upon my 
word,’ said I, ‘perhaps you had better go if you have any friends 
amongst the savages near by.’ ‘Plenty,’ he said. ‘They are simple 
people—and I want nothing, you know.’ He stood biting his 
lip, 
then: ‘I don’t want any harm to happen to these whites here, but of 
course I was thinking of Mr Kurtz’s reputation—but you are a 
brother seaman and——’ ‘All right,’ said I, 
after a time. ‘Mr Kurtz’s 
reputation is safe with me.’ I 
did not know how truly I spoke. 
“He informed me, lowering his voice, that it was Kurtz who had 
ordered the attack to be made on the steamer. ‘He hated sometimes 
the idea of being taken away—and then again.... But I don’t 
understand these matters. I 
am a simple man. He thought it would 
scare you away—that you would give it up, thinking him dead. I 
could not stop him. Oh, I had an awful time of it this last month.’ 
‘Very well,’ I said. ‘He is all right now.’ ‘Ye-e-es,’ he muttered, not 
very convinced apparently. ‘Thanks,’ said I; ‘I shall keep my eyes 
open.’ ‘But quiet—eh?’ he urged, anxiously. ‘It would be awful for 
his reputation if anybody here 
’ I promised a complete discre- 
tion with great gravity. ‘I have a canoe and three black fellows wait- 
ing not very far. I am off. Could you give me a few Martini-Henry 
cartridges?’ I 
could, and did, with proper secrecy. He helped himself, 
with a wink at me, to a handful of my tobacco. ‘Between sailors—you 


Heart of 
Darkness 
+71 
know—good English tobacco.’ At the door of the pilot-house he 
turned round—‘T say, haven’t you a 
pair of shoes you could spare?’ 
He raised one leg. ‘Look.’ The soles were tied with knotted strings 
sandal-wise under his bare feet. I 
rooted out an old pair, at which he 
looked with admiration before tucking it under his left arm. One of 
his pockets (bright red) was bulging with cartridges, from the other 
(dark blue) peeped Towson’s Inquiry, &c., &c. He seemed to think 
himself excellently well equipped for a renewed encounter with the 
wilderness. ‘Ah! Pll never, never meet such a man again. You ought 
to have heard him recite poetry—his own too it was, he told me. 
Poetry!’ He rolled his eyes at the recollection of these delights. ‘Oh, 
he enlarged my mind!’ ‘Goodbye,’ said I. He shook hands and van- 
ished in the night. Sometimes I ask myself whether I 
had ever really 
seen him—whether it was possible to meet such a phenomenon! . 
. 
. 
“When I woke up shortly after midnight his warning came to my 
mind with its hint of danger that seemed, in the starred darkness, 
real enough to make me get up for the purpose of having a look 
round. On the hill a big fire burned, illuminating fitfully a crooked 
corner of the station-house. One of the agents with a picket of a few 
of our blacks, armed for the purpose, was keeping guard over the 
ivory; but deep within the forest, red gleams that wavered, that 
seemed to sink and rise from the ground amongst confused colum- 
nar shapes of intense blackness, showed the exact position of the 
camp where Mr Kurtz’s adorers were keeping their uneasy vigil. 
The monotonous beating of a big drum filled the air with muffled 
shocks and a 
lingering vibration. A steady droning sound of many 
men chanting each to himself some weird incantation came out from 
the black, flat wall of the woods as the humming of bees comes out of 
a hive, and had a strange narcotic effect upon my half-awake senses. I 
believe I dozed off leaning over the rail, till an abrupt burst of yells, 
an overwhelming outbreak of a pent-up and mysterious frenzy, woke 
me up in a bewildered wonder. It was cut short all at once, and the 
low droning went on with an effect of audible and soothing silence. I 
glanced casually into the little cabin. A light was burning within, but 
Mr Kurtz was not there. 
“T think I would have raised an outcry if I had believed my eyes. 
But I didn’t believe them at first—the thing seemed so impossible. 
The fact is I 
was completely unnerved by a sheer blank fright, pure 
abstract terror, unconnected with any distinct shape of physical 


172 
Heart of 
Darkness 
danger. What made this emotion so overpowering was—how shall I 
define it?—the moral shock I received, as if something altogether 
monstrous, intolerable to thought and odious to the soul, had been 
thrust upon me unexpectedly. This lasted of course the merest frac- 
tion of a second, and then the usual sense of commonplace, deadly 
danger, the possibility of a sudden onslaught and massacre, or some- 
thing of the kind, which I saw impending, was positively welcome 
and composing. It pacified me, in fact, so sunt, that I did not raise 
an alarm. 
There was an agent buttoned up inside an ulster and sleeping on 
a chair on deck within three feet of me. The yells had not awakened 
him; he snored very slightly; I left him to his slumbers and leaped 
ashore. I did not betray Mr Kurtz—it was ordered I should never 
betray him—it was written I should be loyal to the nightmare of my 
choice. I was anxious to deal with this shadow by myself alone, —and 
to this 
is 
day 
I don’t 
know why 
Iwas 
so 
jealous of 
sharing with 
any-one 
the peculiar blackness 
of 
that 
experience. 
“As soon as I got on the bank I saw a 
trail—a broad trail through 
the grass. I 
remember the exultation with which I 
said to myself, ‘He 
can’t walk—he is crawling on all-fours—I’ve got him.’ The grass 
was wet with dew. I strode rapidly with clenched fists. I fancy I had 
some vague notion of falling upon him and giving him a drubbing. I 
don’t know. I had some imbecile thoughts. The knitting old woman 
with the cat obtruded herself upon my memory as a most improper 
person to be sitting at the other end of such an affair. I saw a row of 
pilgrims squirting lead in the air out of Winchesters held to the hip. I 
thought I would never get back to the steamer, and imagined myself 
living alone and unarmed in the woods to an advanced age. Such silly 
things—you know. And I remember I confounded the beat of the 
drum with the beating of my heart, and was pleased at its calm 
regularity. 
“I kept to the track though—then stopped to listen. The night 
was very clear: a dark blue space, sparkling with dew and starlight, in 
which black things stood very still. I 
thought I could see a kind of 
motion ahead of me. I was strangely cocksure of everything that 
night. I actually left the track and ran in a wide semicircle (I verily 
believe chuckling to myself) so as to get in front of that stir, of 
that motion I had seen—if indeed I had seen anything. I was 
circumventing Kurtz as though it had been a boyish game. 


Heart of 
Darkness 
173 
“I came upon him, and, if he had not heard me coming, I would 
have fallen over him too, but he got up in time. He rose, unsteady, 
long, pale, indistinct, like a vapour exhaled by 
the earth, and swayed 
slightly, misty and silent before me; while at my back the fires 
loomed between the trees, and the murmur of many voices issued 
from the forest. I had cut him off cleverly; but when actually con- 
fronting him I seemed to come to my senses, I saw the danger in its 
right proportion. It was by no means over yet. Suppose he began to 
shout? Though he could hardly stand, there was still plenty of vigour 
in his voice. ‘Go away—hide yourself,’ he said, in that profound 
tone. It was very awful. I glanced back. We were within thirty yards 
from the nearest fire. A black figure stood up, strode on long black 
legs, waving long black arms, across the glow. It had horns—antelope 
horns, I think—on its head. Some sorcerer, some witch-man, no 
doubt: it looked fiend-like enough. ‘Do you know what you are 
doing?’ I whispered. ‘Perfectly,’ he answered, raising his voice for 
that single word: it sounded to me far off and yet loud, like a hail 
through a speaking-trumpet. If he makes a row we are lost, I 
thought 
to myself. This clearly was not a 
case for fisticuffs, even apart from 
the very natural aversion I 
had to beat that Shadow—this wandering 
and tormented thing. ‘You will be lost,’ I said—‘utterly lost.’ One 
gets sometimes such a flash of inspiration, you know. I did say the 
right thing, though indeed he could not have been more irretrievably 
lost than he was at this very moment, when the foundations of our 
intimacy were being laid—to endure—to endure—even 
to the 
end—even beyond. 
“I had immense plans,’ he muttered irresolutely. ‘Yes,’ said I; 
“but 
if you try to shout [ll smash your head with 
’ there was not a 
stick or a stone near. ‘I will throttle you for good,’ I 
corrected myself. 
‘I was on the threshold of great things,’ he pleaded, in a voice of 
longing, with a wistfulness of tone that made my blood run cold. 
‘And now for this stupid scoundrel——’ ‘Your success in Europe is 
assured in any case,’ I affirmed, steadily. I did not want to have the 
throttling of him, you understand—and indeed it would have been 
very little use for any practical purpose. I tried to break the spell— 
the heavy, mute spell of the wilderness—that seemed to draw him to 
its pitiless breast by the awakening of forgotten and brutal instincts, 
by the memory of gratified and monstrous passions. This alone, I 
was convinced, had driven him out to the edge of the forest, to the 


im? 
Heart of 
Darkness 
bush, towards the gleam of fires, the throb of drums, the drone of 
weird incantations; this alone had beguiled his unlawful soul beyond 
the bounds of permitted aspirations. And, don’t you see, the terror 
of the position was not in being knocked on the head—though I 
had 
a very lively sense of that danger too—but in this, that I had to deal 
with a being to whom I could not appeal in the name of anything 
high or low. I had, even like the niggers, to invoke him—himself— 
his own exalted and incredible degradation. There was nothing 
either above or below him, and I knew it. He had kicked himself 
loose of the earth. Confound the man! he had kicked the very earth 
to pieces. He was alone, and I before him did not know whether I 
stood on the ground or floated in the air. I’ve been telling you what 
we said—repeating the phrases we pronounced,—but what’s the 
good? They were common everyday words,—the familiar, vague 
sounds exchanged on every waking day of life. But what of that? 
They had behind them, to my mind, the terrific suggestiveness of 
words heard in dreams, of phrases spoken in nightmares. Soul! If 
anybody had ever struggled with a soul, I 
am the man. And I 
wasn’t 
arguing with a lunatic either. Believe me or not, his intelligence was 
perfectly clear—concentrated, it is true, upon himself with horrible 
intensity, yet clear; and therein was my only chance—barring, of 
course, the killing him there and then, which wasn’t so good, on 
account of unavoidable noise. But his soul was mad. Being alone in 
the wilderness, it had looked within itself, and, by heavens! I 
tell you, 
it had gone mad. I had—for my sins, I suppose—to go through the 
ordeal of looking into it myself. No eloquence could have been so 
withering to one’s belief in mankind as his final burst of sincerity. He 
struggled with himself, too. I 
saw it,—I heard it. I 
saw the inconceiv- 
able mystery of a soul that knew no restraint, no faith, and no fear, 
yet struggling blindly with itself. I kept my head pretty well; but 
when I 
had him at last stretched on the couch, I 
wiped my forehead, 
while my legs shook under me as though I 
had carried half a ton on 
my back down that hill. And yet I 
had only supported him, his bony 
arm clasped round my neck—and he was not much heavier than a 
child. 
“When next day we left at noon, the crowd, of whose presence 
behind the curtain of trees I 
had been acutely conscious all the time, 
flowed out of the woods again, filled the clearing, covered the slope 
with a mass of naked, breathing, quivering, bronze bodies. I 
steamed 


Heart of 
Darkness 
175 
up a bit, then swung down-stream, and two thousand eyes followed 
the evolutions of the splashing, thumping, fierce river-demon beat- 
ing the water with its terrible tail and breathing black smoke into the 
air. In front of the first rank, along the river, three men, plastered 
with bright red earth from head to foot, strutted to and fro restlessly. 
When we came abreast again, they faced the river, stamped their 
feet, nodded their horned heads, swayed their scarlet bodies; they 
shook towards the fierce river-demon a bunch of black feathers, a 
mangy skin with a pendent tail—something that looked like a dried 
gourd; they shouted periodically together strings of amazing words 
that resembled no sounds of human language; and the deep mur- 
murs of the crowd, interrupted suddenly, were like the responses of 
some satanic litany. 
“We had carried Kurtz into the pilot-house: there was more air 
there. Lying on the couch, he stared through the open shutter. There 
was an eddy in the mass of human bodies, and the woman with 
helmeted head and tawny cheeks rushed out to the very brink of the 
stream. She put out her hands, shouted something, and all that wild 
mob took up the shout in a roaring chorus of articulated, rapid, 
breathless utterance. 
““T)o you understand this?’ I 
asked. 
“He kept on looking out past me with fiery, longing eyes, with a 
mingled expression of wistfulness and hate. He made no answer, but 
I 
saw a smile, a smile of indefinable meaning, appear on his colourless 
lips that a moment after twitched convulsively. ‘Do I not?’ he said 
slowly,* gasping, as if the words had been torn out of him by a 
supernatural power. 
“I pulled the string of the whistle, and I did this because I saw 
the pilgrims on deck getting out their rifles with an air of antici- 
pating a jolly lark. At the sudden screech there was a movement 
of abject terror through that wedged mass of bodies. 
‘Don’t! 
don’t! you frighten them away,’ cried some one on deck discon- 
solately. I pulled the string time after time. They broke and ran, 
they leaped, they crouched, they swerved, they dodged the flying 
terror of the sound. The three red chaps had fallen flat, face down 
on the shore, as though they had been shot dead. Only the bar- 
barous and superb woman 
did not 
so much 
as 
flinch, and 
stretched tragically her bare arms after us over the sombre and 
glittering river. 


é 
. 176 
ye 
Heart of 
Darkness 
““And then that imbecile crowd down on the deck started their 
little fun, and I 
could see nothing more for smoke. 
“The brown current ran swiftly out of the heart of darkness, 
bearing us down towards the sea with twice the speed of our upward 
progress; and Kurtz’s life was running swiftly too, ebbing, ebbing 
out of his heart into the sea of inexorable time. The manager was 
very placid, he had no vital anxieties now, he took us both in with a 
comprehensive and satisfied glance: the ‘affair’ had come off as well 
as could be wished. I saw the time approaching when I 
would be left 
alone of the party of ‘unsound method.’ The pilgrims looked upon 
me with disfavour. I was, so to speak, numbered with the dead. It is 
strange how I accepted this unforeseen partnership, this choice of 
nightmares forced upon me in the tenebrous land invaded by these 
_mean and greedy phantoms. 
“Kurtz discoursed. A voice! a voice! It rang deep to the very last. 
It survived his strength to hide in the magnificent folds of eloquence 
the barren darkness of his heart. Oh, he struggled! he struggled! The 
wastes of his weary brain were haunted by shadowy images now— 
images of wealth and fame revolving obsequiously round his unex- 
tinguishable gift of noble and lofty expression. My Intended, my 
station, my career, my ideas—these were the subjects for the occa- 
sional utterances of elevated sentiments. The shade of the original 
Kurtz frequented the bedside of the hollow sham, whose fate it was 
to be buried presently in the mould of primeval earth. But both the 
diabolic love and the unearthly hate of the mysteries 
it had 
penetrated fought for the possession of that soul satiated with primi- 
tive emotions, avid of lying fame, of sham distinction, of all the 
—— 
appearances of success and power. 
“Sometimes he was contemptibly childish. He desired to have 
kings meet him at railway-stations on his return from some ghastly 
Nowhere, where he intended to accomplish great things. ‘You show 
them you have in you something that is really profitable, and then 
there will be no limits to the recognition of your ability,’ he would 
say. ‘Of course you must take care of the motives—right motives— 
always.’ The long reaches that were like one and the same reach, 
monotonous bends that were exactly alike, slipped past the steamer 
with their multitude of secular trees looking patiently after this 
grimy fragment of another world, the forerunner of change, of 


Heart of 
Darkness 
£77 
conquest, of trade, of massacres, of blessings. I looked ahead— 
piloting. ‘Close the shutter,’ said Kurtz suddenly one day; ‘I can’t 
bear to look at this.’ I did so. There was a 
silence. ‘Oh, but I will 
wring your heart yet!’ he cried at the invisible wilderness. 
“We broke down—as I had expected—and had to lie up for 
repairs at the head of an island. This delay was the first thing that 
shook Kurtz’s confidence. One morning he gave me a 
packet of 
papers and a photograph, 
—the lot tied together with a shoe-string. 
‘Keep this for me,’ he said. “This noxious fool’ (meaning the man- 
ager) ‘is capable of prying into my boxes when I am not looking.’ 
In the afternoon I saw him. He was lying on his back with closed 
eyes, and I withdrew quietly, but I heard him mutter, ‘Live rightly, 
die, die. 
. .* I 
listened. There was nothing more. Was he rehearsing 
some speech in his sleep, or was it a fragment of a phrase from some 
newspaper article? He had been writing for the papers and meant to 
do so again, ‘for the furthering of my ideas. It’s a duty.’ 
“His was an impenetrable darkness. I looked at him as you peer 
down at a man who is lying at the bottom of a precipice where the 
sun never shines. But I 
had not much time to give him, because I 
was 
helping the engine-driver to take to pieces the leaky cylinders, to 
straighten a bent connecting-rod, and in other such matters. I lived 
in an infernal mess of rust, filings, nuts, bolts, spanners, hammers, 
ratchet-drills—things [ abominate, because I don’t get on with 
them. I tended the little forge we fortunately had aboard; I toiled 
wearily in a wretched scrap-heap—unless I 
had the shakes too bad to 
stand. 
“One evening coming in with a candle | was startled to hear him 
say a little tremulously, ‘I am lying here in the dark waiting for 
death.’ The light was within a foot of his eyes. I forced myself to 
murmur, ‘Oh, nonsense!’ and stood over him as if 
transfixed. 
“Anything approaching the change that came over his features I 
have never seen before, and hope never to see again. Oh, I wasn’t 
touched. I 
was fascinated. It was as though a 
veil had been rent. I 
saw 
on that ivory face the expression of sombre pride, of ruthless power, 
of craven terror —of an4ntenseand hopeless despair.* Did he live his 
life again in every detail of desire, temptation, and surrender during 
that supreme moment of complete knowledge? He cried in a whisper 
at some image, at some vision, —he cried out twice, a cry that was no 
more than a breath— 


ke 
ZL. 
a 
ae 
7 
178/ 
Heart of 
Darkness 
_7 “The horror! The horror!’* 
“I blew the candle out and left the cabin. The pilgrims were 
dining in the mess-room, and I took my place opposite the manager, 
who lifted his eyes to give me a questioning glance, which I success- 
fully ignored. He leaned back, serene, with that peculiar smile of his 
sealing the unexpressed depths of his meanness. A continuous 
shower of small flies streamed upon the lamp, upon the cloth, upon 
our hands and faces. Suddenly the manager’s boy put his insolent 
black head in the doorway, and said in a tone of scathing contempt— 
“*Mistah Kurtz—he dead.’ 
“All the pilgrims rushed out to see. I 
remained, and went on with 
my dinner. I 
believe I 
was considered brutally callous. However, I 
did 
not eat much. There was a lamp in there—light, don’t you know— 
and outside it was so beastly, beastly dark. I 
went no more near the 
remarkable man who had pronounced a judgment upon the adven- 
tures of his soul on this earth. The voice was gone. What else had 
been there? But I am of course aware that next day the pilgrims 
buried something in a muddy hole. 
eat 
then 
1 they very nearly buried me.* 
“However, 
as 
you 
see, F-did not go to join Kurtz there and then. I 
did not. I remained to dream the nightmare out to the end, and to 
show my loyalty to Kurtz once more. Destiny. My destiny! Droll 
thing life is—that mysterious arrangement of merciless logic for a 
futile purpose. The most you can hope from it is some knowledge of 
yourself—that comes too late—a crop of unextinguishable regrets. 
I 
_ 
have wrestled with death. It 
is the most unexciting contest you can 
imagine. It takes 
«place in 
ansimpalpable ereynesa with 
weenie 
underfoot, 
with 
h 
nothing around, without s 
spectators, without clam- 
our, without glory, without the great desire of 
victory, without the 
great fear of 
defeat, in a sickly atmosphere of tepid scepticism, with- 
out much belief 
in your own right, and still less in that “of 
your 
adversary. If such 
is the form of ultimate 
_wisdom, then 
life is a 
greater riddle than some of us think it to be. I was within a hair’s- 
breadth of the last opportunity for pronouncement, and I 
found with 
humiliation that probably I would have nothing to say. This is the 
reason why 
I 
affirm that Kurtz was a remarkable man. He had some- 
thing to say. He said it. Since I had peeped over the edge myself, I 
Pe 
understand better the meaning of his\stare,ythat could 
not see 
the 
flame of 
the candle, but was wide enough to embrace the whole 
Ce 
eee 
EEE 
SS 
ee 


Oy ye 
4 nk 
jp | 
Heart of 
Darkness 
U 
vig, 
Pi.
zs 
universe, piercing enough to penetrate all the hearts that ae 
fda 
barkuseinkeeiaranned up— 
-he 
had judged. 
‘The horror!’ He was ~ 
SE 
SS 
== 
= 
a remarkable man. After al 
ression of some sort of 
eS 
eS Se 
belief; it 
had 
cand 
candour, it 
had 
conviction, 
it had a 
da vibrating note of 
revolt 
in its-whisper, it 
had the appalling face of a_ 
glimpsed t 
truth— 
45 
the strange 
commingling 
of desire and 
hate,/And it is not 
ot 
my 
own 
| 
e 
nity I 
remember best—a vision of 
greyness without form filled 
| 
with physical pain, and a careless contempt for the evanescence of all 
_ 
things—even 
of 
this 
pain itself. Jo! It 
is his extremity that 
I 
seem to 
“have lived through. True, he had made that last stride, he had 
stepped over the edge, while I had been permitted to draw back my 
hesitating foot. And perhaps in this is the whole difference; perhaps 
/ 
all the wisdom, and all truth, and all sincerity, are just compressed 
into that inappreciable moment of time in which we step over the 
threshold of the invisible. Perhaps! I like to think my summing-up 
would not have been a word of careless contempt. Better his cry— 
much better. It was an affirmation, a moral victory paid for by 
innumerable defeats, by abominable terrors, by abominable satisfac- 
tions. But it was a victory! That 
is why I have remained loyal to 
Kurtz to the last, and even beyond, 
when a 
long time after I heard 
once more, not his own voice, but the echo of his magnificent elo- 
quence thrown to me from a 
soul as translucently pure as a 
cliff of 
crystal. 
“No, they did not bury me, though there is a period of time which 
I remember mistily, with a shuddering wonder, like a passage 
through some inconceivable world that had no hope in it and no 
desire. I found myself back in the sepulchral city resenting the sight 
of people hurrying through the streets to filch a little money from 
each other, to devour their infamous cookery, to gulp their unwhole- 
some beer, to dream their insignificant and silly dreams. They tres- 
passed upon my thoughts. They were intruders whose knowledge of 
life was to me an irritating pretence, because I 
felt so sure they could 
not possibly know the things I knew. Their bearing, which was 
simply the bearing of commonplace individuals going about their 
business in the assurance of perfect safety, was offensive to me like 
the outrageous flauntings of folly in the face of a danger it is unable 
to comprehend. I had no particular desire to enlighten them, but I 
had some difficulty in restraining myself from laughing in their 
faces, so full of stupid importance.* I daresay I was not very well at 


180 
Heart of 
Darkness 
that time. I tottered about the streets—there were various affairs to 
settle—grinning bitterly at perfectly respectable persons. I 
admit my 
behaviour was inexcusable, but then my temperature was seldom 
normal in these days. My dear aunt’s endeavours to ‘nurse up my 
strength’ seemed altogether beside the mark. It was not my strength 
that wanted nursing, it was my imagination that wanted soothing. I 
kept the bundle of papers given me by Kurtz, not knowing exactly 
what to do with it. His mother had died lately, watched over, as I 
was 
told, by his Intended. A clean-shaved man, with an official manner 
and wearing gold-rimmed spectacles, called on me one day and made 
inquiries, at first circuitous, afterwards suavely pressing, about what 
he was pleased to denominate certain ‘documents.’ I was not sur- 
prised, because I had had two rows with the manager on the subject 
out there. I had refused to give up the smallest scrap out of that 
package, and I took the same attitude with the spectacled man. He 
became darkly menacing at last, and with much heat argued that the 
Company had the right to every bit of information about its ‘territor- 
ies.’ And, said he, ‘Mr Kurtz’s knowledge of unexplored regions 
must have been necessarily extensive and peculiar—owing to his 
great abilities and to the deplorable circumstances in which he had 
been placed: therefore 
* IT assured him Mr Kurtz’s knowledge, 
however extensive, did not bear upon the problems of commerce or 
administration. He invoked then the name of science. ‘It would be an 
incalculable loss if,’ &c., &c. I offered him the report on the ‘Sup- 
pression of Savage Customs,’ with the postscriptum torn off. He 
took it up eagerly, but ended by sniffing at it with an air of contempt. 
“This is not what we had a 
right to expect,’ he remarked. ‘Expect 
nothing else,’ I said. ‘There are only private letters.’ He withdrew 
upon some threat of legal proceedings, and I saw him no more; but 
another fellow, calling himself Kurtz’s cousin, appeared two days 
later, and was anxious to hear all the details about his dear relative’s 
last moments. Incidentally he gave me to understand that Kurtz had 
been essentially a great musician. ‘There was the making of an 
immense success,’ said the man, who was an organist, I 
believe, with 
lank grey hair flowing over a greasy coat-collar. I had no reason to 
doubt his statement; and to this day I am unable to say what was 
Kurtz’s profession, whether he ever had any—which was the great- 
est of his talents. I 
had taken him for a painter who wrote for the 
papers, or else for a journalist who could paint—but even the cousin 


Heart of 
Darkness 
181 
(who took snuff during the interview) could not tell me what he had 
been—exactly. He was a universal genius—on that point I agreed 
with the old chap, who thereupon blew his nose noisily into a large 
cotton handkerchief and withdrew in senile agitation, bearing off 
some family letters and memoranda without importance. Ultimately 
a journalist anxious to know something of the fate of his ‘dear col- 
league’ turned up. This visitor informed me Kurtz’s proper sphere 
ought to have been politics ‘on the popular side.’ He had furry 
straight eyebrows, bristly hair cropped short, an eye-glass on a broad 
ribbon, and, becoming expansive, confessed his opinion that Kurtz 
really couldn’t write a bit—‘but heavens! how that man could talk! 
He electrified large meetings. He had faith—don’t you see? —he had 
the faith. He 
could get 
himself to 
believe 
anything—anything. 
He 
would have been a splendid leader of an extreme party.’* ‘What 
party?’ I asked. ‘Any party,’ answered the other. ‘He was an—an— 
extremist.’ Did I 
not think so? I 
assented. Did I 
know, he asked, with 
a sudden flash of curiosity, ‘what it was that had induced him to go 
out there?’ ‘Yes,’ said I, and forthwith handed him the famous 
Report for publication, if he thought fit. He glanced through it hur- 
riedly, mumbling all the time, judged ‘it would do,’ and took himself 
off with this plunder. 
“Thus I was left at last with a slim packet of letters and the girl’s 
portrait. She struck me as beautiful—I mean she had a beautiful 
expression. I know that the sunlight can be made to lie too, yet one 
felt that no manipulation of light and pose could have conveyed the 
delicate shade of 
truthfulness upon those features.* She seemed ready 
to listen without mental reservation, without suspicion, without a 
thought for herself. I concluded I would go and give her back her 
portrait and those letters myself. Curiosity? Yes; and also some other 
feeling perhaps.* All that had been Kurtz’s had passed out of my 
hands: his soul, his body, his station, his plans, his ivory, his career. 
There remained only his memory and his Intended—and I wanted 
to give that up too to the past, in a way,—to surrender personally all 
that remained of him with me to that oblivion which is the last word 
of our common fate. I 
don’t defend myself. I 
had no clear perception 
of what it was I really wanted. Perhaps it was an impulse of 
unconscious loyalty, or the fulfilment of one of these ironic neces- 
sities that lurk in the facts of human existence. I don’t know. I can’t 
tell. But I 
went. 


182 
Heart of 
Darkness 
“J thought his memory was like the other memories of the dead 
that accumulate in every man’s life, 
—a vague impress on the brain of 
shadows that had fallen on it in their swift and final passage; but 
before the high and ponderous door, between the tall houses of a 
street as still and decorous as a well-kept alley in a cemetery, I had a 
vision of him on the stretcher, opening his mouth voraciously, as if 
to 
devour all the earth with all its mankind. He lived then before me; he 
lived as much as he had ever lived—a shadow insatiable of splendid 
appearances, of frightful realities; a shadow darker than the shadow 
of the night, and draped nobly in the folds of a gorgeous eloquence. 
The vision seemed to enter the house with me—the stretcher, the 
phantom-bearers, the wild crowd of obedient worshippers, the 
gloom of the forests, the glitter of the reach between the murky 
bends, the beat of the drum, regular and muffled like the beating of 
a heart—the heart of a conquering darkness. It was 
a moment of 
triumph for the wilderness, an invading and vengeful rush which, 
it seemed to me, I would have to keep back alone for the salvation 
of another soul. And the memory of what I had heard him say afar 
there, with the horned shapes stirring at my back, in the glow of 
fires, within the patient woods, those broken phrases came back to 
me, were heard again in their ominous and terrifying simplicity.* I 
remembered his abject pleading, his abject threats, the colossal 
scale of his vile desires, the meanness, the torment, the tempestu- 
ous anguish of his soul. And later on I seemed to see his collected 
languid manner, when he said one day, ‘This lot of ivory now is 
really mine. The Company did not pay for it. I collected it myself 
at a very great personal risk. I am afraid they will try to claim it as 
theirs though. H’m. It is a difficult case. What do you think I 
ought to do—resist? Eh? I want no more than justice.’ ... He 
wanted no more than justice—no more than justice. I rang the bell 
before 
a mahogany door on the first floor, and while I waited he 
seemed to stare at me out of the glassy panel—stare with that wide 
and immense stare embracing, condemning, loathing all the uni- 
verse. I seemed to hear the whispered cry, ‘The horror! The 
horror!’* 
“The dusk was falling. I 
had to wait in a lofty drawing-room with 
three long windows from floor to ceiling that were like three lumi- 
nous and bedraped columns. The bent gilt legs and backs of the 
furniture shone 
in indistinct curves. The tall marble fireplace had a 


& 
0 
Heart of 
Darkness 
183 
cold and monumental whiteness. A grand piano stood massively in a 
corner, with dark gleams on the flat surfaces like a sombre and 
polished sarcophagus. A high door opened—closed. I 
rose. 
“She came forward, all in black, with a pale head, floating towards 
e in the dusk. She was in mourning. It was more than a 
year since 
his death, more than a year since the news came; she seemed as 
though she would remember and mourn for ever. She took both my 
hands in hers and murmured, ‘I had heard you were coming.’ I 
noticed she was not very young—I mean not girlish. She had a 
mature capacity for fidelity, for belief, for suffering. The room 
seemed to have grown darker, as if all the sad light of the cloudy 
evening had taken refuge on her forehead. This fair hair, this pale 
visage, this pure brow, seemed surrounded by an ashy halo from 
which the dark eyes looked out at me. Their glance was guileless, 
profound, confident, and trustful. She carried her sorrowful head as 
though she were proud of that sorrow, as though she would say, I—I 
alone know how to mourn for him as he deserves. But while we were 
still shaking hands, such a look of awful desolation came upon her 
face that I perceived she was one of those creatures that are not the 
playthings of Time. For her he had died only yesterday. And, by 
Jove! the impression was so powerful that for me too he seemed to 
have died only yesterday—nay, this very minute. I saw her and him 
in the same instant of time—his death and her sorrow—I saw her 
sorrow in the very moment of his death. Do you understand? I saw 
them together—I 
heard them together. She had said, with a deep 
catch of the breath, ‘I have survived’; while my strained ears seemed 
to hear distinctly, mingled with her tone of despairing regret, the 
summing-up whisper of his eternal condemnation. I asked myself 
what I was doing there, with a sensation of panic in my heart as 
though I had blundered into a place of cruel and absurd mysteries 
not fit for a human being to behold.* She motioned me to a chair. We 
sat down. I 
laid the packet gently on the little table, and she put her 
hand over it.... ‘You knew him well,’ she murmured, after a 
moment of mourning silence. 
“Intimacy grows quick out there,’ I 
said. ‘I knew him as well as it 
is possible for one man to know another.’ 
“And you admired him,’ she said. ‘It was impossible to know him 
and not to admire him. Was it?’ 
“He was a remarkable man,’ I said, unsteadily. Then before the 


184 
Heart of 
Darkness 
appealing fixity of her gaze, that seemed to watch for more words on 
my lips, I went on, ‘It was impossible not to——’ 
“‘T ove him,’ she finished eagerly, silencing me into an appalled 
dumbness. ‘How true! How true! But when you think that no one 
knew him so well as I! I had all his noble confidence. I knew him 
best.’ 
“You knew him best,’ I repeated. And perhaps she did. But with 
Sv 
roa 
spokentiehteal vl 
Ronin 
ae 
head, 
smoot 
i 
ained 
illumined 
by the unextinguish- 
able light of 
belief and love. 
“*You were his friend,’ she went on. ‘His friend,’ she repeated, a 
little louder. ‘You must have been, if he had given you this, and sent 
you to me. I feel I can speak to you—and oh! I must speak. I want 
you—you who have heard his last words—to know I have been 
worthy of him.... It is not pride.... Yes! I am proud to know 
I understood him better than any one on earth—he told me so 
himself. And since his mother died I have had no one—no one— 
to—to 
; 
“T listened. The darkness deepened. I was not even sure whether 
he had given me the right bundle. I rather suspect he wanted me to 
take care of another batch of his papers which;-after his death, I’saw 
the manager examining under the lamp.* And 
he 
ped easing 
her pain in the certitude of my sympathy; she talked 
as thirsty men 
drink. I had heard that her engagement with Kurtz had been disap- 
proved by her people. He wasn’t rich enough or something. And 
indeed I 
don’t know whether he had not been a pauper all his life. He 
had given me some reason to infer that it was his impatience of 
comparative poverty that drove him out there. 
“*. .. Who was not his friend who had heard him speak once?’ she 
was saying. ‘He drew men towards him by what was best in them.’ 
She looked at me with intensity. ‘It is the gift of the great,’ she went 
on, and the sound of her low voice seemed to have the accompani- 
ment of all the other sounds, full of mystery, desolation, and sorrow, 
I had ever heard—the ripple of the river, the soughing of the trees 
swayed by the wind, the murmurs of wild crowds, the faint ring of 
incomprehensible words cried from afar, the whisper of a voice 
speaking from beyond the threshold of an eternal darkness. ‘But you 
have heard him! You know!’ she cried. 
“Yes, I 
know,’ I 
said with something like despair in my heart, but 


t 
Heart of 
Darkness 
185 
bowing my head 
before the 
faith 
that 
was in her, before that great 
and saving illusion that shone with an unearthly glow in the dark- 
ness, in the triumphant darkness from which I could not have 
defended her—from which I could not even defend myself. 
“*What a loss to me—to us!’—she corrected herself with beauti- 
ful generosity; then added in a murmur, ‘To the world.’ By the last 
gleams of twilight I 
could see the glitter of her eyes, full of tears—of 
tears that would not fall. 
““T have been very happy—very fortunate—very proud,’ she went 
on. “Too fortunate. Too happy for a 
little while. And now I am 
unhappy for—for life.’ 
“She stood up; her fair hair seemed to catch all the remaining light 
in a glimmer of gold. I 
rose too. 
““And of 
all this,’ she went on, mournfully, ‘of all his promise, and 
of all his greatness, of his generous mind, of his noble heart, nothing 
remains—nothing but a memory. You and I——’ 
“We shall always remember him,’ I 
said, hastily. 
““Nol she cried. ‘It is impossible that all this should be lost—that 
such a life should be sacrificed to leave nothing—but sorrow. You 
know what vast plans he had. I knew of them too—I could not 
perhaps understand,—but others knew of them. Something must 
remain. His words, at least, have not died.’ 
“His words will remain,’ I 
said. 
“And his example,’ she whispered to herself. ‘Men looked up to 
him,—his goodness shone in every act. His example 
4 
“*True,’ I 
said; ‘his example too. Yes, his example. I forgot that.’ 
“But I do not. I cannot—I cannot believe—not yet. I cannot 
believe that I shall never see him again, that nobody will see him 
again, never, never, never.’ 
“She put out her arms as if after a retreating figure, stretching 
them black and with clasped pale hands* across the fading and narrow 
sheen of the window. Never see him! I 
saw him clearly enough then. 
I 
shall see this eloquent phantom as long as I 
live, and I 
shall see her 
too, a tragic and familiar Shade, resembling in this gesture another 
one, tragic also, and bedecked with powerless charms, stretching 
bare brown arms over the glitter of the infernal stream, the stream of 
darkness.* She said suddenly very low, ‘He died as he lived.’ 
“His end,’ said I, 
with dull anger stirring in me, ‘was in every way 
worthy of his life.’ 


186 
Heart of 
Darkness 
““And I was not with him,’ she murmured. My anger subsided 
before a feeling of infinite pity. 
“«Fverything that could be done 
> mumbled. 
““Ah, but I believed in him more than any one on earth—more 
than his own mother, more than—himself. He needed me! Me! I 
would have treasured every sigh, every word, every sign, every 
glance.’ 
“T felt like a chill grip on my chest. ‘Don’t,’ I said, in a muffled 
voice. 
“Forgive me. I—I—have mourned 
so long in silence—in 
silence... 
. You were with him—to the last? I 
think of his loneliness. 
Nobody near 
to understand him as I would have understood. 
Perhaps no one to hear .. 
.’ 
““To the very end,’ I 
said, shakily. ‘I heard his very last words. 
. 
. .’ 
I stopped in 
a 
fright. 
““Repeat them,’ she said in a heart-broken tone. 
‘I want—I 
want—something—something—to—to live with.’ 
“I was on the point of crying at her, ‘Don’t you hear them?’ The 
dusk was repeating them in a persistent whisper all around us, in a 
whisper that seemed to swell menacingly like the first whisper of a 
rising wind. ‘The horror! the horror!’ 
““His 
last word—to 
live with,’ she murmured. 
‘Don’t you 
understand I loved him—I loved him—I loved him!’ 
“T pulled myself together and spoke slowly. 
\& “‘The last word he pronounced was—your name.’ 
“I heard a 
light sigh, and then my heart stood still, stopped dead 
short by an exulting and terrible cry, by the cry of inconceivable 
triumph and of unspeakable pain. ‘I knew it—I was sure!’ ... 
She knew. She was sure. I heard her weeping; she had hidden her 
face in her hands. It seemed to me that the house would collapse 
before I 
could escape, that the heavens would fall upon my head. But 
nothing happened. The heavens do not fall for such a 
trifle. Would 
they have fallen, I wonder, if I had rendered Kurtz that justice 
which was his due? Hadn’t he said he wanted only justice?* But I 
couldn’t. I 
could not tell her. It would have been too dark—too dark 
altogether... .” 
Marlow ceased, and sat apart, indistinct and silent, in the pose of 
a 
meditating Buddha. Nobody moved for a time. “We have lost the 
first of the ebb,” said the Director, suddenly. I raised my head. The 


Heart of 
Darkness 
187 
offing was barred by a black bank of clouds, and the tranquil 
waterway leading to the uttermost ends of the earth flowed sombre 
under an overcast sky—seemed to lead into the heart of an immense 
darkness. 


EXTRACT FROM THE 
AUTHOR’ 
S 
NOTE (1317) 
TO YOUTH | 
A NARRATIVE | 
AND TWO 
OTHER STORIES 
THE three stories in this volume lay no claim to unity of artistic purpose. 
The only bond between them is that of the time in which they were 
written. They belong to the period immediately following the publication 
of the Nigger of 
the Narcissus, and preceding the first conception of Nos- 
tromo, two books which, it seems to me, stand apart and by themselves in 
the body of my work. It is also the period during which I contributed to 
“Maga”; a period dominated by Lord Jim and associated in my grateful 
memory with the late Mr. William Blackwood’s encouraging and helpful 
kindness. 
Youth was not my first contribution to “Maga.” It was the second. But 
that story marks the first appearance in the world of the man Marlow, with 
whom my relations have grown very intimate in the course of years. The 
origins of that gentleman (nobody as far as I 
know had ever hinted that he 
was anything but that)--his origins have been the subject of some literary 
speculation of, I 
am glad to say, a friendly nature. 
One would think that I am the proper person to throw a 
light on the 
matter; but in truth I find that it isn’t so easy. It is pleasant to remember 
that nobody had charged him with fraudulent purposes or looked down on 
him as a charlatan; but apart from that he was supposed to be all sorts of 
things: a clever screen, a mere device, a “personator,” a familiar spirit, a 
whispering “demon.” I myself have been suspected of a meditated plan 
for his capture. 
That is not so. I made no plans. The man Marlow and I came together 
in the casual manner of those health-resort acquaintances which some- 
times ripen into friendships. This one has ripened. For all his assertive- 
ness in matters of opinion he is not an intrusive person. He haunts my 
hours of solitude, when, in silence, we lay our heads together in great 
comfort and harmony; but as we part at the end of a tale I 
am never sure 
that it may not be for the last time. Yet I don’t think that either of us 
would care much to survive the other. In his case, at any rate, his occupa- 
tion would be gone and he would suffer from that extinction, because I 
suspect him of some vanity. I 
don’t mean vanity in the Solomonian sense. 
Of all my people he’s the one that has never been a vexation to my spirit. 
A most discreet, understanding man. 
. . 
. 


Author’s Note 
189 
Even before appearing in book-form Youth was very well received. It 
lies on me to confess at last, and this is as good a place for it as another, 
that I 
have been all my life—all my two lives—-the spoiled adopted child of 
Great Britain and even of the Empire; for it was Australia that gave me my 
first command. I break out into this declaration not because of a lurking 
tendency to megalomania, but, on the contrary, as a man who has no very 
notable illusions about himself. I follow the instincts of vain-glory and 
humility natural to all mankind. For it can hardly be denied that it is not 
their own deserts that men are most proud of, but rather of their pro- 
digious luck, of their marvellous fortune: of that in their lives for which 
thanks and sacrifices must be made on the altars of the inscrutable gods. 
Heart of 
Darkness also received a certain amount of notice from the 
first; and of its origins this much may be said: it is well known that curious 
men go prying into all sorts of places (where they have no business) and 
come out of them with all kinds of spoil. This story, and one other [‘An 
Outpost of Progress’] [. 
. .], are all the spoil I 
brought out from the centre 
of Africa, where, really, I had no sort of business. More ambitious in its 
scope and longer in the telling, Heart of 
Darkness is quite as authentic in 
fundamentals as Youth. It is, obviously, written in another mood. I won’t 
characterize the mood precisely, but anybody can see that it is anything 
but the mood of wistful regret, of reminiscent tenderness. 
One more remark may be added. Youth is a feat of memory. It is a 
record of experience; but that experience, in its facts, in its inwardness and 
in its outward colouring, begins and ends in myself. Heart of 
Darkness is 
experience too; but it is experience pushed a little (and only very little) 
beyond the facts of the case for the perfectly legitimate, I 
believe, purpose 
of bringing it home to the minds and bosoms of the readers. There it was 
no longer a matter of sincere colouring. It was like another art altogether. 
That sombre theme had to be given a 
sinister resonance, a tonality of its 
own, a continued vibration that, I hoped, would hang in the air and dwell 
on the ear after the last note had been struck [. 
. .] 
1917. 
ig 


EXPLANATORY NOTES 
Nautical and foreign terms, and various place-names, are listed in the 
Glossary. In these notes, the following abbreviations are used: 
AB 
BP 
CD 
CEW 
CWwW 
Jee 
HH 
HS 
LE 
Letters 
LP 
MOS 
SR 
Andrzej Busza, ‘Conrad’s Polish Literary Background and Some 
Illustrations of the Influence of Polish Literature on his Work’, 
Antemurale, 10 (Rome: Institutum Historicum Polonicum, 1966). 
Gustave Flaubert, Bouvard et Pécuchet (Paris: Lemerre, 1881). 
Zdzistaw Najder (ed.), Congo Diary and Other Uncollected Pieces 
(New York: Doubleday, 1978). 
Norman 
Sherry, 
Conrad’s Eastern 
World (London: 
Cambridge 
University Press, 1966). 
Norman 
Sherry, Conrad’s 
Western 
World (London: Cambridge 
University Press, 1971). 
Yves Hervouet, The French Face of 
Joseph Conrad (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1990). 
Hunt Hawkins, ‘Conrad’s Critique of Imperialism in Heart of 
Darkness, 
Publications 
of the Modern 
Language Association 
of 
America, 94 (1989), 286-99. 
Henry Morton Stanley, The Congo and the Founding of 
Its Free State: 
A Story of Work and Exploration (2 volumés; New York: Harper, 
1885). 
Joseph Conrad, Last Essays (London: Dent, 1926). 
Frederick R. Karl and Laurence Davies (ed.), The Collected Letters of 
Joseph Conrad (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press; vol. i, 
1983; 
vol. 1i, 1986; vol. iii, 1988). 
Guy Burrows, The Land of 
the Pigmies (London: Pearson, 1898). 
Joseph Conrad, The Mirror of 
the Sea (London: Methuen, 1906). 
Rodney Mundy, Narrative of Events in Borneo and Celebes (2 
volumes; London: Murray, 1848). 
Robert Hampson (ed.), Joseph Conrad: Heart of 
Darkness (London: 
Penguin, 1995). 
Robert Kimbrough (ed.), Joseph Conrad: Heart of Darkness (3rd 
edn.; New York: Norton, 1988). 
Joseph Conrad, Some Reminiscences 
(London: 
Eveleigh Nash, 
1912). 
Quotations from Shakespeare are taken from the ‘Globe’ edition: The Works of 
William Shakespeare, ed. W. G. Clark and W. A. Wright (London: Macmillan, 
1864), which would have been available to Conrad. 
An Outpost of 
Progress 
3 Kayerts . .. Carlier... legs: when Conrad made his journey through the 
Congo in 1890, the commercial agent Alphonse Kayaerts travelled with 


Explanatory Notes 
IgI 
him in the Roz des Belges from Stanley Pool to Stanley Falls. The captain 
of the steamer Lualaba, which in the same year plied between Antwerp 
and the Congo, was named Carlier (CWW 21, 43). When describing ‘An 
Outpost of Progress’, Conrad told his publisher: ‘It is a story of the 
Congo [. 
. .]| 
The most common incidents are related—the life in a lonely 
station on the Kassai. I 
have divested myself of everything but pity—and 
some scorn—while putting down the insignificant events that bring on 
the catastrophe’ (Letters, i. 294). 
The third . 
. 
. Price: Sierra Leone, on the west coast of Africa, was popu- 
lated partly by liberated slaves and their descendants. In 1808 its coastal 
settlement became a 
British colony, and in 1896 the colony and its hinter- 
land were proclaimed a British protectorate. (In the magazine text, 
Henry Price’s name is ‘James Price’.) 
for all furniture: 
a Gallicism. 
Subsequent Gallicisms 
include ‘He 
regretted the streets’ (for ‘He missed the streets’) and ‘this dog of a 
country’. 
torn wearing apparel: later editions have ‘town wearing apparel’, but ‘torn’ 
fits the context better. 
He made a speech. . 
. station: H. M. Stanley, in The Congo (HS ii. 244-5), 
gives an example of the disappointments he encountered. At one trading- 
post, he made an encouraging speech to the agent in charge, but to no 
avail: 
I am absent ten months from the scene, but I find on my return that the 
condition of the place is far worse than when I departed. The warm 
promises made by him created in me an ideal paradise; but instead of my 
bright, and, alas! too florid an ideal, I see the wild grass has overrun our 
native village, so that it is scarcely visible [. 
. .]; famine beleaguers the 
garrison [. 
. .]; the stores are empty [. 
. .] 
The natives leave him and his 
station so severely alone that he is in actual risk of starvation. 
an army guaranteed from harm by several European Pomers: Article VII of 
the Treaty of London (1839) declared that Belgium was ‘an independent 
and perpetually neutral state’ under the collective guarantee of Great 
Britain, France, Prussia, Russia, and Austria. In a 
letter of 1903 (Letters, 
ili. 94), Conrad remarked: 
Kayerts is not a French name. Carlier perhaps, but as soon as I 
name him, 
I 
hasten to say that he is a former cavalry n.c.o. of an army protected from 
all danger by several European powers. 1 took the trouble to make a soldier 
out of that animal deliberately. They are gallant Belgians—God bless 
them: and they were recognized as such here and in Brussels when the 
tale appeared [. 
. .] 
to begin: the serial version reads: ‘to begin. The two most useless men I 
ever saw.’ A few lines later, the phrase ‘The two men watched’ at the start 
of a paragraph reads, in the serial, “The two useless men watched’. 


192 
5 
Explanatory Notes 
of 
its police and of 
its opinion: in ‘Signs of the Times? (1829), as later 
published in Critical and Miscellaneous Essays, vol. ii (London: Chapman 
& Hall, 1899), Thomas Carlyle declared (p. 78): 
For the ‘superior morality,’ of which we have heard so much, we too 
would desire to be thankful: at the same time, it were but blindness to 
deny that this ‘superior morality’ is properly rather an ‘inferior criminal- 
ity,’ produced not by greater love of Virtue, but by greater perfection of 
Police; and of that far subtler and stronger Police, called Public Opinion. 
On the sands ... side: in ‘Heart of Darkness’ (pp. 136-7), there is very 
similar alliterative phrasing: ‘On silvery sandbanks hippos and alligators 
sunned themselves side by side.’ ‘Alligators’ is Conrad’s error for 
‘crocodiles’. 
Richelieu ... people: Richelieu and d’Artagnan appear in Les Trois 
Mousquetaires (The Three Musketeers), by Alexandre Dumas the Elder; 
Hawk-eye (Natty Bumppo) appears in The Last of 
the Mohicans and the 
other Leather-Stocking narratives of 
James Fenimore Cooper; and Father 
Goriot is prominent in La Comédie humaine (The Human Comedy), a 
sequence of novels by Honoré de Balzac. The rather naive responses of 
Kayerts and Carlier to their reading-matter partly resemble the more 
elaborate responses of the eponymous heroes of Flaubert’s Bouvard et 
Pécuchet, whose choice of novels (in chapter 5) also includes work by 
Dumas and Balzac. ‘Melie’, the name of Kayerts’s daughter, appears in 
Flaubert’s text as ‘Mélie’, the name of a maidservant. 
Tt spoke much ... dark places of 
the earth: in widely reported speeches, 
King Leopold II of Belgium (the proprietor, from 1885 to 1908, of the 
‘Congo Free State’) had proclaimed the nobly civilizing mission of 
Belgian traders in the Congo. He said, for instance: 
I am pleased to think that our agents, nearly all of whom are volunteers 
drawn from the ranks of the Belgian army, have always present in their 
minds a strong sense of the career of honour in which they are 
engaged, and are animated with a pure feeling of patriotism; not spar- 
ing their own blood, they will the more spare the blood of the natives, 
who will see in them the all-powerful protectors of their lives and their 
property, benevolent teachers of whom they have so great a need. Our 
only programme [.. .] is the work of moral and material regeneration, 
and we must do this among a population whose degeneration in its 
inherited conditions it is difficult to measure. The many horrors and 
atrocities which disgrace humanity give way little by little before our 
intervention [...] [O]ur progress [...] will soon introduce into the 
vast region of the Congo all the blessings of Christian civilization 
(LP 286-7, 288). 
In 1903, Conrad remarked to Roger Casement (Letters, iii. 96): 
It is an extraordinary thing that the conscience of Europe which seventy 
years ago has put down the slave trade on humanitarian grounds tolerates 


10 
20 
25 
30 
32 
35 
37 
Explanatory Notes 
193 
the Congo State to day. It is as if the moral clock had been put back 
many hours [. 
. .] 
and the Belgians are worse than the seven plagues of 
Egypt [. 
. .] 
Father Gobila: Henry Morton Stanley’s account (HS i. 507, 510) of 
Lieutenant Janssen’s station in the Upper Congo stated: 
His residence is like a genteel farmhouse in appearance, with a cool and 
shady porch, where he holds his palavers and chats twice a day with Papa 
Gobila [...] This old gentleman, stout of form, hearty and genial in 
manner, came up breathlessly and held out his fat hands, and welcomed 
Bula Matari (‘Breaker of Rocks’, the sobriquet of Stanley] after his long 
absence [. 
. .] 
Gobila, genial, aldermanic Gobila—Papa Gobila [. 
. .] 
Conrad’s Gobila is thin rather than stout, but he shares with his real-life 
namesake both the paternal attitude and the staff ‘tall as himself’ (which 
is shown in Stanley’s picture of Gobila: HS i. 508). 
exterminating all the niggers ... habitable: this anticipation of Kurtz’s 
‘Exterminate all the brutes!’ is one of many connections between ‘An 
Outpost of Progress’ and ‘Heart of Darkness’. (Other connections 
include the manager’s cynicism, the steamboat’s delay, the incompetence 
of the traders, and the demoralizing effect on Europeans of isolation 
within a wilderness.) 
“.. Bring out that sugar, Kayerts!’’: one source of this sequence is the 
fierce and almost suicidal quarrel between Bouvard and Pécuchet over 
two spoonfuls of tea (BP 299-300). 
with his right eye blown out—: the serial reads ‘with half his face blown 
away—’. 
Karain: 
A 
Memory 
Karain: Conrad may have derived this name from Captain Rodney 
Mundy’s Narrative of Events in Borneo and Celebes, which mentions 
that a ‘rajah Karain’ was a ruler in the Wajo region of south-west Celebes 
(NE i. 110-11). ‘Kara-eng’ is Makasarese for ‘lord, descendant of 
rulers’. 
All that ... immobility of 
a painted scene: the phrasing echoes that of 
Flaubert’s Madame Bovary: ‘Ainsi vu d’en haut, le paysage tout entier 
avait l’air immobile comme une peinture’ (FF 50). 
which he would politely conceal ... threshold: Frederick McNair’s Perak 
and the Malays (London: Tinsley, 1878), 245, says: “Considered an 
almost indispensable article of his dress, the Malay always wears his kris 
on the left side, where it is held up by the twisting of the sarong, with 
which during an interview it is considered respectful to conceal the 
weapon.’ 
His mother... Gulf of 
Boni: the Gulf of Boni (also spelt Bone) is a large 
gulf extending deeply into southern Celebes (Sulawesi). B. H. M. 


194 
37 
47 
49 
Explanatory Notes 
Vlekke, in Nusantara (The Hague: Van Hoeve, 1959), 299, states that in 
the 1850s, 
[t]here was fighting on Celebes where a proud queen of the Buginese had 
ordered her skippers to display the Dutch flag upside down on their 
ships. Batavia retaliated with armed force, and the campaign gave the 
Dutch the opportunity to renew their old alliance with the Aru Palacca of 
Bone. 
The ‘revolt’ by Base Kajuara (the Queen of Boni) and her people was 
crushed by Dutch forces in 1859-60. The Times (29 March 1860, p. 11) 
reported: ‘The people have submitted, the Queen has taken to flight, and 
her successor will hold office as a vassal of Holland.’ 
a Korinchi man of 
no family: according to Hans van Marle, it would have 
been as unlikely for a Bugis queen to marry a Korinchi trader (a Muslim 
Malay from West Sumatra) as for Queen Victoria to have married John 
Brown. 
the great trouble that broke the alliance of 
the four states of 
Wajo: in south- 
western Celebes during the 1840s and 1850s, the states of Wajo, Boni (or 
Bone), Soping (Sopeng), and Si Dendring (Sidenring) fell to dissension 
over the choice of successor to the Rajah of Si Dendring. The outcome of 
the strife was that the Dutch extended their influence in the region. The 
Dutch expeditions of 1859-60 defeated the Queen, Base Kajuara, and 
brought to the throne the pretender, Aru Palaka (also spelt Aru Palacca 
and Aroe Palakka). In 1860 Boni and Soping enteréd a treaty recognizing 
Dutch sovereignty; this was confirmed in 1880. Wajo did the same in 
1888. 
Pata Matava: ‘Pata’ means ‘Lord’ (title of a high nobleman). ‘Matara’ 
was the name of a Bugis nobleman who guided Captain Mundy during 
his visit to Celebes in 1840; Conrad may have derived the name from 
Mundy’s book (NE i. 31, 34, 79). 
a great mountain burning in the midst of 
water: possibly Gunung Api (‘Fire 
Mountain’), a volcanic island located at 8° 12’ south, 119° east, near the 
meeting-point of the Selat Sape and the Flores Sea. (Not the Moluccan 
Gunung Api.) 
a foreign sword: Captain Mundy, whose writings were consulted by 
Conrad, argued that in Java, Celebes, and the other states of the 
Malay Archipelago, European domination had proved disastrous for 
the indigenes. See, for example, NE i. 70: 
The first voyagers from the west found the natives rich and powerful, 
with strong established governments, and a 
thriving trade with all parts 
of the world. The rapacious European has reduced them to their present 
condition. Their governments have been broken up; the old states 
decomposed by treachery, by bribery, and intrigue; their possessions 
wrested from them under flimsy pretences; their trade restricted, their 
virtues repressed, and their energies paralysed or rendered desperate. 


51 
52 
53 
58 
59 
60 
62 
Explanatory Notes 
195 
Bajow people, who have no country: Captain Mundy (NE i. 45), says: ‘The 
Orang Bajow [Bajow people] resemble the Bugis and Malays. They have 
no country, live in boats, carry on a 
trade in tortoise-shell, béche de mer, 
&c. [. 
. .] 
They say they have [. 
. .] 
a tradition that they originally came 
from the kingdom of Luwu.’ 
Atjeh, where there was war: the Atjehnese (or Achinese) War of 1873-1904 
was a colonial campaign in which the Dutch repeatedly strove, with 
eventual success, to conquer the Muslim state of Atjeh in northern 
Sumatra. In March 1873, the Dutch declared war; and in 1874, after 
heavy losses (increased by cholera), they gained dominance; but sporadic 
warfare continued for thirty years. 
scraped the flint with his thumb-nail: Andrzej Busza points out (AB 211) 
that this detail derives from Adam Mickiewicz’s ballad ‘Czaty’ (‘The 
Ambush’), which provided the basis of Conrad’s tale. In ‘Czaty’, the 
governor, who seeks to kill his unfaithful young wife, tells his henchman: 
‘[P]Jour in some priming and scrape the flint with your nail.’ 
We served the Sultan of 
Sulu. We fought the Spaniards: the sultans of the 
Sulu Archipelago 
in the south-western 
Philippines 
long opposed 
Spanish domination. 
‘Give me your protection... charm... a weapon!’: Mundy claimed that 
the Bugis people of southern Celebes were not only deeply supersti- 
tious but also great admirers of the English: “They look to them for 
protection...” (NF 1. 115, 82). 
We felt .. 
. illusions: in classical mythology, Minos, Aeacus, and Rhada- 
manthus are the appointed judges of the souls of the dead on their entry 
to the underworld. 
‘Tt’s on account of 
its being a likeness—an engraved image’. one tradition of 
the Muslim religion is aniconism, which forbids the representation of 
human beings and other living creatures; so Hollis fears that if 
Karain is a 
strict Muslim, he may deem idolatrous a talismanic image of the Queen. 
(Some Muslims maintain the aniconic tradition; others tolerate pictorial 
representations in restricted areas; and others openly display portraits of 
the holy family, the prophets, and religious leaders.) 
Jubilee sixpence... gilt... rim: in 1887, to commemorate the Golden 
Jubilee (the fiftieth anniversary of Queen Victoria’s accession to the 
throne), a new coinage was issued. It included a silver sixpenny piece 
bearing the Queen’s head on one side and the royal coat of arms on the 
other. Unfortunately, this coin, which was of relatively low value, had a 
close resemblance in size and design to the gold half-sovereign, which 
was of relatively high value; so forgers gilded it in order to pass it fraudu- 
lently as the half-sovereign. In an appropriate irony, Hollis’s ‘gilt’ six- 
pence appears more valuable than it really is: the coin is doubly decep- 
tive. (The ‘hole punched near the rim’ enabled it to be worn as an 
ornament.) 
Suleiman the Wise, who commanded the genii: the Koran (Sura XXXIV) 


196 
63 
65 
66 
67 
7p 
Explanatory Notes 
states that Suleiman the Wise (Solomon) was served by spirits (djinn or 
genii) who ‘made for him whatever he pleased’. 
thing like those Italian peasants wear, you know: Italian peasants used to 
wear Madonna amulets, which could be made of gold, silver or tin, on 
neck-chains. 
Bland’s window: the shop of Thomas Bland and Sons, the gunsmiths, 
stood at 430, West Strand; the Strand being a busy street of central 
London, with theatres, hotels, and prosperous shops. 
A watery gleam. . 
. voices: Hervouet (FF 51-2) suggests that this passage 
echoes phrases of a sentence in Flaubert’s ‘La Légende de Saint Julien 
P 
Hospitalier’, notably ‘une confusion de toits pressés’, ‘des rues noires’, 
and ‘d’ou montait jusqu’a lui un bourdonnement continuel’. 
a line of 
yellow boards ... hats: the boards are advertising-placards on a 
frame or yoke, extending above the shoulders of each of the bearers (the 
‘sandwich men’). Sometimes (as here) a procession of boards spelt out 
the name of 
a firm or product. (In other cases, a pair of boards hung from 
the shoulders of the bearer, one at the front and one at the back: hence 
the names ‘sandwich boards’ and ‘sandwich men’.) 
Youth: A Narrative 
The director had been a ‘Conway’ boy: the Conway, moored in the River 
Mersey at Liverpool, was a prestigious training-ship for naval cadets. 
The group of men described here reappears in ‘Heart of Darkness’ and 
was based on a group of Conrad’s friends: G. F W. Hope (a company 
director and former Conway boy), W. B. Keen (an accountant), and T. L. 
Mears (a lawyer). Charles Marlow, whose voyages resemble Conrad’s, 
was an invention. 
It was my first voyage to the East, . 
. 
. skipper’s first command: the ensuing 
tale is based on Conrad’s first voyage to the East, as second mate of the 
Palestine in 1881-3. The Palestine was a wooden barque of 427 tons, built 
at Sunderland in 1857 and owned by John Wilson (the ‘Wilmer, Wilcox’ 
of the tale); her captain was Elijah (not John) Beard, who in 1881 was 57 
years old; and the first mate was H. Mahon. The Palestine’s disastrous 
odyssey was summarized in the report of the Marine Court of Enquiry 
which was held in Singapore on 2 April 1883: 
On the 29th November 1881 she sailed from Newcastle-upon-Tyne with 
a cargo of 557 tons of West Hartley coal, bound to Bang Kok, and a crew 
of 13 hands all told. Arriving in the chops of the English Channel, the 
vessel encountered a succession of heavy gales, losing sails and springing 
a leak on the 24th of December 1881, the crew refusing to proceed, the 
vessel put into Falmouth. The coal was there discharged and stored 
under cover, with the exception of about go tons, and the vessel thor- 
oughly repaired in dock. On the 17th September 1882 the ‘Palestine’ 
sailed from Falmouth with a complement of 13 hands all told, and 
proceeded on her voyage to Bang Kok. The passage was tedious owing to 


72 
74 
Explanatory Notes 
197 
persistent high winds, but nothing unusual occurred until noon of the 
11th March, when a 
strong smell resembling paraffin oil was perceived; 
at this time the vessel’s position was lat. 2 36 S and long. 105 45 
E. Banca Strait. Next day smoke was discovered issuing from the coals on 
the port side of main hatch. Water was thrown over them until the 
smoke abated, the boats were lowered, water placed in them. On the 
13th some coals were thrown overboard, about 4 tons, and more water 
poured down the hold. On the 14th, the hatches being on but not 
battened down, the decks blew up fore and aft as far as the poop. The 
boats were then provisioned and the vessel headed for the Sumatra 
shore. About 3 p.m. the S. S. ‘Somerset’ came alongside in answer to 
signals and about 6 p.m. she took the vessel in tow. Shortly afterwards 
the fire rapidly increased and the master of the ‘Palestine’ requested the 
master of the ‘Somerset’ to tow the barque on shore. This being 
refused, the tow-rope was slipped and about 11 p.m. the vessel was a 
mass of fire, and all hands got into the boats, 3 in number. The mate and 
4 seamen in one boat, the 2nd mate with three hands in another and the 
master in the long boat with 3 men. The boats remained by the vessel 
until 8.30 a.m. on the 15th. The boats arrived at Mintok at ro p.m. on 
the 15th [. 
. .] 
The officers and crew came on to Singapore in the British 
steamer ‘Sissie’. 
. 
. 
. 
The Court considers that the cause of the fire was spontaneous 
combustion, the passage having been unusually protracted. 
The Court is further of opinion that the vessel was not prematurely 
abandoned and that no blame is attached to the master, officers or crew 
(CEW 297-8). 
I 
had come out... I 
was just twenty: in 1880, Conrad had worked as third 
mate of the Loch Etive, a ‘crack clipper’ that voyaged from London to 
Sydney. He was 23 when he joined the Palestine in September 1881. 
‘Do or Die’ underneath: ‘Let’s [. 
. .| 
either doe, or dye’ (John Fletcher, The 
Island Princess, 1621, 1. ii. 67). 
Abraham: in the serial version of ‘Youth’, between ‘Abraham.’ and ‘Mrs 
Beard’ appears the following sentence: ‘It rained every day, and in the 
cabin we lived en famille.’ 
‘Sartor Resartus’ and Burnaby’s ‘Ride to Khiva’. Thomas Carlyle’s Sartor 
Resartus (1834) is an elaborately satiric philosophical work. Although 
Marlow is unenthusiastic about it, Carlyle’s text does include (in chapter 
5) 
a passage which, by stressing the contrast between youthful ardour and 
subsequent disillusionment, anticipates one of the main themes of 
Conrad’s tale: 
Happy season of virtuous youth, when shame is still an impassable celes- 
tial barrier; and the sacred air-cities of Hope have not shrunk into the 
mean clay-hamlets of Reality; and man, by his nature, is yet infinite and 
free! 


198 
74 
aS 
79 
81 
82 
Explanatory Notes 
Captain Frederick G. Burnaby’s A Ride to Khiva: Travels and Adventures 
in Central Asia (London: Cassell, 1877) would have appealed to Conrad 
in various ways. First, it is a warning against Russian expansionism, and 
particularly against the threat that Russia may offer to British interests in 
India. Secondly, the narrative depicts the backwardness of Russia and the 
oppressiveness of her rulers. Thirdly, the quixotic courage of Burnaby’s 
venture would have appealed to the author of ‘Youth’. Burnaby claimed 
that it was precisely because the Russian authorities had forbidden for- 
eigners to travel in central Asia that he conceived his plan of traversing 
Russia from St Petersburg to Khiva, a journey of about 2,000 miles in icy 
and perilous conditions. 
I watched .. 
. remained: a ‘head-light’ is a white light on or in front of a 
foremast, and the starboard side of a vessel has a green light, while the 
port side has a red light. 
A sailor... wife—I say: in Conrad’s Nostromo, Captain Mitchell says: ‘I 
was never married myself. A sailor should exercise self-denial.’ 
blessed name. 
Mesopotamia: 
the celebrated 
actor, David Garrick, is 
reputed to have remarked, “That blessed word Mesopotamia’, when 
declaring that George Whitefield (a renowned Methodist preacher) 
‘could make men laugh or cry’ by his pronunciation of this name of an 
Iraqi region. 
concluded to clear out: a Gallicism; the meaning is ‘decided to clear out’. 
the superstition about them: proverbially, rats instinctively desert a ship 
that is doomed to sink. 
A rotten carcass of 
a boat, not rigg’d, 
Nor tackle, sail, nor mast; the very rats 
Instinctively had quit it. 
(Shakespeare, The Tempest, 1. ii. 146-8) 
on fire: Robert W. Stevens’s On the Stowage of 
Ships and Their Cargoes 
(6th edn., London: Longmans, Green, Reader, & Dyer, 1873), 120, says: 
Coal is liable to danger of two kinds, totally different, although often 
confounded together; one is from spontaneous combustion, and the other 
the liability of ignition and explosion of the gas evolved from the coal, 
and remaining in the ship [. 
. .] Any coal containing a large quantity of 
iron pyrites is apt to heat when saturated with water, and after some time 
to burst into flame; the only prevention is said to be to keep the coal 
dryaliats)} 
Stevens advocates (on p. 121) use of a system of ventilation to prevent the 
accumulation of flammable gas in a vessel. 
You see... anything else: Stevens (pp. 121-2) states that coal which is free 
from iron pyrites is relatively safe, whereas ‘brassey coal and steam coal’ 
are relatively dangerous. ‘Smithy coal’ is small and soft bituminous coal 
of the kind used in a blacksmith’s forge. 


83 
85 
87 
89 
go 
gI 
Explanatory Notes 
199 
by want of 
air: Stevens’s advice (p. 135) is this: 
Fire cannot continue without a constant supply of air, therefore use the 
utmost diligence in stopping every hole and crevice through which air 
can obtain access to the combustible; and prevent as much as possible the 
passing off of the smoke produced, because it contains carbonic acid, 
which is even a more active extinguisher of fire than water itself. 
And she crawled on ... splendour of 
sea and sky: in this fine passage of 
Conradian poetic prose, the rhetorical devices include alliteration, asson- 
ance, asyndeton (phrases associated without conjunctions), parison 
(structural parallelism), and ploce (systematic repetition of words). 
all round me like: a Gallicism; ‘all round me something like’ would be 
better English. 
the explosion: Stevens (p. 121) says: 
Every kind of steam and other coal, especially when rapidly transferred 
from the mine to the ship, gives out carburetted hydrogen gas or fire 
damp, which is explosive when mixed with atmospheric air, on the appli- 
cation of 
a 
flame [. 
. .] 
If the hatches are fastened down directly the cargo 
is received, which is frequently done to keep out the rain or cold, or to 
prepare for sea, the gas finds its way from the coal to the spaces under the 
deck, and penetrates through the bulk-heads into the lazarette, cabin, and 
forecastle, and when a match is lit, or a lighted candle exposed [. 
. .], an 
explosion may take place and damage the decks, and jeopardize the lives 
of the crew. 
The coal-dust suspended . 
. 
. on the cargo: in the serial, this passage reads: 
You see, she had blown up her decks, and the coal-dust suspended in 
the air of the hold glowed dull-red for an instant. In the twinkling of an 
eye, in an infinitesimal fraction of a second since the first tilt of the 
bench, I 
struck full length on the coals. 
and be done with our ridiculous troubles: the serial reads: ‘and thus end the 
poignant comedy of that voyage’. 
I 
wonder what will happen. O 
youth!: the serial reads: ‘I wonder what will 
happen. I exulted as if after a triumph. O youth! And are we not all 
descendants of Don Quixote, all the wise, all the simple—all of us in the 
quixotism of our youth?’ 
I 
don’t say positively . 
. 
. same way: the serial reads: ‘I don’t say positively 
that the crew of a vulgar French or German merchantman wouldn’t have 
done it, but I doubt it. And it wouldn’t have been done in the same way.’ 
The old man .. 
. gear: the serial reads: ‘The old man informed us it was 
part of our duty to save as much as we could out of the ship.’ 
the sparks flew upwards, as man is born to trouble: ‘Yet man is born unto 
trouble, as the sparks fly upward’ (Job 5: 7). 


200 
Explanatory Notes 
93 The silly ... youth: the use of the definite article here is another 
Gallicism. 
95 handful of 
dust: Meditation IV of John Donne’s Devotions upon Emergent 
Occasions 
(1624) 
says: 
‘[W]hats become 
of mans 
great extent & 
proportion, when himselfe shrinkes himselfe, and consumes himselfe to a 
handfull of dust?’ 
98-9 Only a moment... youth!: the serial reads: ‘My God! Only a moment, 
an instant, a beat of the eyelid, and all is gone. All! The strength, the 
ignorance, the romance, the hopes, the glamour—youth!’ 
99 the good old time: Lord Byron’s “The Age of Bronze’ (I. 1-2) says: 
The ‘good old times’ —all times when old are good 
— 
Are gone; the present might be if they would [. 
. .] 
Youth and the sea: the serial reads: ‘Youth and the sea. You have known 
it. What was it? What was there in it? Eh? Not the life itself. Hey? 
What?’ 
already gone... illusions: the serial reads: ‘already gone, gone past, gone 
unseen, gone in a flash—gone together with the youth, with the strength, 
with the romance of illusions.’ 
Heart of 
Darkness 
103 HEART OF DARKNESS: the title is richly ambiguous, even more so 
than its original form in the serial (which began with the definite 
article). The phrase ‘heart of darkness’ could mean the centre of a dark 
(obscure, mysterious, sinister, or evil) place. It suggests the interior of 
Africa, which was then widely termed ‘The Dark Continent’ (and the 
tale refers to ‘the profound darkness of its heart’); but London is 
described as the centre of ‘a brooding gloom’. The phrase could also 
mean ‘A person with a dark (obscure, mysterious, sinister, or evil) heart’, 
so that it anticipates the depiction of Kurtz, as when ‘the darkness of his 
heart’ is mentioned by Marlow. In the tale, the word ‘darkness’ also 
connotes: the death of the individual or of the human race; ‘dark ages’ 
between periods of civilization; the abominable; the primordial; the 
inscrutable; the unknown; the mapped. Light is associated with civiliza- 
tion and truth but also with the brightness and destructiveness of fire. 
Whiteness is associated with hypocrisy, ivory, bones, death, fog, and the 
unmapped. In Virgil’s Aeneid, Bk. VI, the ivory gates of the Underworld 
are the gates by which ‘false dreams’ are sent to the world above. Kurtz’s 
career may occasionally evoke that of Lucifer (whose name means ‘Light- 
bringer’), the brightest of the angels, who fell through pride and reigned 
in Hell. 
The Director of 
Companies .. 
. host: the ‘Director’ was G. E W. Hope (a 
director of the South African Mercantile Company and the Thames 
Sand Dredging Company), who owned the yawl Nellie, moored at 
Greenhithe. He made occasional sailing expeditions in her with his 


104 
Explanatory Notes 
201 
friends T. L. Mears (a lawyer), W. B. Keen (an accountant), and Conrad. 
When at anchor, they would exchange yarns. Mears had served in 
the Duke of 
Sutherland, as had Hope and Conrad at different times. 
(See Hope’s ‘Friend of Conrad’ in The Conradian, 25: 2 (Autumn 2000), 
1-56.) 
He resembled a pilot, 
. 
. 
. trustworthiness personified: Hampson (RH 126) 
notes that the typescript contains a fuller description: ‘The sunburnt 
neck, the broad shoulders, the set of the blue clothes, the balance 
and solid aspect of the whole figure suggested the idealized type of a 
pilot [. 
. .]’ 
as I have already said somewhere, the bond of 
the sea: the ‘somewhere’ is 
paragraph two of ‘Youth’, which mentions this bond. 
bones: ‘bones’ was a familiar term for dominoes, which were then often 
made of ivory (so that, in contrast to most dominoes today, they were 
white and bore black spots). The term introduces the tale’s thematic 
association of ivory with death. G. F W. Hope used to play dominoes 
with his friends aboard the Nellie. 
He... resembled an idol: Conrad’s purposes in comparing Marlow to ‘an 
idol’ here (and subsequently to ‘a Buddha preaching’ and ‘a meditating 
Buddha’) are partly ironic, for this ‘Buddha’ is ‘in European clothes and 
without a lotus-flower’ and offers no road to Nirvana: Marlow is a scep- 
tic. Like the eastern idol to a western tourist, Marlow may seem the 
possessor of more knowledge than he can express. Nevertheless, like 
the Buddha Gautama, Marlow teaches by means of paradoxes; he warns 
of the perils of the appetites; and he indicates the impermanence and 
possible illusoriness of the phenomenal world. 
It had known ... Drake ... Franklin ... never returned: Sir Francis 
Drake (¢.1542—1596) was knighted by Queen Elizabeth I at Deptford 
aboard The Golden Hind, the ship in which he had circumnavigated the 
globe and harried the Spaniards, returning with pillaged wealth. Sir John 
Franklin (1786-1847) commanded an expedition to find a north-west 
passage linking the North Atlantic to the North Pacific. Both its ships, 
the Erebus and the Terror, became ice-bound in the Arctic, and all the 
men died. Subsequently, Dr John Rae alleged that the last survivors had 
resorted to cannibalism in the unsuccessful attempt to save their lives. 
Conrad, when praising Franklin (LE 15-16) refers to the termination of 
that expedition as ‘the end of the darkest drama perhaps played behind 
the curtain of Arctic mystery’. 
“tnterlopers” ... 
“generals” ... fleets: ‘interlopers’ were traders who 
breached a legal monopoly. Brian Gardner’s The East India Company 
(London: Hart-Davis, 1971), 50, says: 
Another bane of the [East India] Company was the activity of the mer- 
chant interlopers [. 
. .] 
[I]n 1685 the Company mounted 48 prosecutions 
for interloping. In 1701, the notorious Captain Kidd was executed for 
piracy in the Indian Ocean [. 
. 
.] 


202 
105 
Explanatory Notes 
The ‘commissioned “generals” of 
East India fleets’ were the commanders 
of the company’s fleets: James Lancaster, for instance, was termed ‘our 
Generall’ (Gardner, 26). The East India Company, originally chartered 
by Queen Elizabeth I in 1600, gradually took control of most of the 
Indian subcontinent until, in 1857—8, its authority there was transferred 
to the British government. 
one of 
the dark places of 
the earth: Psalms 74:20. William Booth, in his Jn 
Darkest England and the Way Out (London: Salvation Army, 1890), 11, 
said: ‘As there is a darkest Africa is there not also a darkest England?’ 
Booth’s volume was partly a response to a work published earlier in 1890: 
In Darkest Africa, by H. M. Stanley, the renowned explorer. (Previously, 
Rudyard Kipling’s tale ‘The Man Who would be King’ had referred to 
the Indian ‘Native States’ as ‘the dark places of the earth’.) 
when the Romans first came here ... the other day: The Times (4 October 
1892, p. 5) reported a speech by H. M. Stanley which quoted as follows 
the oratory of William Pitt in 1792: 
; 
‘It has been alleged that Africa labours under a natural incapacity for 
civilization [. 
. .] 
Allow of this principle as applied to Africa, and I 
should 
be glad to know why it might not also have been applied to ancient and 
uncivilized Britain. Why might not some Roman Senator have predicted 
with equal boldness—“There is a people destined never to be free, a 
people depressed by the hand of nature below the level of the human 
species, and created to form a supply of slaves for the rest of the world”? 
Sir, we were once as obscure among the nations of the earth, as debased 
in our morals, as savage in our manners, as degraded in our understand- 
ings as these unhappy Africans are at present. But, in the lapse of a long 
series of years, by a progression slow and, for a time, almost impercept- 
ible, we have become rich in a variety of acquirements, favoured above 
measure with the gifts of Providence [. 
. .] 
God forbid that we should any 
longer subject Africa to the same dreadful scourge and preclude the light 
of knowledge which has reached every other quarter of the globe from 
having access into her coasts.’ 
Conrad’s friend Cunninghame Graham, in his Notes on the District of 
Menteith (London: Black, 1891), 81, wrote: 
History informs us that the Romans once ruled the greater part of Scot- 
land [. 
. .] 
What an abode of horror it must have been to the unfortunate 
centurion, say from Naples, stranded in a marsh far from the world, in a 
climate of the roughest, and blocked on every side by painted savages! 
Hampson (RH 128) notes the irony that the Roman legions would have 
included soldiers from North Africa. 
106 you say ‘knights’?: this interjection retrospectively modifies the status of 
the anonymous narrator’s reflections on the Thames and her ‘knights all, 
titled and untitled’. Evidently the statements from ‘The tidal current’ to 


Explanatory Notes 
203 
“germs of empires’ should be regarded mainly as tacitly reported speech, 
representing words originally uttered aloud, and thus justifying the shift 
to the past perfect tense during that descriptive passage. (Conrad some- 
times, however, uses the past perfect where the present perfect is 
correct.) 
if 
we may believe what we read: in, for example, Julius Caesar’s De Bello 
Gallico, v. 1-2, which claims that 628 ships were built in one winter by 
Romans preparing to invade Britain. 
mend his fortunes: in this proleptic paragraph, the account of the ‘trireme 
commander’ partly anticipates the description of Marlow’s experiences, 
while the account of this ‘decent young citizen’ partly anticipates what 
will be said of Kurtz. Section XXX of Conrad’s The Mirror of 
the Sea 
(1906) again imagines a Roman galley-commander’s first voyage up the 
Thames: see 
MOS 158-60. 
106-7 
without a lotus-flower: Buddhist scriptures confer many symbolic 
107 
meanings on the lotus-flower: these include ‘enlightening doctrine’, ‘spir- 
itual grace’, ‘paradisal beauty’, ‘purity’, and ‘the support and ground of 
manifestation’. In paintings and sculptures of the Buddha, a cross-legged 
posture indicates meditation or preaching, and a raised forearm with 
palm outwards signifies reassurance. 
efficiency: efficiency was a quality highly recommended in the 1890s by 
Social Darwinists, Liberal imperialists, and Fabian imperialists. In 1899, 
Conrad remarked to William Blackwood about “The Heart of Darkness’: 
“The criminality of inefficiency and pure selfishness when tackling the 
civilizing work in Africa is a justifiable idea.’ In 1901, however, Conrad 
said that The Inheritors (which he co-authored with EF M. Hueffer) 
attacked the fashionable ‘worship’ of ‘unscrupulous efficiency’ (see 
Letters, 11. 139-40, 348). 
‘to be got: Hampson (RH 129) notes that a cancelled passage in the manu- 
script continues: ‘but at any rate they had no pretty fictions about it. 
They had no international associations from motives of philanthropy 
with some third rate king for head [.. .]’ This passage, indicting King 
Leopold II of Belgium, was superseded by an expanded version which 
also appears in the typescript. 
blind ... 
darkness: 
cf. Deuteronomy 28: 29: ‘the blind gropeth in 
darkness’. 
Flames glided .. 
. hastily: the ‘flames’ are the lights of vessels and their 
reflections in the water. Sailing vessels carried a green light on the star- 
board side and a 
red one on the port side; a steamer carried, in addition, a 
white light on or in front of the foremast. 
sleepless river: there follows in the manuscript a lengthy description of ‘a 
big steamer [. 
. .] 
bound to the uttermost ends of the earth’, followed by a 
comparison of the earth to ‘a pea spinning in the heart of an immense 
darkness’. The typescript contains an equivalent passage. 


204 
108 
109 
IIo 
Explanatory Notes 
I will go there: Marlow’s recollections resemble Conrad’s, as given in 
SR 4i: 
It was in 1868, when nine years old or thereabouts, that while looking at a 
map of Africa of the time and putting my finger on the blank space then 
representing the unsolved mystery of that continent, I said to myself 
with absolute assurance and an amazing audacity which are no longer in 
my character now: ‘When I grow up I 
shall go there.’ 
There is a similar passage in ‘Geography and Some Explorers’ (LE 24). 
dream gloriously over: in ‘Geography and Some Explorers (LE 20), 
Conrad recalls that in his childhood atlas, printed in 1852, ‘[t]he heart 
of its Africa was white and big’. The explorations of David Livingstone, 
Sir Richard Burton, and Captain J. H. Speke then helped to fill such 
space with details of the interior of the continent. 
a Company for trade on that river: the river is evidently the Congo, and the 
company corresponds to the Société Anonyme Belge pour le Commerce 
du Haut-Congo (the Belgian Limited Company for Trade on the Upper 
Congo), which had its headquarters in Brussels. 
I had an aunt ... enthusiastic soul: she is based partly on Marguerite 
Poradowska, whom Conrad addressed as ‘Aunt’ (though she was really 
the wife of his maternal grandmother’s first cousin) and who lived in 
Brussels. In November 1889 Conrad was interviewed in that city by 
Captain Albert Thys, director of the Société Anonyme Belge, and was 
apparently promised the command of the Florida, a paddle-steamer in 
the Congo. In February 1890, around the time of her husband’s death, 
Conrad visited Madame Poradowska; he was again interviewed, but 
doubted the outcome; yet, in April, the appointment was confirmed. 
Apparently she had exerted her influence on Conrad’s behalf. (Her 
friends included A. J. Wauters, secretary-general of the Compagnies 
Belges du Congo.) 
Fresleven ... 
stick: Otto Liitken, in ‘Joseph Conrad in the Congo’ 
(London Mercury, 22 May 1930, p. 43), states: 
[Johannes] Freiesleben, a Danish captain, and Conrad’s predecessor in 
command of the Florida, was killed by the natives at Tchumbef[r]i in 
some dispute over firewood or fresh provisions; but his bones were 
recovered on the 24th March, 18go[,] by the two steamers [...] The 
steamers had soldiers on board and some Belgian officers [. 
. .]; and there 
was a good deal of shooting and burning of native huts [. 
. .] 
Duhst, who 
was there, tells of the grass growing through the bones of the skeleton 
which lay where it had fallen. 
whited sepulchre: according to St Mark’s Gospel (23: 27-8), Jesus said: 
Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye are like unto 
whited sepulchres, which indeed appear beautiful outward, but are 
within full of dead men’s bones, and all uncleanness. 


II _ 
112 
Explanatory Notes 
205 
Even so ye also outwardly appear righteous unto men, but within ye 
are full of hypocrisy and iniquity. 
Marlow associates Brussels with hypocrisy because of the ‘philanthropic 
pretence’ masking the desire to ‘make no end of coin by trade’. In the 
typescript of ‘Heart of Darkness’ the description of the city is expanded: 
its big houses, for example, ‘suggest the reserve of discreet turpitude’. 
Two women .. 
. knitting black wool: this description may distantly recall 
Charles Dickens’s 4 Tale of 
Two Cities, in which Madame Defarge knits 
‘with the steadfastness of Fate’. She says she is knitting shrouds; her 
companion in the task is called ‘Vengeance’; and the knitwork incorpor- 
ates the names of the exploiters who are to incur retribution. Given that 
one of the knitters is ‘uncanny and fateful’ and that both are associated 
with death, another connotation (though tenuous and partly parodic) is 
with the classical Fates, Clotho, Lachesis, and Atropos: Clotho and 
Lachesis spin the thread of each person’s life, and Atropos lethally shears 
it. Ivan Turgenev’s A House of 
Gentlefolk mentions ‘three old women’ 
who, ‘like the Fates, swiftly and silently plied their knitting-needles’. 
Incidentally, in a letter of 1897, Conrad described the universe as a 
remorseless knitting machine: ‘It knits us in and it knits us out’ (Letters, 
137425): 
red... yellow: British late nineteenth-century maps of the world usually 
coloured British territories red, French territories blue, Italian green, 
Portuguese orange, German purple, and Belgian yellow: this was a stand- 
ard code. (Tanganyika, on the east coast of Africa, became a German 
protectorate in 1891.) 
pale plumpness in a frock-coat: probably a recollection of Captain Albert 
Thys (1849-1915), the director who had interviewed Conrad. (In photo- 
graphs taken between 1887 and 1892, Thys is markedly plump.) In 1885 
Thys was praised by H. M. Stanley (HS i, 
p. xiii) for supplying Stanley’s 
expeditions in the Congo. 
trade secrets: compare: ‘I am destined to the command of a steamboat 
[. 
. .] 
but I know nothing for certain as everything is supposed to be kept 
secret’ (Conrad to Karol Zagorski, 22 May 1890: Letters, i. 52). 
guarding the door of 
Darkness: the Sybil in Virgil’s Aeneid guards ‘the door 
of gloomy Dis’, the entrance of the underworld into which Aeneas is to 
descend. 
Ave!... Morituri te salutant: the original Latin form was ‘Ave Caesar [or 
Ave imperator], morituri te salutant’: ‘Hail, Caesar [or Hail, Emperor], 
those about to die salute you’: the gladiators’ salutation on entering the 
arena of combat. 
assured me the secretary: one of Conrad’s lapses into French word-order. 
quoth Plato to his disciples: a facetious tag, not a genuine attribution. 
measure my head: the doctor is a craniologist and craniometrist: he 
measures crania in order to compare and classify the characteristics of 


206 
113 
Explanatory Notes 
different individuals and races. In the late nineteenth century, this was a 
flourishing though controversial area of research; and in 1881 Conrad 
had been asked to collect skulls during his travels and send them to a 
museum in Krak6éw. Alfred Russel Wallace’s The Malay Archipelago 
(1869), one of Conrad’s favourite books, contains an appendix in which 
Wallace, while noting that the value of craniology has been questioned by 
T. H. Huxley, specifies the results of his own researches, which appear to 
reveal a correlation between cranial volume and ‘capacity for civilization’. 
Du calme, du calme. Adieu: ‘[Keep]| calm, calm. Goodbye.’ 
Workers, with a capital—you know: as in Thomas Carlyle’s Past and 
Present [1843] (London: Chapman & Hall, 1858), 302: 
But it is to you, ye Workers, [. 
. .] 
that the whole world calls for new work 
and nobleness. Subdue mutiny, discord, widespread despair, by manful- 
ness, justice, mercy and wisdom. Chaos is dark, deep as Hell; let light be, 
and there is instead a green flowery World [. 
. .] It is work for a God. 
Sooty Hell of mutiny and savagery and despair can, by man’s energy, be 
made a kind of Heaven. 
In 1898, H. M. Stanley quoted this passage to justify King Leopold’s 
activities in the Congo, adding: ‘Who can doubt that God chose the King 
for His instrument to redeem this vast slave park’ (RK 79). 
sort of apostle: Hampson notes that in 1882 the French press had 
described the explorer Pierre de Brazza as an ‘apostle of liberty’ who had 
dealt ‘a death blow to slavery in West Africa’ (RH 132). 
rot let loose... time: in 1889, for example, Leopold II opened the inter- 
national ‘Brussels Conference for the Abolition of the Slave-Trade’, 
which was widely publicized; and Albert Thys published his proposals 
for the Lower Congo Railway, concluding: 
We must also appeal to philanthropists and men of goodwill who are 
horrified by the barbarities of the slave-trade; [...] to religious and 
believing men who suffer to see the unfortunate blacks held in the ignor- 
ance of fetish-worship. All these friends of humanity will find that the 
Congo railway is the means par excellence of allowing civilisation to 
penetrate rapidly and surely into the unknown depths of Africa. 
(Quotation from Ruth Slade’s King Leopold’s Congo (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 1962), 75.) 
the labourer is worthy of 
his hire: Luke 10: 7. This maxim was cited by 
H. M. Stanley in The Congo and the Founding of Its Free State (HS vol. i, 
p. xiv). 
It’s queer 
. 
. 
. whole thing over: in Chance (London: Methuen, 1914), 131, 
Marlow says the opposite: 
‘The women’s rougher, simpler, more upright judgment, embraces the 
whole truth, which their tact, their mistrust of masculine idealism, ever 


114 
115 
116 
117 
Explanatory Notes 
207 
prevents them speaking in its entirety [. 
..] We could not stand women 
speaking the truth [. 
. .] It would cause infinite misery and bring about 
most awful disturbances in this rather mediocre, but still idealistic fool’s 
paradise in which each of us lives his own little life.’ 
centre of 
the earth: Jules Verne’s Voyage au centre de la terre had appeared 
in 1864; but Marlow’s phrasing also evokes Dante, who (in /nferno, Canto 
II) paused fearfully before setting out for Hell, ‘this centre here below’. 
Gran’ Bassam, Little Popo: in 1890, when Conrad voyaged from Bordeaux 
to the mouth of the Congo in the steamer Ville de Maceio, the vessel 
called at Grand Bassam (or Bassa) on the Ivory Coast and at Grand Popo 
in Dahomey (Benin). Little Popo (or Anecho) is in Togo, formerly 
Togoland. 
wars going on thereabouts: Conrad later explained (Letters, iii. 94): ‘If I 
say 
that the ship which bombarded the coast was French, it is quite simply 
because it was a French ship. I recall its name—the Seignelay. It was 
during the war (!) with Dahomey.’ Between February and October 1890, 
the French attempted to conquer the African kingdom of Dahomey by 
bombardment and invasion. The campaign resumed between 1892 and 
1894, until in 1894 King Behanzin surrendered and Dahomey became a 
French protectorate. 
dropped limp: this is the version in the Blackwood and Dent texts. The 
manuscript and the Heinemann 1921 edition give ‘drooped limp’. 
seat of 
the government: Conrad stayed one night at Boma, the ‘seat of 
government’ of the Congo Free State. In the manuscript of ‘Heart of 
Darkness’, Marlow speaks scornfully of the place, particularly its ‘greasy 
and dingy’ hotel. Sherry (CWW 27) says that in 1890 Boma, with its 
steam-tramway, hotel and post office, was actually ‘a well-established, 
well-organised seat of government’. 
Company’s station . 
. 
. slope: the location corresponds to Matadi. 
building a railway: construction of the 270-mile railway line from Matadi 
to Kinshasa was beset by difficulties, and it took eight years (until 
completion in 1898) instead of the expected four. 
unhappy savages: ‘On 8 August 1890, a royal decree [by Leopold II] 
permitted the railway company to establish a militia to impress workers 
from the surrounding area’ (HH 290). Forced labour, under various pre- 
texts, became widespread in the Congo. In 1890 George Grenfell 
reported that he had seen ‘nine slaves chained neck to neck in the State 
Station at Upoto’ (RK 101). 
118 gloomy circle of 
some Inferno: Marlow’s journey has intermittent (though 
distant) analogies with Dante’s journey through the nine circles of hell: 
he sees suffering beings, learns of various kinds of corruption, and, on 
meeting Kurtz, encounters a 
flagrant malefactor who is described as a 
tormented soul. 


208 
Explanatory Notes 
118 helpers had withdrawn to die: Louis Goffin’s Le Chemin de fer du Congo 
119 
120 
a 
(Brussels: Weissenbruch, 1907), 43-4, emphasizes the high mortality rate 
among the black workers during the construction of the railway through 
the Congo. In one month alone, 15 November to 15 December 1891, 150 
men (nearly 8 per cent of the black workforce of 1,951) perished. Goffin 
remarks that they often withdrew into the bush to die. Numerous Euro- 
peans either died or (like Conrad) were sent home suffering from tropical 
diseases. 
time contracts: 
G. W. Williams, who traversed the Congo in 1890, 
reported that labourers were often recruited from distant coastal regions 
and were expected to work for one year (RK 95, 106). 
white worsted 
... Why?: probably as an amulet supposed to ward off 
diseases of the throat. See Astonishment and Power (exhibition catalogue; 
Washington: Smithsonian Institution Press, 1993), 84. 
clear necktie: as Hampson (RH 133) points out, ‘clear silk necktie’ in the 
manuscript became ‘clear necktie’ in the 1902 edition and, after Conrad’s 
proof-correction, ‘clean necktie’ in the Heinemann text. (There may be a 
Gallicism: the French adjective ‘clair’ can mean ‘light in colour’ as well as 
‘clear’.) 
Kurtz: in the manuscript, Conrad initially used the name ‘Klein’ before 
changing it to ‘Kurtz’. When Conrad, in the Roi des Belges, reached 
Stanley Falls in September 1890, the vessel took on board an agent of the 
company, 
Georges Antoine 
Klein. The agent was 
suffering from 
dysentery, and died while the paddle-steamer was making her way 
downstream. 
‘Klein’ 
is German 
for ‘small’; 
‘kurz’ is German 
for 
‘short’. Marlow later explains the doubly ironic significance of Kurtz’s 
name. 
to-hundred-mile tramp: this part of Marlow’s journey corresponds geo- 
graphically to Conrad’s overland trek from Matadi to Kinshasa between 
June and August 1890. Sherry (CWW 38-9) notes that whereas Marlow 
describes a depopulated region, ‘Conrad’s journey took him to many 
market places, to various stations, and he passed en route other caravans’. 
Nevertheless, G. W. Williams reported in 1890 that numerous inhabit- 
ants had moved away or been killed ‘by war or small pox epidemic’ (RK 
93), and E. D. Morel lists areas depopulated after raids and outrages by 
the State soldiers (Red Rubber (London: Unwin, 1906), 44-6). 
the population had cleared out a long time ago: H. M. Stanley reported of 
the Matadi-Boma region (HS i. 96): 
Boma (Mboma) has a history, a cruel blood-curdling history, fraught with 
horror, and woe, and suffering. Inhumanity of man to man has been 
exemplified here for over two centuries by the pitiless persecution of 
black men, by sordid whites [. 
. .] 
Now do you wonder, as you look about 
over the large area of wilderness and sterility, that so much of those rich 
plains, now covered with mournfully rustling grass, lies untilled? 


122 
123 
124 
125 
Explanatory Notes 
209 
Zanzibaris: the soldiers in the Congo were ‘very largely imported from 
Zanzibar’ (G. W. Williams: RK 106). 
rows with the carriers: on Conrad’s trek, his European companion, Pros- 
per Harou, became very ill with fever and had to be carried in a hammock 
by the African porters. He was heavy, and quarrels ensued. (See ‘Congo 
Diary’, RH 159.) Harou’s older brother had accompanied Stanley on his 
1879-82 expedition (RH 134). 
had behaved: as this is direct speech, ‘has behaved’ would be correct. 
the real significance of 
that wreck at once: when Conrad reached Kinshasa 
at the beginning of August 1890, he found that the Florida (the paddle- 
steamer he expected to command) had been wrecked. In the tale, Conrad 
has converted this fact into part of a covert plot. The ‘real significance’ of 
the fictional wreck is the probability that the central station’s manager 
devised the ‘mishap’. The manager hopes to destroy Kurtz, his main rival 
for promotion, by delaying the relief of the inner station until Kurtz has 
become mortally ill. After the steamer has been wrecked, the manager 
then impedes the repairs for three months by intercepting Marlow’s 
requests for rivets. By the time the vessel reaches its goal, Kurtz (who has 
thus been isolated for well over a year) is dying. In reality, the Florida was 
wrecked, salvaged, and brought back to Kinshasa by 23 July; and Conrad 
was not delayed, nor was he involved in salvage work (see 
CWW 40-1). 
Norman Sherry points out that Conrad had taken an exceptionally long 
time to trek from Matadi to Kinshasa (35 days instead of the usual 17-20) 
and might well have been reproached for tardiness. If 
so, the tale imagina- 
tively transfers culpability from Conrad to the manager (CWW 44-7). 
nor even respect: while staying at Kinshasa, Conrad wrote to Marguerite 
Poradowska (Letters, i. 62): 
From the manager in Africa who has taken the trouble to tell one and all 
that I offend him supremely, down to the lowest mechanic, they all have 
the gift of irritating my nerves—so that I am not as agreeable to them 
perhaps as I 
should be. The manager is a common ivory dealer with base 
instincts who considers himself a merchant though he is only a kind of 
African shop-keeper. His name is Delcommune. He detests the English, 
and out here I am naturally regarded as such. 
The ‘common 
ivory dealer’? 
was Camille Delcommune 
(1859-92), 
manager of the Société Belge du Haut-Congo. 
no entrails: Arthur Hodister, a trader in the Congo, was depicted by his 
critics as ‘a man with no heart and no entrails’ (CWW 
114-15). 
‘How could I 
tell?... I 
hadn’t. 
. 
. doubt.’: although these quotation-marks 
signify direct speech, Conrad uses the tenses of indirect (reported) 
speech. In page proofs for the Heinemann edition, Conrad changed 
‘could’ to ‘can’ and ‘hadn’t’ to ‘haven’t’. 
take advantage of 
this unfortunate accident: the implication is that the 
destruction of the shed which contained trading goods could be used as 


210 
126 
127 
128 
Explanatory Notes 
another pretext for delaying Kurtz’s relief. The manager, however, does 
not need to exploit this possibility. 
bricks without . .. straw maybe: Exodus 5: 7 quotes Pharaoh’s command: 
‘Ye shall no more give the people straw to make brick, as heretofore: let 
them go and gather straw for themselves.’ Sherry (CWW 43-4) remarks 
that the actual brick-maker at Kinshasa made plenty of bricks. 
act of 
special creation perhaps: Marlow mockingly alludes to those people 
who, in the nineteenth-century controversy about evolutionary theories, 
maintained that species were not a product of natural evolution but were 
individually created by God. 
percentages: agents were paid a commission on ivory which rose in inverse 
proportion to the sums they paid for it. “The less the native got [. 
. .], the 
larger the Official’s commission!’ (Morel, Red Rubber, 32.) 
steal a horse while another must not look at a halter: as ‘halter’ means (here) 
‘rope or strap for leading a horse’, Marlow is offering a witty variant of 
the old proverb, ‘One man may steal a horse, while another may not look 
over a hedge’ (meaning that some people commit crimes with impunity, 
though others are punished for trivial or imaginary misdemeanours). 
worth his while: in the manuscript and the serial, these words are followed 
by the sentence: ‘His allusions were Chinese to me.’ 
a woman, draped and blindfolded, carrying a lighted torch: Astraea, goddess 
of Justice, is often depicted as blindfolded (meaning that ideal justice is 
impartial), and Liberty is famously depicted as brandishing a lighted 
torch; but Kurtz has created a new and highly ironic symbol. From his 
viewpoint, the painting presumably expresses the idea that the advance of 
civilization into the darkness of Africa lacks vision (hence the blindfold). 
His idealistic writings were designed to provide that vision. Marlow has 
sarcastically referred to Roman colonists as ‘men going at it blind—as is 
very proper for those who tackle a darkness’. The primary narrator had 
described British adventurers positively as bearers of ‘the torch’, ‘bearers 
of a spark from the sacred fire’. Conrad, however, provides various indi- 
cations that the torch is an ambiguous symbol, for it may be incendiary 
(starting a conflagration) rather than illuminative: hence, perhaps, the 
‘sinister’ effect of the torchlight on the bearer’s face. What makes the 
picture so fully symbolic is that, while it solicits decipherment, it retains 
a residue of the indeterminable. 
devil knows what else: Norman Sherry (CWW 95-118) suggests that 
Kurtz is based partly on Arthur Hodister, the ivory-collector and explorer 
who was ambitious, courageous, idealistic, eloquent, and corruptible. 
(In view of the tale’s Faustian theme, Marlow’s colloquialism—‘devil 
knows’ —has thematic resonance.) 
papier-maché Mephistopheles: papier-maché is paper (or paper-pulp) 
treated to make such items as trays, boxes, light furniture, and imitation 
plaster moulding. It is cheap, deceptive, and lacks strength: hence, ‘if I 


130 
131 
133 
Explanatory Notes 
211 
tried I could poke my forefinger through him’. Mephistopheles, who is 
prominent in Marlowe’s and Goethe’s versions of the Faust legend, is the 
diabolic agent of Lucifer. 
We live, as we dream—alone: Conrad sometimes quoted Calderén’s 
maxim, ‘La vida es suefio’ (‘Life is a dream’); and Decoud, in Nostromo, 
remarks: ‘All this is life, must be life, since it is so much like a dream.’ 
Among writers whose works were studied by Conrad, Schopenhauer 
quoted Calderon’s phrase and emphasized ‘the frailty, vanity and dream- 
like quality of all things’, Maupassant repeatedly voiced the fear of utter 
solitude, and Walter Pater (in Marius the Epicurean, 1885) let Marius 
reflect: “The ideas we are somehow impelled to form of an outer world, 
and of other minds akin to our own, are, it may be, but a day-dream.’ 
Marlow’s words ‘We live [. 
. .] alone’ constitute an oxymoron, for the 
solipsism of ‘alone’ is contradicted by the collectivity of ‘We’. 
hippopotamus: the connection between the hippopotamus and the rivets is 
soon implied. Whereas the hippopotamus ‘has a charmed life’, ‘no man 
here bears a charmed life’. Kurtz is vulnerable, and the manager is 
increasing his vulnerability by protracting the steamer’s repair. The 
brick-maker’s remark, ‘I write from dictation’, implies that the manager 
has prevented the transmission of Marlow’s request for rivets; and, since 
the brick-maker ‘had been planning to be assistant-manager by-and-by 
under the present man’, his loyalty is to the manager rather than to 
Kurtz. Marlow fails to perceive the brick-maker’s logic, and therefore 
wrongly assumes that he has persuaded the man to transmit the request: 
hence his subsequent assurance to the boiler-maker—‘We shall have 
rivets!’ 
Huntley ©& Palmer biscuit-tin: Marlow omits the ‘s’ from the name 
‘Palmers’. Huntley & Palmers, famous biscuit-makers based at Reading 
in England, exported their products worldwide (and to the table of King 
Leopold IJ). 
Eldorado Exploring Expedition: Sherry (CWW 85) says that Alexandre 
Delcommune’s Katanga expedition arrived at Kinshasa in three groups 
on zo and 23 September and 5 October 1890, leaving on 17 October. 
(Alexandre was the elder brother of Camille Delcommune.) ‘E] Dorado’ 
(meaning ‘the golden place’ or ‘the gilded man’) was the name given by 
the Spanish conguistadores to the fabulous land, rich in gold, which they 
sought in vain. In ‘Geography and Some Explorers’ (LE 5), Conrad 
writes: 
I 
suppose it is not very charitable of me, but I must say that to this day I 
feel a malicious pleasure at the many disappointments of those pertin- 
acious searchers for E] Dorado who climbed mountains, pushed through 
forests, swam rivers, floundered in bogs, without giving a single thought 
to the science of geography. 
hanged! Why not?: in 1895, a Belgian officer in the Congo arrested and 
hanged on the spot a British lay-missionary, Charles Stokes, who had 


212 
135 
137 
138 
139 
Explanatory Notes 
sold arms to Arabs. The British government protested, but the officer 
was acquitted. (Neil Ascherson, The King Incorporated (London: Allen 
& Unwin, 1963), 243.) Conrad may have read about this incident. 
I 
did my possible: a Gallicism; a literal translation of ‘J’ai fait mon possible’ 
(‘I’ve done all I 
could’— or ‘I did my best’, as Conrad rendered it in later 
editions). Another example, a few lines later, is ‘Conceive you’ (recalling 
‘concevez-vous’ or ‘congois-tu’); the meaning is ‘Can you imagine?’ 
Other instances are ‘Famous’ (for ‘Splendid’, p. 112), ‘you conceive’ (p. 
130), ‘My faith’ (p. 158), and ‘I felt like a chill grip on my chest’ (p. 186). 
next day’s steaming: when Conrad voyaged up the Congo from Kinshasa 
to Stanley Falls in the Roi des Belges, the captain was Ludvig Koch, and 
Conrad made navigational notes in preparation for the time when (he 
expected) he himself would be captain of one of the company’s vessels. 
The Roi des Belges, a paddle-steamer fuelled by timber, closely resembled 
the vessel described in the tale; and Conrad’s notes make evident the 
dangers presented by snags, stones, and sandbanks in the river. See 
‘Up-river Book’ in CD. 
twenty cannibals . 
. 
. pushing: S. L. Hinde, who travelled on the Congo at 
this period, reported (LP 142): 
When I 
was returning from Stanley Falls on my homeward journey six of 
the [Bangala] crew were in irons on board ship, whom the captain 
delivered up to justice at Bangala for having eaten two of their number 
during the voyage up to the falls. 
Norman Sherry (CWW 59-60) comments: 
The crews of steamers were from the upper Congo, mostly from Bangala 
[. . .] 
Like Marlow’s cannibal crew, the Bangalas were joyfully cannibal- 
istic. The brother of Bapulula (popular pilot on the mission steamer 
Peace on the river at this time), when asked if he ate human flesh, 
answered, ‘Ah! I wish I could eat everybody on earth’. Dr Bentley, the 
missionary, recalls talking to an old man at Bangala, three years before 
Conrad went up the river, who was reported to have killed and eaten 
seven of his wives. 
G. 
W. Williams, a black observer, noted in 1890 that some of the soldiers 
in the Congo were ‘bloodthirsty cannibalistic Bangalas’ who ate the 
bodies of slain children (RK 110). 
I had the manager 
. 
. 
. complete: in the Roi des Belges, Conrad’s European 
companions were Captain Koch, Camille Delcommune, three agents, and 
a mechanic. 
exclusively: Hampson (RH 136) notes that in the manuscript a cancelled 
passage here includes the words: ‘Towards the man possessed of moral 
ideals holding a 
torch in the heart of darkness.’ 
The mind . 
. 
. anything: Maupassant’s ‘La Chevelure’ concludes: ‘L’esprit 
de Phomme est capable de tout’ (FF 63). 


141 
145 
147 
150 
151 
152 
Explanatory Notes 
213 
Towser, Towson—some such name— Master in his Majesty’s Navy: the serial 
and the 1902 text have “Tower” as the first name, but ‘Towser’ (which 
appears subsequently in this paragraph) is the spelling at this point in the 
manuscript. J. A. Arnold, in Conradiana, 7 (1976), 121-6, suggests that 
Marlow or Conrad linked the name of 
J. 
T. Towson to a book by Nicholas 
Tinmouth. Towson published navigational tables but not a handbook, 
whereas Tinmouth published in 1845 An Inquiry Relative to Various 
Important Points of 
Seamanship, Considered as a Branch of 
Practical Sci- 
ence. Its preface manifests both the humility and the ‘concern for the 
right way of going to work’ that Marlow notes; and the subsequent 
chapters, based on ‘half-a-century’ of maritime experience, do indeed 
‘inquir[e] earnestly into the breaking strain of ships’ chains and tackle’. 
The book also includes eighteen of the ‘illustrative diagrams’ and three 
of the ‘repulsive tables of figures’ mentioned by Marlow. Tinmouth, 
however, was not a ‘Master in his Majesty’s Navy’ but a Master- 
Attendant at Her Majesty’s dockyard at Woolwich. 
brass wire ... 
villages: J. Rose Troup, in With Stanley’s Rear Column 
(London: Chapman & Hall, 1890), 103-4, states: 
The mitako, or brass rod, is the currency among the natives at Leopold- 
ville and most of the regions of the Upper Congo. It is in general 
imported to the Congo by the State in large rolls or coils of 60 Ibs. in 
weight. After its arrival at Leopoldville it is cut up into the regulation 
lengths (about 2 feet) [. 
. .]; the value of each of these pieces at Leopold- 
ville is reckoned at 1’/d. 
stuff 
like half-cooked dough: kwanga, 1.e. cassava (also known as manioc or 
tapioca), steeped and boiled to form a 
stiff dough; sometimes combined 
with ground millet and preservatives. It can indeed be ‘of a dirty lavender 
colour’ but is long-lasting and sustaining. 
beset... castle: in Charles Perrault’s version of the fairy tale ‘The Sleep- 
ing Beauty’, the sleeping princess’s castle is surrounded by an apparently 
impenetrable thicket of trees and briars, and is said to be haunted by 
ghosts or sorcerers or a cannibalistic ogre. 
lounged: alternative spelling (now archaic) of ‘lunged’. 
steam-whistle 
... hurriedly: as Hampson notes (RH 137), W. Holman 
Bentley’s Pioneering on the Congo (London: Religious’ Tract Society, 
1900), ii. 139, says that, during Bentley’s voyage by steamboat on a 
tributary of the Congo, four local men (armed with guns) in a canoe tried 
to levy toll: 
They demanded blackmail, and lay across our bows. The two whistles of 
the Peace [sic: the name of the steamer] shrieked their loudest [. 
. .] 
There was an instant collapse in the canoe; guns were dropped and 
paddles were seized and plied to their utmost. 
had I been... or had missed my destiny in life: grammatically, Marlow 
should have said ‘missed’ (or ‘had I 
missed’) instead of ‘had missed’. 


214 
Explanatory Notes 
153 the hair goes on growing sometimes: i.e. on corpses, Marlow having previ- 
ously referred to ‘the disinterred body of Mr Kurtz’. Subsequently 
Kurtz will be termed ‘an initiated wraith’, ‘a shade’, and a ‘phantom’. 
154 His mother was half-English, his father was half-French: Conrad remarked: 
‘I took great care to give Kurtz a cosmopolitan origin’ (Letters, 111. 94). 
155 International Society for the Suppression of 
Savage Customs: Conrad was 
perhaps recalling the International Association for the Exploration and 
Civilizing of Africa (‘Association Internationale pour Exploration et la 
Civilisation en Afrique’), of which King Leopold II was the president. 
Arthur Hodister was associated with the Belgian Anti-Slavery Society 
(‘la Société Antiesclavagiste de Belgique’). 
nerves, went wrong... unspeakable rites... himself: H. M. Stanley alleged 
that the ‘unfledged’ European in Africa would ‘very readily explode his 
unspeakable passions’ (HS i. 517). Norman Sherry notes that Arthur 
Hodister assisted at the fifteenth wedding of a chieftain, Tyabo, and 
witnessed human sacrifices decreed by Tyabo during funerary rites. In 
1892 The Times reported that, during further explorations in the Congo, 
Hodister was captured and killed, his head stuck on a 
pole, and his body 
eaten (CWW too-1, 110-11). 
158 harlequin: a type found in French folk-literature, the Italian commedia 
dell’arte, and English pantomime: a 
lively, acrobatic character, dressed in 
bright particoloured costume. 
159 Government of Tambov: 
‘Government 
of’ here means 
‘(from the) 
administrative region called’, Tambov is one of the largest provinces of 
western Russia, and its chief city and administrative centre (also called 
Tambov) has a seventeenth-century cathedral and was an archiepiscopal 
see of the Russian Orthodox Church. 
Dutch trading-house on the coast: the most powerful trading company on 
the 
Congolese 
coast 
was 
the 
Nieuwe 
Afrikaansche 
Handels- 
Vennootschap (see CWW 69, and Bentley’s Pioneering on the Congo, i. 
68-9). 
Van Shuyten: ‘impossible as a Dutch name; Van Schuyten will do’, com- 
ments Hans van Marle. Sherry (CWW 117) suggests that Conrad 
adapted the name of Schouten, a Belgian associated with Hodister. 
164 symbolic: in the serial, the wording between ‘symbolic; and ‘expressive’ 
is: ‘they were symbolic of some cruel and forbidden knowledge. They 
were’. 
heads on the stakes: in 1892, it was reported that fifty-two human heads on 
stakes surrounded a station at Yanga (in the Congo) where two white 
men stayed (CWW 117-18). E. J. Glave noted in 1895 that at Stanley 
Falls ‘twenty-one heads [. 
. .] 
have been used by Captain Rom as a 
decor- 
ation round a 
flower-bed in front of his house’ (‘Cruelty in the Congo 
Free State’, Century Illustrated Monthly Magazine, 54 (1897), 706). 
fantastic invasion: in the serial, the wording between ‘fantastic’ and ‘I 


168 
175 
177 
Explanatory Notes 
215 
think’ is: ‘invasion. It had tempted him with a 
the sinister suggestions of 
its loneliness.’ 
hollow at the core: the ancient proverb, ‘The empty vessel makes the 
greatest sound’ (Shakespeare, Henry V, tv. iv. 73-4), partly explains 
Kurtz’s combination of ‘hollowness’ and exceptional eloquence. 
she stopped . 
. 
. failed her: in the serial, the wording between ‘she’ and ‘The 
young fellow’ is: 
stopped. Had her heart failed her, or had her eyes, veiled with that 
mournfulness that lies over all the wild things of the earth, seen the 
hopelessness of longing that will find out sometimes even a savage soul in 
the lonely darkness of its being? Who can tell. Perhaps she did not know 
herself. 
A formidable silence hung over the scene: this short sentence replaces the 
longer version in the serial: ‘Her sudden gesture seemed to demand a 
cry, 
but the unbroken silence that hung over the scene was more formidable 
than any sound could be.’ 
‘Do I 
not?’ he said slowly: in the serial, the wording is: ‘“I will return,” he 
said, slowly’. 
‘Live rightly, die, die ...’: in the manuscript, the phrase ‘die nobly’ 
completes the maxim. 
face the expression. 
. 
. despair: in the serial, the wording between ‘face’ and 
‘Did he live’ is: ‘the expression of savage pride, of mental power, of 
avarice, of blood-thirstiness, of cunning, of excessive terror, of an intense 
and hopeless despair.’ 
‘The horror! The horror!’: Marlow interprets these words in different 
ways, thus setting the precedent for many subsequent commentators. He 
suggests the following meanings. (1) Kurtz condemns as horrible his 
corrupt actions, so that this ‘judgment upon the adventures of his soul on 
this earth’ is ‘an affirmation, a moral victory’. (2) Kurtz deems hateful 
but also desirable the temptations to which he has succumbed: the whis- 
per has ‘the strange commingling of desire and hate’. (3) Kurtz deems 
horrible the inner nature of everybody: ‘no eloquence could have been so 
withering as his final burst of sincerity’ when his stare ‘penetrate[d] all 
the hearts that beat in the darkness’. (4) Kurtz deems horrible the whole 
universe: ‘that wide and immense stare embracing, condemning, loathing 
all the universe . 
. 
. “The horror!” 
The words ‘The horror! The horror!’ thus serve as a thematic nexus, a 
climactic but highly ambiguous utterance which sums up, without resolv- 
ing, several of the paradoxical themes of the tale. As is customary with 
symbols, the various meanings suggested do not exhaust the phrase’s 
potential: it retains some opacity. Co-ordinated enigmas are a structural 
principle of ‘Heart of Darkness’. 
(Incidentally, Conrad may have recalled here Psalms 55: 4-5: ‘My 
heart is sore pained within me: and the terrors of death are fallen upon 


216 
179 
18 
_ 
182 
Explanatory Notes 
me. Fearfulness and trembling are come upon me, and horror hath over- 
whelmed me.’) 
they very nearly buried me: Conrad, suffering from fever and dysentery, 
was allowed to return early from the Congo to Europe. 
I 
found myself back in the sepulchral city resenting the sight of 
people . 
. 
. so 
full of 
stupid importance: there are analogies with Gulliver’s distaste for a 
humankind ‘smitten with pride’ (in the closing pages of Swift’s Gulliver’s 
Travels) and with Prendick’s revulsion as he walks through the crowded 
streets (near the close of Wells’s The Island of 
Doctor Moreau). 
leader of 
an extreme party: Conrad knew the work of Max Nordau, and in 
Nordau’s Degeneration (London: Heinemann, 1895), the description of 
the ‘highly-gifted degenerate’ (pp. 22-4) may have provided hints for the 
characterization of Kurtz: 
“The degenerate,’ says Legrain, ‘may be a genius. A badly balanced mind 
is susceptible of the highest conceptions, while, on the other hand, one 
meets in the same mind with traits of meanness and pettiness all the more 
striking from the fact that they co-exist with the most brilliant qualities.’ 
[. 
. .] 
‘As regards their intellect, they can,’ says Roubinovitch, ‘attain to a 
high degree of development, but from a moral point of view their exist- 
ence is completely deranged ... A degenerate will employ his brilliant 
faculties quite as well in the service of some grand object as in the 
satisfaction of the basest propensities.’ [. 
. .] I 
do not share Lombroso’s 
opinion that highly gifted degenerates are an active force in the progress 
of mankind. They corrupt and delude; they do, alas! frequently exercise a 
deep influence, but this is always a baneful one [. 
. .] 
They, likewise, are 
leading men along the paths they themselves have found to new goals, but 
these goals are abysses or waste places. They are guides to swamps like 
will-o’-the-wisps, or to ruin like the ratcatcher of Hammelin. 
yet... features: in the serial, the wording after ‘yet’? and before ‘She 
seemed? is: 
that face on paper seemed to be a 
reflection of truth itself. One felt that 
no manipulation of light and pose could have conveyed the delicate shade 
of truthfulness upon those features. She looked out truthfully. 
some other feeling perhaps: Conrad told David Meldrum that the tale 
offered ‘[a] mere shadow of love interest just in the last pages’ (Letters, 
li. 145-6). This motif reaches its ironic conclusion in the closing pages of 
Chance, 
when 
Marlow, 
an 
ageing 
bachelor, 
successfully 
acts 
as 
matchmaker for a younger seafarer and a widow. 
terrifying simplicity: in the serial, the wording after ‘terrifying’ and before 
‘I remembered’ is: 
simplicity: “I have lived—supremely!’ ‘What do you want here? I have 
been dead—and damned.’ ‘Let me go—I want more of 
it.’ More of what? 
More blood, more heads on stakes, more adoration, rapine, and murder. 


183 
184 
185 
186 
Explanatory Notes 
215 
he seemed to stare at me ... The horror!: the memory of Kurtz’s face 
perhaps suffuses the reflection of Marlow’s in the ‘glassy panel’; and the 
description may be influenced by the incident in Dickens’s 4 Christmas 
Carol when Scrooge, about to open the door of his house, sees the staring 
face of the dead Marley, and associates it with a vision of horror: 
[Though the eyes were wide open, they were perfectly motionless. That, 
and its livid colour, made it horrible; but its horror seemed to be in spite 
of the face and beyond its control, rather than a part of its own 
expression. 
to behold: in the serial, after ‘to’ and before ‘She’, the wording is: ‘behold. 
I wanted to get out.’ 
under the lamp: in the serial, after ‘lamp.’ and before ‘And the girl’, the 
wording is: ‘But in the box I had brought to his bedside there were 
several packages pretty well alike, all tied with shoe-strings, and probably 
he had made a mistake.’ 
stretching them black and with clasped pale hands: her arms appear black 
because she is wearing a long-sleeved mourning dress. The sense would 
be clearer if 
the punctuation were thus: ‘stretching them, black and with 
clasped pale hands,’. 
Shade...arms... darkness: Virgil’s Aeneid (vi. 314) says that the Shades 
in the underworld ‘stretched their arms out in longing’ to Charon as they 
stood on the shore of Styx, the river of darkness. 
It seemed... that the heavens would fall . 
. 
. justice: Marlow is recalling the 
Latin maxim, ‘Fiat iustitia ruat caelum [or coelum]’: ‘Let justice be done, 
though the heavens fall’. Conrad quoted this as ‘fiat justicia ruat coelum’ 
when writing to Marguerite Poradowska in March 1890, six weeks before 
setting out for the Congo (Letters, i. 43). The recurrence of the tag is one 
of several features suggesting that the description of Marlow’s meeting 
with the Intended is based, in part, on Conrad’s relationship with ‘Aunt’ 
Marguerite in 1890. Marguerite lived in Brussels, as does Kurtz’s fiancée. 
Marguerite was 42; the fiancée is ‘not very young’. When Conrad visited 
Marguerite in April 1890, she, like the Intended, was bereaved and in 
mourning, because her husband, Aleksander Poradowski, had died 
recently. (Aleksander had apparently strayed morally ‘into an abyss’ dur- 
ing his mortal illness.) Marlow admires and is attracted to the Intended; 
Conrad admired and was attracted to Marguerite. Indeed, Conrad’s 
uncle, Tadeusz Bobrowski, wrote to warn him against an infatuation 
which could not lead to marriage. 


GLOSSARY 
abaft, aft behind, towards the stern of a vessel 
ad patres (Latin) to the fathers; ‘send (them) ad patres’: kill them 
after-hatch rearmost hatch in main deck 
Ahoy! traditional nautical cry to hail a ship or attract attention 
alienist psychiatrist 
alpaca cloth made of wool from the South American mammal, the alpaca 
amok, amuck (Malay) (in) a state of murderous frenzy 
Anjer coastal town in north-west Java 
appeal (noun, p. 12) call (Gallicism, from appe/) 
assegai light spear 
a-starboard to the right 
athwart (p. 116) sideways 
Atjeh Muslim state (also termed Achin, Aceh, etc) in northern Sumatra 
attap (Malay) palm fronds (particularly from the nipa palm) used for 
thatching 
Bajow people maritime Malays (often nomadic traders known as ‘sea 
gypsies’) inhabiting the coastal regions of Borneo, Celebes, and-the 
southern Philippines 
Batavia (subsequently Jakarta) capital of Indonesia; located in north- 
west Java; founded in 1619, and ruled by the Dutch until 1945 
beggar (p. 157, slang) (mildly derogatory term for) person, fellow 
bend sails secure sails to spars 
berth (1) sleeping-place; (ii) mooring-place 
billet (colloquial) job, position 
blab divulge a secret 
blamed (p. 113) (euphemism for) blasted 
bluff of her bow upper part of a vessel’s front end 
boat-hook pole ending in a hook, for pulling or pushing off a boat 
Boni, Gulf of long gulf, later called Teluk Bone, in southern Celebes 
(Sulawesi) 
bow, bows forward part of vessel, where it curves to the stem 
bowman oarsman at the bow of a boat 
brought up (p. 142) halted and anchored; ‘brought up with the deep-sea 
lead-line’ (p. 96): halted by employing as an anchor the lead-weighted 
line normally used for assessing the depth of water in fathoms 
(‘Deep-sea’ was pronounced ‘dip-see’) 
buckler small round shield 


Glossary 
219 
Bugis inhabitants (or their descendants) of the south-western part of 
Celebes 
; 
bulkhead upright partition between compartments 
bulwarks ship’s sides above deck-level 
bunt baggy part of 
a 
sail 
caballeros (Spanish) cavaliers or gentlemen; (p. 66) Spanish authorities 
in the region 
cabinet photograph photograph measuring approximately 6% by 4% 
inches (16.5 by 11.4 cm) 
calabash gourd-shell used as a container 
Calashes (Malay) Malay seamen 
calipers (usually ‘callipers’) compasses with legs suitable for measuring 
inner or outer diameters 
campong (Malay) village or cluster of buildings, enclosed and some- 
times fortified with palisades 
Canal Suez Canal 
cat-heads beams supporting anchor-tackle 
caulk her topsides make watertight with oakum the upper parts of the 
vessel’s sides (between the waterline and the ship’s rail) 
Celebes island in the Dutch East Indies; later known as Sulawesi in 
Indonesia 
chain-hook iron rod ending in a hook, used 
for hauling chain- 
cables 
chain-plates iron plates to which shrouds (ropes supporting a mast) are 
secured 
*Change place such as the Royal Exchange or the Stock Exchange in 
London, where merchants, financiers, and their employees transact 
business. ‘Men on ’Change’: merchants, businessmen 
Chapman lighthouse screw-pile lighthouse, erected in 1849 on a mud- 
flat off Canvey Island in the Thames 
chased hilt ornamented handle 
Chips customary nickname of a ship’s carpenter 
cipher code 
come to (p. 103) anchor 
companion (i) ladder or stairway; (ii) entrance to a stairway 
confab (colloquial) confabulation, conversation 
coppered sheathed in copper 
cortége (French) procession of attendants 
counter curving part of a vessel’s hull towards the stern 
crack (adjective) first-rate, excellent 
crew of runners crew engaged for a single short voyage 
cuddy (i) in a large vessel (such as the schooner in ‘Karain’), a saloon 


220 
Glossary 
serving as a common room for meals, etc; (ii) in a smaller vessel, a cabin; 
(iii) in an even smaller vessel, a shelter or locker 
davits small cranes by which a ship’s boat is raised or lowered 
Deal town on the east coast of Kent 
Delli (Deli) region of north-east Sumatra 
Deptford eastern suburb of London, on the south side of the Thames; 
once noted for its dockyard established by Henry VIII 
Dogger Bank submerged sandbank in the North Sea between northern 
England and Denmark 
Eastern Archipelago the Malay Archipelago, whose many islands in- 
clude Borneo, Sumatra, Java, and Celebes (Sulawesi) 
Eldorado the Golden Land sought in vain by the Spanish Conquista- 
dores in America (from the Spanish e/ dorado, the gilded man or golden 
place) 
Erith port and township on the south side of the Thames, 3 miles 
north-west of Dartford 
evolutions (p. 175) manceuvres 
fairway navigable part of a river 
Falernian wine fine wine from the district of Falernus Ager, lying 
inland from Neapolis (now Napoli or Naples) 
famous (p. 112) splendid (Gallicism, from fameux) 
fife-rail pin-rail (to hold belaying-pins) in a semi-circle round the mast 
near its base 
Fleet Street busy street of central London, famed as a centre for 
newspaper publishing 
float (p. 142) blade of a paddle-wheel 
foot-warmer perforated box containing a pan for hot coals 
force-pump piston-operated pump which ejects liquid forcibly, under 
pressure (as opposed to a 
lift-pump, which emits—rather than ejects— 
the liquid) 
Forelands two headlands (North Foreland and South Foreland) in 
south-eastern England, on the coast of Kent 
forepeak scuttle hatch of compartment in the forward part of a vessel, 
close to the bow 
foresail lowest of the sails on the foremast (mast nearest bow) 
gasket canvas band to tie a furled sail to a yard 
Gauls Cisalpine Gaul and Transalpine Gaul. The former was bordered 
by the Alps and the Apennines, the latter by the Alps, the Mediter- 
ranean, the Pyrenees, the Atlantic, and the Rhine 
Geordie person who hails from (or lives in) Tyneside, in north-east 
England 
get-up (slang) attire 


Glossary 
221 
Goram men Muslim traders from the island of Goram in eastern 
Indonesia 
. 
Gran’ Bassam Grand Bassam, a 
coastal town of Ivory Coast 
Gravesend town and port on the south side of the Thames, opposite 
Tilbury Docks, approximately 20 miles from central London 
Greenwich an eastern borough of London, on the south bank of the 
Thames; former port, and location of a palace 
Greenwich Time clock-time co-ordinated by the Royal Observatory 
located on the zero meridian at Greenwich 
gripes bands and fastenings retaining a 
boat in its cradle 
grog-blossoms purplish blotches attributed to the frequent drinking of 
grog (rum) 
Gulf of Boni long gulf (later called Teluk Bone) in southern Celebes 
gunwale (pronounced ‘gunnel’) upper edge of a boat’s side 
‘Harbour furl—aloft there!’ ‘You hands up there, furl the sails neatly 
as if for docking!’ 
hard a-starboard as far as possible to the right 
head-light white navigation-light carried on the mast-head 
head-pump small manual lift-pump fixed at vessel’s bow, to draw sea 
water aboard; normally used for washing the ‘heads’ (lavatories) and 
decks 
helm wheel 
helmsman man who steers a vessel 
holland coarse linen cloth 
hooker old-fashioned or clumsy vessel 
ichthyosaurus gigantic prehistoric marine reptile 
incontinently (i) immediately; (ii) impetuously 
intelligence news, report, information 
interlopers (p. 104) venturers trespassing on the trade monopoly of the 
East India Company 
Java Head the western tip of Java, where the Sunda Strait meets the 
Indian Ocean 
jury-rig makeshift rigging 
kedge-anchor small anchor for steadying and manceuvring a ship 
knot unit of speed: one nautical mile (1.85 km) per hour 
Korinchi man Muslim Malay from western Sumatra 
kriss (Malay) Malayan or Indonesian dagger with scalloped or wavy 
edges 
Land’s End granite headland at the south-western tip of Cornwall 
lazarette (from Italian /azzaretto) storeroom between decks near the 
stern of a ship 
lee bow downwind side of the front part of a vessel 


py 
Glossary 
leeward downwind 
Little Popo Anecho, a coastal town in Togo 
Lizards Cornwall’s southernmost promontory and its offshore rocks 
Loanda a 
port on the Atlantic coast of Angola (then in Portuguese West 
Africa) 
long-boat largest boat of a ship 
long-shore loafers waterfront idlers 
lounged (p. 150; now-archaic spelling) lunged 
main-chains metal fixtures to which the shrouds from the mainmast are 
secured 
main-deck uppermost of the decks which span the length and breadth 
of a ship 
mainmast chief mast of a sailing-vessel with two or more masts: (i) on a 
yawl or ketch, the foremast; (ii) on most other vessels, the second mast 
from the bow 
mainsail largest and lowest sail on the mainmast 
mainyard lowest yard (horizontal spar) on the mainmast 
Martini-Henry breech-action rifle, its breech designed by F. Martini, its 
barrel-rifling by A. Henry 
Mephistopheles a devil who, as Lucifer’s agent, is prominent in the 
Faust legend 
Mesopotamia region of south-west Asia between the lower and middle 
reaches of the rivers Tigris and Euphrates 
mess (p. 80) meal 
Mindanao the second largest island of the Philippines 
mizzen-mast rear mast on a two- or three-masted vessel; third mast 
from front on a four-masted vessel 
mizzen-shrouds ropes extending from the vessel’s sides to the head of 
the mizzen-mast 
mizzly (rain) rain falling in a light misty drizzle of droplets 
mooned, mooned about was listlessly idle 
motley particoloured garb, as worn by harlequins 
muff bungler, incompetent person 
mulatto person having one black and one white parent 
Nemesis (1) retribution; (ii) the Greek goddess of retribution 
Nero Roman emperor from AD 54 to 68, notorious for despotism and 
cruelty 
non-commissioned officer subordinate officer (e.g. sergeant) who is 
appointed from the ranks and does not hold a commission 
oakum tarred rope-fibres used for caulking seams 
Odyssey (p. 56) long and arduous journey comparable to that of the 
legendary Odysseus (Ulysses) 


Glossary 
223 
offing part of the sea that is visible from the shore 
omnibus large four-wheeled horse-drawn passenger-vehicle 
Ough! exclamation of distaste or disgust, loosely corresponding to the 
more recent exclamation ‘Yuck!’ 
P. & O. Peninsular and Oriental Steamship Company 
painter rope in the bow of a boat, for securing or towing it 
palaver discussion or negotiation 
palm wine the fermented sap of the palm tree 
papier-maché paper or paper-pulp treated with adhesive and moulded 
Perak state on the north-west coast of the Malay Peninsula 
plantain plant yielding banana-type fruit 
poop high deck and enclosed area beneath it, at the stern of a vessel 
port (side) left side of a vessel, relative to a forward-facing position 
aboard 
prau Malay boat, usually undecked 
purchases leverages; mechanical advantages in raising or lowering 
put back (a vessel) reverse the vessel’s course 
rattans climbing palms whose stems are used for wickerwork and canes 
Ravenna town of north-east Italy near the Adriatic coast. Augustus 
(Roman emperor from 29 BC to AD 14) made its port, Classis, into a 
naval station 
reach length of river between bends 
‘ready’: at ‘ready’ pointed outwards, ready for firing 
recaulked rendered watertight again by pressing oakum into the seams 
recrudescence new outbreak 
regret the streets (Gallicism) miss (sadly recall) the streets 
revolver-carbine light rifle with a rotating magazine 
rumour (pp. 39, 66; Gallicism) murmur; humming noise 
runner seaman engaged for a single short voyage 
salamander (p. 92) amphibious creature reputed to live in fire 
sardine box sardine tin 
sarong (Malay) garment resembling a 
long skirt 
schooner two-masted sailing-ship with fore-and-aft rigging 
scow flat-bottomed boat 
scratch (p. 32) hastily gathered 
scuttling (p. 88) deliberately flooding a ship’s holds 
secular age-old, long-lived, ancient 
Selangore (Selangor) state of 
Peninsular Malaya, on the Strait of 
Malacca 
serang (from Persian and Urdu sarhang) native boatswain 
shade (pp. 154, 176, 185) ghost 
Shadwell basin channel at Wapping which connects the London Docks 
to the River Thames 


224 
Glossary 
shakes (slang) uncontrollable trembling caused by fever 
sheered (p. 148) steered on a deviating course 
ship’s biscuit hard biscuit (also called ‘ship’s bread’) for seamen 
shot down (p. 133) thrown down, dumped 
shrouds ropes supporting a mast 
side-spring boots boots with elasticized side-strips 
Sierra Leone then a 
British colony on the west coast of Africa, popu- 
lated partly by freed slaves and their descendants 
smithy coal small and soft bituminous coal used in a blacksmith’s forge 
snag hazard to navigation, particularly a submerged or semi-submerged 
part of a tree 
Solomon King of Israel in the tenth century BC; credited with great 
wisdom 
soughing sighing 
sounding-rod metal rod used to measure the depth of water in the bilges 
spontaneous combustion ignition resulting from the oxidation process 
sprit spar set diagonally upwards from the mast, to extend and elevate a 
fore-and-aft sail 
square-rigged fitted with rectangular sails slung athwartship 
square the foreyard set, at a right-angle to the fore-and-aft line of the 
vessel, the spar on the foremast from which the lowest sail is suspended 
squirts (p. 150; slang) repeating rifles 
stanchion upright supporting-post 
starboard right-hand side of a vessel, relative to a forward-facing 
position aboard 
stem-head top end of the stem (the curving post at the front of a boat) 
step (a 
mast) fix a mast in place 
sternports openings at the stern of a vessel 
stream-anchor medium-sized anchor used for warping or to moor a 
ship in a 
sheltered position 
stream-cable cable or hawser of the stream-anchor 
strophe division of a song 
stun’-sail studding-sail, a light auxiliary sail set outboard on a spar on 
either side of a square sail 
Sulu the Sulu Archipelago in the south-western Philippines 
taffrail aftermost rail of a vessel, following the curve of the stern 
tale: lost the tale lost count 
tallow dip candle made by dipping a wick in fat or grease 
Tambov city and region of central Russia, about 300 miles south-east of 
Moscow 
thwarts planks which extend transversely across a boat and may be used 
as seats 


Glossary 
225 
tier (i) row of ships anchored or moored; (ii) anchorage or mooring-place 
where ships lie in rows or columns 
told off as appointed to the post of 
told off to allocated to 
top-gallant mast mast extending above topmast 
trim the yards adjust the spars 
trireme galley with three banks of oars on each side 
truck flat circular wooden cap at the top of a mast 
truckle-bed low bed on wheels, capable of being stored beneath another 
bed 
twill woven fabric showing diagonal lines 
twopenny-halfpenny (pronounced ‘twpnee-hapenee’) cheap and of 
infer- 
ior quality 
Tyne river in northern England which flows into the North Sea 
valiance valour 
Wajo region and town (later called Kaluwaja) in south-western Celebes 
(Sulawesi) on the Gulf of Boni (Teluk Bone) 
warp (a ship) move a 
ship by hauling on a ‘warp’ (towing-rope) 
watch (1) period of duty; (ii) group of men allotted to a period of duty. 
‘Watch and watch’ (pp. 76-7): in turn, the two halves of the crew 
taking duty alternately every four hours 
waterman man who plies a boat for hire 
weather-cloth protective tarpaulin 
white-lead type of putty made from lead carbonate and linseed oil 
whizz (noun, p. 150) sound of an object moving rapidly through the air 
Winchester American repeating rifles named after O. F Winchester, 
their manufacturer 
windlass rotating cylinder used for raising or lowering the anchor 
wink (p. 144) blink 
yard (on vessel) spar to bear or extend a 
sail 
Yarmouth roads anchorage outside the port of Great Yarmouth in 
Norfolk 
yawl two-masted sailing vessel, rigged fore-and-aft, with a large main- 
mast and a small mizzen-mast (rear mast) 


of 
bene it 
a 
(ok aoe 
@e Gat Szent 
re 
7 
=a 
aati ewie aes 
sal 
+ th fae 
te Oe 
. 
as 
> 
tee 
atone 
wi 
Ges a 
ie 
- 
2,408 
x 
; 
sera 
29 
eae 
eed \que—pelr gy errr ced 
DAD 
| 
Teigth—e 
ww awaaPwy yeep es 
ii 
ited ga! rel eee 
: 
ont 
tn 
fame 
it —~ 
) 
Pee(P-—Jem, — 
Peon. 
SS eel} eer 
la 
= 
vad! dfod Oo) aia 
: 
ih 
tire 
=e avtenilegat Gide som dg 
RD OP 
ay <5 Comal ty Siete 
fy 
Sl 
sO) 
ay Ped 
Hi 27) oe 
Ake: eee 
«4 
: a cele inrepeiacaiald te 
a 
e 
‘ 
oaties we a 
hs 
eels 
—_— 
<a 
Su 
el sees 
a 
ee 
“8 
TR 
> 
ar? <1 kee Mert ier emote 
et 
ea 
il Cte 
ie io bade ine 
Pweriae 
4.4) 
&- 
= a) eee 
= 
> 
* 
mioréic 
$0 
6) 
Sie oa or Say mbatiys pda 
= 
_ 
— 
apg 
; 
~~ 
ten 
124 
iocl Hb tanya: f 
o 
Bnei 
P 
wed? 
W 
Mo— es Chet epee 
eheot 
a 
. 
| =e) Bibles 
ham, 
Oahalt Sadiesedh 
; 
sim 
= 
2 hecny uma iinet 
ae 
x 
oy) 
o-4 
— 
<r *nS6 ce 
7 
~< 
* 
= 6 lile@u@es kee 
: 
_— 
es 
648 © hte peewee 
loa ae <> 
2 
OG” 
cae 
6 =e wa 
>| 
woe 
Sag? . Bee 
aart Aaa 
ae we) Pit = Oe 
re) 
5 


ie 


‘The horror! 
The horror!’ 
Set in an atmosphere of mystery and menace, ‘Heart of Darkness’ 
tells the story of Marlow’s journey up the Congo River to meet the 
remarkable Mr Kurtz. It reveals Conrad at the height of his powers as a 
writer of 
great vividness, intensity, and sophistication. ‘An Outpost of 
Progress’ is also set in central Africa and offers a fiercely sardonic view 
of European imperialism. ‘Karain’, with its Malaysian setting, questions 
conventional ideas of the contrasts between races. ‘Youth’ is a largely 
autobiographical account of an ill-fated voyage in which Marlow makes 
his first appearance. 
The four tales variously appraise the glamour, folly, and rapacity of 
imperial adventure. All are concerned with illusions and all, in their 
diverse ways, display the brilliance of Joseph Conrad, creator of exotic 
vistas, adventurous narratives, and acutely ironic insights into human 
nature and the bases of civilization.