1 
 
Section I Important Notes, Contents, and Definitions 
The Board of Directors (the “Board”), the Supervisory Committee and the directors, 
supervisors and senior management of the Company confirm the truthfulness, accuracy and 
completeness of the contents of this Annual Report and there are no misrepresentations, 
misleading statements or material omissions from this Annual Report, and they accept joint 
and several responsibilities for the truthfulness, accuracy and completeness of the contents 
herein. 
Mr. Dong Ming, the person in charge of the Company, Mr. Ma Jia, the accounting officer, 
and Ms. Xu Jing, the head of accounting center (accounting supervisor), hereby declare that 
they warrant the truthfulness, accuracy, and completeness of the financial statements in this 
Annual Report. 
All directors of the Company attended the Board meeting in respect of considering and 
approving this Annual Report. 
The Company kindly requests investors to read through this Annual Report and pay 
special attention to “XI. Outlook of the Company” in the “Section III Management Discussion 
and Analysis.” This part does not constitute our substantial commitments to investors. 
Investors are advised to pay attention to investment risks. 
The profit distribution plan considered and approved by the Board of Directors is as 
follows: Based on the total share capital of the Company of 1,796,862,549 shares as at the end 
of 2023 less 12,599,946 shares repurchased by the special securities account for share 
repurchase, i.e., on the basis of 1,784,262,603 shares, a cash dividend of RMB 20.77 (tax 
inclusive) for every 10 shares will be paid to all shareholders, 0 bonus shares (tax inclusive) will 
be distributed, and 0 shares will be issued to all shareholders for every 10 shares by way of 
conversion of capital reserve. 
This report has been prepared in Chinese and translated into English. Should there be any 
discrepancies or misunderstandings between the two versions, the Chinese version shall prevail. 
 
 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
2 
 
Contents 
Section I Important Notes, Contents, and Definitions ........................................... 1 
Section II Company Profile and Key Financial Indicators 
................................... 6 
Section III Management Discussion and Analysis ................................................ 11 
Section IV Corporate Governance ......................................................................... 59 
Section V Environmental and Social Responsibilities .......................................... 92 
Section VI Significant Events 
................................................................................ 101 
Section VII Changes in Shareholdings and Particulars about Shareholders 
.. 128 
Section VIII Preference Shares 
............................................................................ 138 
Section IX Bonds .................................................................................................... 139 
Section X Financial Statements 
........................................................................... 140 
 
 
 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
3 
 
Documents Available for Inspection 
(I) Financial statements affixed with the signatures and stamps of the person in 
charge of the Company, the accounting officer, and the general manager of accounting 
center; 
(II) Originals of the audit report containing the stamps of the external accounting 
firm and the signatures and stamps of the registered accountants; 
(III) Originals of all the Company’s documents and announcements publicly 
disclosed on the Securities Times, Shanghai Securities News, China Securities Journal, 
and http://www.cninfo.com.cn during the reporting period; 
(IV) Other related materials. 
 
 
 
 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
4 
 
Definitions 
Term 
Definitions 
CSRC 
China Securities Regulatory Commission 
SZSE 
Shenzhen Stock Exchange 
Hong Kong Stock Exchange 
The Stock Exchange of Hong Kong Limited 
SASAC of Yunnan Province 
State-owned Assets Supervision and Administration Commission of Yunnan Provincial People’s 
Government 
CSRC Yunnan Bureau 
Yunnan Bureau of China Securities Regulatory Commission 
The Company / Yunnan Baiyao 
Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
New Huadu 
New Huadu Industrial Group Co., Ltd. 
Yunnan Investment Group 
Yunnan Provincial Investment Holdings Group Co., Ltd. 
Yunnan State-owned Equity Operation 
Management Company 
Yunnan State-owned Equity Operation Management Co., Ltd. 
Yunnan Hehe 
Yunnan Hehe (Group) Co., Ltd. 
Jiangsu Yuyue 
Jiangsu Yuyue Science & Technology Development Co., Ltd. 
Baiyao Holdings 
Yunnan Baiyao Holdings Co., Ltd. 
YNBY International / Ban Loong Holdings 
YNBY International Limited (Formerly Ban Loong Holdings Limited) 
Shanghai Pharma 
Shanghai Pharmaceuticals Holding Co., Ltd. 
Mixed ownership reform 
Baiyao Holdings, former controlling shareholder of Yunnan Baiyao, introduced strategic 
investors New Huadu and Jiangsu Yuyue by capital increase 
Merger and overall listing 
A transaction that Yunan Baiyao merged with Baiyao Holdings by issuing shares to all 
shareholders of Baiyao Holdings, including SASAC of Yunnan Province, New Huadu and 
Jiangsu Yuyue 
Incentive Plan 
2020 Stock Option Incentive Plan 
General tender offer 
A mandatory general cash offer was made for all issued shares held by all shareholders of 
Ban Loong Holdings, except the offeror and its acting-in-concert parties 
Yunnan Pharma 
Yunnan Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd. 
Teayield 
Yunnan Baiyao Teayield Co., Ltd. 
CEO 
Chief Executive Officer 
IP 
Intellectual Property, ie value contentization 
D to C 
Direct to Customer, ie the marketing model that directly faces consumers 
ESG 
Environmental, Social and Governance 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
5 
 
Term 
Definitions 
AI 
Artificial Intelligence 
VBP 
Volume-based procurement 
OTC 
Over-the-counter drug 
DTP pharmacies 
The pharmacies that provide more valuable professional services directly to patients 
Reporting period 
The period from January 1, 2023 to December 31, 2023 
RMB, RMB’0,000, RMB’00,000,000 
Expressed in the Chinese currency of Renminbi, expressed in tens of thousands of 
Renminbi, expressed in hundreds of millions of Renminbi 
 
 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
6 
 
Section II Company Profile and Key Financial Indicators 
I. Company Profile 
Stock abbreviation 
Yunnan Baiyao 
Stock Code 
000538 
Stock abbreviation before change 
(if any)  
None 
Stock Exchange 
Shenzhen Stock Exchange 
Company name in Chinese 
云南白药集团股份有限公司 
Company abbreviation in Chinese 
云南白药 
Company name in English (if any)  
YUNNAN BAIYAO GROUP CO., LTD. 
Company abbreviation in English 
(if any)  
YUNNAN BAIYAO 
Legal representative of the 
Company 
Dong Ming 
Registered address 
No. 3686 Yunnan Baiyao Street, Chenggong District, Kunming City, Yunnan Province 
Postal code of the registered 
address 
650500 
Historical changes in the 
Company’s registered address 
No. 51 Xiba Road, Kunming City, Yunnan Province, National High-tech Industrial Development 
Zone, Kunming City, Yunnan Province (registered address of the Group); No. 222 Second Ring 
West Road, Kunming City, Yunnan Province (registered address of the parent company of the 
Group); No. 3686 Yunnan Baiyao Street, Chenggong District, Kunming City, Yunnan Province 
Office address 
No. 3686 Yunnan Baiyao Street, Chenggong District, Kunming City, Yunnan Province 
Postal code of the office address 
650500 
Company website 
www.yunnanbaiyao.com.cn 
Email address 
000538@ynby.cn 
II. Contact Person and Contact Information 
 
Secretary of the Board of Directors 
 Representative of Securities Affairs 
Name 
Qian Yinghui 
Li Mengjue 
Contact address 
No. 3686 Yunnan Baiyao Street, Chenggong District, 
Kunming City, Yunnan Province 
No. 3686 Yunnan Baiyao Street, Chenggong 
District, Kunming City, Yunnan Province 
Tel 
0871-66226106 
0871-66226106 
Fax 
0871-66203531 
0871-66203531 
E-mail 
000538dm@ynby.cn 
000538@ynby.cn 
III. Information Disclosure and Location 
Website of the stock exchange where the Company 
discloses its Annual Report 
http://www.cninfo.com.cn 
Name and website of the media where the 
Company discloses its Annual Report 
Securities Times, Shanghai Securities News, China Securities Journal 
Location where the Company prepares and places 
its Annual Report 
Company Archives Room 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
7 
 
IV. Changes in Registration 
Unified Social Credit Code 
9153000021652214XX 
Changes in the principal businesses of the 
Company since it was listed (if any)  
None 
Changes in the Company’s controlling 
shareholders (if any)  
1997: Yunnan Pharmaceutical Corporation 
1999: Yunnan Pharmaceutical Group Co., Ltd. 
2003: Yunnan Yunyao Co., Ltd. 
2010: Yunnan Baiyao Holdings Co., Ltd. (“Baiyao Holdings”) 
In 2017, Baiyao Holdings was the controlling shareholder but the Company 
had no de facto controller. 
In 2019, after the cancellation of the Company’s shares held by Baiyao 
Holdings, the Company had no controlling shareholders and no de facto 
controller. 
V. Other Information 
The accounting firm engaged by the Company 
The sponsor engaged by the Company to perform continuous supervision duties during the reporting period 
□ Applicable 
  Not applicable 
The financial advisor engaged by the Company to perform continuous supervision duties during the reporting period 
□ Applicable 
  Not applicable 
VI. Key Accounting Data and Financial Indicators 
Whether the Company needs retroactive adjustment or restatement of accounting data in prior years or not 
□Yes  
  No 
 
2023 
2022 
Increase/decrease compared 
to the previous year 
2021 
Operating revenue (RMB)  
39,111,292,156.00 36,488,372,649.73 
7.19% 36,373,919,016.03 
Net profit attributable to shareholders of 
the listed company (RMB)  
4,093,782,074.02 
3,001,125,887.45 
36.41% 
2,804,916,715.84 
Net profit attributable to shareholders of 
the listed company after deducting non-
recurring profits and losses (RMB)  
3,763,605,361.07 
3,232,024,514.64 
16.45% 
3,339,920,238.78 
Net cash flows from operating activities 
(RMB)  
3,502,742,348.02 
3,209,410,032.57 
9.14% 
5,223,278,282.50 
Basic earnings per share (RMB/share)  
2.29 
1.90 
20.53% 
2.21 
Diluted earnings per share (RMB/share)  
2.29 
1.90 
20.53% 
2.18 
Weighted average ROE 
10.51% 
7.87% 
2.64% 
7.58% 
Name of the accounting firm 
Mazars Certified Public Accountants (SGP) 
Office address of the accounting firm 
17-18/F, Changjiang Industrial Building, No. 166, Zhongbei Road, 
Shuiguohu Subdistrict, Wuchang District, Wuhan 
Name of signing accountants 
Yang Manhui, Yang Fan 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
8 
 
 
End of 2023 
End of 2022 
Increase/decrease compared 
to the end of the previous 
year 
End of 2021 
Total assets (RMB)  
53,784,293,183.93 53,320,943,868.74 
0.87% 52,335,429,198.95 
Net assets attributable to shareholders 
of the listed company (RMB)  
39,879,122,031.51 38,503,673,731.86 
3.57% 38,227,432,067.86 
The lower of the Company’s net profits before and after deducting non-recurring profits and losses in the latest three accounting 
years are all negative, and the Company’s audit report for the previous year shows uncertainties in the Company’s ability to continue 
as a going concern 
□Yes  
  No 
The lower of the Company’s net profits before and after deducting non-recurring profits and losses is negative 
□Yes  
  No 
Total share capital of the Company as at the trading day prior to the disclosure: 
Total share capital of the Company as at the trading day prior to the 
disclosure (shares)  
1,796,862,549.00 
Fully diluted earnings per share calculated based on the latest share capital: 
Preferred share dividend paid 
0.00 
Perpetual bond interest paid (RMB)  
0.00 
Fully diluted earnings per share calculated based on the latest share 
capital (RMB/share)  
2.2783 
VII. Differences in Accounting Data under Chinese Accounting Standards (CAS) and Overseas 
Accounting Standards 
1. Differences in the net profits and net assets in financial statements disclosed respectively under 
International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) and CAS 
□Applicable 
      Not applicable 
During the reporting period, there was no difference in net profits and net assets in financial statements disclosed respectively 
under IFRS and CAS. 
2. Differences in the net profit and net assets in financial statements disclosed respectively under overseas 
accounting standards and CAS 
□Applicable 
      Not applicable 
During the reporting period, there was no difference in the net profit and assets in financial statements disclosed respectively under 
overseas accounting standards and CAS. 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
9 
 
VIII. Key Financial Indicators by Quarter 
Unit: RMB 
Note: The Company reported operating revenue of RMB 9.423 billion in the fourth quarter of 2023. The gross margin was 23.77%, 
up 2.76 percentage points from the fourth quarter of 2022. In the fourth quarter of 2023, promotional activities and employee benefits 
payable were more concentrated than in the previous three quarters, and Yunnan Baiyao experienced a decline in investment income 
from Shanghai Pharmaceuticals Holding Co., Ltd (“Shanghai Pharma”) and a decline in gains from changes in the fair value of financial 
assets held for trading after the completion of the disposal of secondary market securities investments. 
Whether there is any significant difference between any of the above-mentioned financial indicator or their total number and those 
disclosed in the Company’s any quarterly statements or interim statements 
□ Yes  
 No 
IX. Non-recurring Profits and Losses and their Amounts 
Applicable 
 □Not applicable 
Unit: RMB 
Item 
Amount in 2023 
Amount in 2022 
Amount in 2021 
Remarks 
Profits and losses from disposal of non-current assets 
(including the write-offs for the accrued impairment of 
assets)  
110,477,911.97 
-62,684,387.81 
621,711,864.34 
 
Government subsidies included in the current profits and 
losses (excluding the government subsidies closely 
related to regular businesses of the Company in line with 
national policies and received by a determined standard, 
with a continuous impact on the Company’s profits and 
losses) 
75,375,220.16 
99,898,358.75 
178,356,401.29 
 
Profits and losses from changes in fair value of financial 
assets and liabilities held for trading by non-financial 
enterprises, and from disposal of such financial assets and 
liabilities, except for effective hedging operations related 
to regular businesses of the Company 
199,779,795.08 
-403,800,800.93 
-1,346,093,999.30 
 
Profits and losses arising from entrusted investment or 
asset management 
3,146,335.87 
 
 
 
Profits and losses arising from contingencies unrelated to 
regular businesses of the Company 
 
4,190,474.35 
606,039.83 
 
Non-operating revenue and expenses other than the 
above 
-1,919,286.26 
3,035,335.64 
-3,394,986.29 
 
Other profits and losses satisfying the definition of non-
recurring profits and losses 
41,588,740.24 
80,566,869.79 
1,200,931.04 
 
Less: Amount affected by the income tax 
69,955,013.92 
-48,913,488.78 
-13,530,812.00 
 
Amount affected by minority interests (after tax)  
28,316,990.19 
1,017,965.76 
920,585.85 
 
Total 
330,176,712.95 
-230,898,627.19 
-535,003,522.94 
-- 
 
Q1 
Q2 
Q3 
Q4 
Operating revenue 
10,512,750,996.14 
9,796,621,853.93 
9,379,159,224.37 
9,422,760,081.56 
Net profit attributable to shareholders of 
the listed company 
1,517,988,356.56 
1,310,023,258.74 
1,295,465,799.15 
-29,695,340.43 
Net profit attributable to shareholders of 
the listed company after deducting non-
recurring profits and losses 
1,402,680,418.31 
1,334,375,367.59 
1,116,150,641.76 
-89,601,066.59 
Net cash flows from operating activities 
733,744,202.46 
1,518,207,167.64 
337,635,107.01 
913,155,870.91 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
10 
 
Other profits and losses satisfying the definition of non-recurring profits and losses: 
Applicable 
 □Not applicable 
Other non-recurring profits and losses that meet the definition of non-recurring profits and losses mainly 
include other non-recurring profits and losses such as interest on fixed deposits and value added tax credit. 
Note for the definition of non-recurring profits and losses set out in the No.1 Explanatory Announcement on Information 
Disclosure for Companies Offering Their Securities to the Public - Non-recurring Profits and Losses, as recurring profits and losses 
□Applicable 
      Not applicable 
The Company does not define any non-recurring profits and losses set out in the No.1 Explanatory 
Announcement on Information Disclosure for Companies Offering Their Securities to the Public - Non-recurring 
Profits and Losses as recurring profits and losses. 
 
 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
11 
 
Section III Management Discussion and Analysis 
I. Industry Landscape of the Company during the Reporting Period 
(I) Industry landscape and development trends 
In 2023, amidst profound industry transformations and ongoing healthcare system reforms, the healthcare 
sector encountered a dynamic landscape of challenges and opportunities. On the industrial demand side, demand 
growth in the industry has been ascertained by population aging and a resurgence in consumer spending. Moreover, 
the evolving concept of national health management and the changing consumer demands pose new requirements 
for reshaping the industry’s product categories. With the implementation of industry policies, including the new 
medical insurance mechanism, volume-based procurement (VBP), and drug purchase outside with a prescription, 
the out-of-hospital over-the-counter (OTC) market witnessed remarkable expansion, underscoring its substantial 
growth potential. The trends of chaining and centralization in offline retail pharmacies further heightened, while the 
direct-to-patient (DTP) pharmacy channel experienced more favorable conditions. The online channel embarked on 
a period of rapid development, with a trend to explore the innovation strategies of “patient-centered” omni-channel 
operation. On the industrial supply side, the healthcare industry epitomized the characteristic of supply creating 
demand, with innovation serving as the perpetual driving force for the pharmaceutical sector. Only products that 
truly align with consumer value demands can help businesses navigate through cycles and achieve sustainable 
development in the market. 
The contribution of TCM to the national health service and the importance of TCM in promoting the 
implementation of the “Healthy China” strategy have become increasingly prominent. China should inherit the 
essence of TCM while pursuing innovation. The General Office of the State Council has issued the Implementation 
Plan for Major Projects for the Revitalization and Development of Traditional Chinese Medicine, which sets forth 
goals for the revitalization and development of TCM, covering areas such as the TCM service system, 
comprehensive service capacity, scientific and technological innovation capacity, talent pool development, TCM 
quality, and international presence. The plan also provides specific requirements to promote the revitalization and 
development of TCM. The National Medical Products Administration (NMPA) has issued the Special Provisions 
on the Administration of Registration of Traditional Chinese Medicines, which emphasize the dialectical approach 
needed to balance the inheritance and innovation of TCM, accelerate the establishment of an evidence-based system 
for TCM evaluation, define multiple indicators for assessing the therapeutic efficacy of TCM, and further drive the 
development of innovative TCM. The introduction of the “three-combination” evidence-based system for TCM 
evaluation (ie a TCM registration and approval evidence-based system that integrates TCM theory, human use 
experience, and clinical trials) has further clarified the guiding principles for the innovative R&D and approval of 
TCM. The system presents new opportunities for R&D of new TCM and re-exploration of well-known classic 
prescriptions, and improve the approval and marketing processes of TCM, providing the sector with additional 
avenues for growth. With the full implementation of VBP of TCM products, the management and marketing of 
these products have entered a new phase. Market leadership will be taken by high-quality, large-scale TCM 
enterprises that have established a comprehensive supply chain. In terms of market trends, the increasing influence 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
12 
 
of the “Silver Economy” in China has led to golden opportunities in the field of “musculoskeletal care, healthcare 
and chronic disease management.” Meanwhile, with the emergence of the “new Chinese healthcare” and other 
concepts, the consumer demand for TCM products and nourishing products has been expanding, and the retail 
market has witnessed continuous improvement. 
Within the Big Health industry, aging population and stronger awareness of health management spurred 
medical demands, and the consumer demands and patterns tend to be more diversified. In terms of consumer demand, 
the consumers have gradually shifted to “rational consumption.” Products with characteristics such as satisfying 
multi-level personalized needs, having more scientific ingredient formulations and segmented efficacy claims, and 
possessing strong social attributes become priorities of consumers. As for the product mix, consumer expectations 
have also evolved, with stricter requirements on cost-effectiveness while pursuing quality. As costs soar, many 
consumer products have entered a phase of balancing price reduction with quantity increase. Consumer 
classification is becoming increasingly evident. In terms of channel, driven by the “near-field” and “digitalization” 
trends of consumer goods channels, e-commerce channels experienced sustained growth, with content e-commerce 
and instant retail expanding rapidly. Against the backdrop of shrinking traditional large channels, the transformation 
and upgrading of traditional channels represented by smaller grocery stores accelerated the reshaping of offline 
business formats. Thanks to meeting diverse consumer demands such as immediate, urgent, and emerging needs, 
the online-to-offline (O2O) model has rapidly developed, bringing sales increments to most product categories. 
Within segments, the oral care market has witnessed channel fragmentation, intensifying competition and 
necessitating further exploration of oral cleansing and care needs. Personal care brands have gained market share, 
while national brands have made significant breakthroughs, presenting both opportunities and challenges for 
Chinese enterprises. The health industry is entering an era of “discerning” expenditure. To stay ahead in this fiercely 
competitive landscape, companies must adopt refined management and operations in channel and retail terminals, 
acquire precise insights into consumer characteristics and demands, and enhance the cost competitiveness of the 
supply side. 
(II) Industry position 
The CPC Central Committee and the State Council attach great importance to the development of TCM, 
positioning the inheritance and innovation of TCM as an important aspect of the socialist cause with Chinese 
characteristics in the new era. The report to the 20th CPC National Congress has explicitly stated that we should 
“promote the inheritance and innovation of TCM.” The Outline of 14th Five-Year Plan for Economic and Social 
Development and Long-Range Objectives through the Year 2035 of China put forth measures to promote the 
inheritance and innovation of TCM, providing robust support and impetus for TCM’s inheritance and innovation in 
the new era. 
At the end of 2023, the Company celebrated its thirtieth anniversary of listing. Over the past three decades 
since its listing, Yunnan Baiyao has maintained continuous growth, with operating revenue growing from RMB 58 
million in 1993 to RMB 39.111 billion in 2023, representing an increase of 673 times; the net profit attributable to 
the parent company growing from RMB 13 million in 1993 to RMB 4.094 billion in 2023, representing an increase 
of 314 times. While continuously improving its intrinsic quality, the Company has always adhered to its corporate 
social responsibility, continued to enhance its dividend distribution capacity, increased the level of dividend 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
13 
 
distribution, and distributed the dividends to its shareholders for 30 consecutive years. As of 2022, the cumulative 
cash dividends exceeded RMB 20.7 billion. Through stable operation and continuous dividend distribution, the 
Company has shared the achievements of corporate development with all stakeholders, created lucrative value 
returns for long-term value investors, and further promoted the high-quality development of the enterprise. 
Yunnan Baiyao has consistently focused on integrating TCM into modern life, explored the endogenous 
potential of traditional medical products, responded to the needs of modern life with product innovation and infused 
traditional brands and TCM products with renewed vitality. In the pharmaceutical products domain, the Company’s 
roots lie in Yunnan Baiyao Powder with a century-long legacy. Through persistent exploration and innovation, 
Yunnan Baiyao has progressively developed a series of core pharmaceutical products encompassing diverse forms 
like aerosol, plaster, tincture, and woundplast. In terms of personal care products, the Company has successfully 
combined core ingredients of Yunnan Baiyao with oral care items and created a group of oral care products, notably 
exemplified by Yunnan Baiyao toothpaste. This achievement stands as a prominent case for TCM enterprises 
venturing into cross-border innovation and reshaping consumer preferences. Leveraging its successful development 
strategies in pharmaceutical and health product sectors, the Company has expanded its business footprint into 
various domains, including natural medicine, TCM decoction pieces, special medicines, medical devices, personal 
care products, and healthcare food. This move enables the Company’s evolution from a TCM manufacturing 
enterprise to a modern, Big Health-oriented entity.  
The Company has 567 drug approval numbers and 316 varieties, covering 222 varieties of Chinese patent 
medicines, including 43 exclusive varieties. The Company not only vigorously promotes the secondary development 
of TCM varieties, but also enhances the innovation of new TCM products through R&D investment and scientific 
and technological strength. In the secondary development of TCM products, the Company focuses on the R&D of 
Gongxuening Capsule for hemostasis and anti-inflammation, and Qixuekang Oral Liquid for improving Qi 
deficiency and blood stasis. To enrich the new TCMs, we have assigned superior R&D resources to incubate key 
R&D projects for three new TCMs under Category 1.1, including the Panax notoginseng Tablet for treatment of 
heart-pulse stasis syndrome related symptoms, the Fuqi Guben Ointment, the first new TCM approved for clinical 
syndrome for warming kidney and consolidating foundation, and Xianghuo Spray for patients during the recovery 
period of COVID-19 or with wind-cold related syndrome. In addition, we have carried out the development of 
Chinese herbal preparations for two classic prescriptions (PZ-018, PZ-019). 
In 2023, Yunnan Baiyao continued to maintain its market leading position in several business areas. The 
Company’s core product, Yunnan Baiyao (Powder) occupied a 14.5% retail market share of systemic Chinese patent 
medicines for orthopedic injuries in the musculoskeletal system, ranking No.1 in the market. Yunnan Baiyao 
Aerosol occupied a 91.0% retail market share of the topical Chinese patent medicine aerosol for pains in 
musculoskeletal joints and muscle, ranking No.1 in the market. Yunnan Baiyao Woundplast occupied a 66.5% retail 
market share of woundplasts (medicated) for external hemostasis, ranking No.1 in the market (source: CHIS 
System). Yunnan Baiyao Toothpaste gained a market share of 24.60% in the domestic market in 2023, maintaining 
its No.1 position in market share (source: Nielsen Retail Research Data (YTD2312)). In the pharmaceutical 
distribution segment, Yunnan Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd (“Yunnan Pharma”) maintained a regional dominant market 
position in the public hospitals at or above the county level in Yunnan Province. 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
14 
 
II. Principal Businesses of the Company during the Reporting Period 
(I) Product and business 
The Company has four business groups, namely Pharmaceutical Business Group, Health Products Business 
Group, Traditional Chinese Medicine (TCM) Resources Business Group and Yunnan Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd 
(pharmaceutical distribution). These business groups serve as the foundation for the Company’s production and 
operations. 
Pharmaceutical Business Group focuses on the products of Yunnan Baiyao series, (for example, Yunnan 
Baiyao Aerosol, Yunnan Baiyao Plaster, Yunnan Baiyao Woundplast, etc), which are mainly used for hemostasis, 
pain relief, swelling reduction, and blood stasis elimination. The BG extends its offerings to include other branded 
TCMs with natural characteristics, covering areas such as tonifying Qi and blood, treating colds and flu, 
cardiovascular health, gynecology, pediatrics, and more. The BG is also actively involved in the development of 
Panax notoginseng botanical supplements, aiming to identify new avenues for growth. 
Health Products Business Group, with its core focus on the toothpaste category, relies on its robust brand 
infrastructure encompassing people, products, and consumer scenarios. Embracing a user-centric approach, the BG 
actively explores new consumer scenarios and introduces innovative product categories, particularly in the realms 
of oral care and Yangyuanqing anti-hair loss solutions. 
TCM Resources Business Group capitalizes on Yunnan Province’s unique medicinal plant resources. While 
ensuring the high-quality, efficient, and cost-effective supply of TCM raw materials across the Group, the BG strives 
to develop both B-end (including Panax notoginseng series, branded medicinal materials, raw material extracts) 
and C-end (including TCM decoction pieces and healthcare food) products. Moreover, the BG continues to advance 
the digitalization, platform-based operation, and integrated management of TCM resource cultivation, while 
exploring growth potential. 
Yunnan Pharma remains steadfast in pursuit of maintaining its leading market share among pharmaceutical 
distribution companies in Yunnan Province. It has achieved full coverage in all 16 prefectures and cities of Yunnan 
Province, with its channels radiating across major retail chain pharmacies. It also assists governments and medical 
institutions in building better management and service systems, providing high-quality and modern pharmaceutical 
supply chain service solutions for upstream and downstream customers. 
(II) Business model 
1. Transformation from a traditional manufacturing enterprise to a provider of comprehensive solutions  
Driven by innovative biotechnology, artificial intelligence, and big data computing capabilities, the global 
healthcare industry is undergoing a transformation from evidence-based medicine to precision medicine, which has 
driven the global pharmaceutical industry’s transition from large-scale industrial production to personalized 
approaches and from chemical drugs to biologics and therapies. The market demand has also shifted from a singular 
“product” to “comprehensive solutions.” In this context, Yunnan Baiyao is gradually transitioning from a traditional 
manufacturing enterprise to a “globally leading provider of comprehensive solutions.” We are embarking on a path 
of platformization and digitalization upgrade. The Company remains focused on our principal businesses while 
actively expanding the potential of key sectors such as pharmaceuticals, health products, TCM resources, and 
commercial logistics. This ensures the steady growth of the Company. Looking ahead in the medium to long term, 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
15 
 
we are committed to our established strategic tracks. By leveraging a “dual-wheel drive” strategy of internal growth 
and external expansion, and introducing innovative products and establishing a commercial platform that facilitates 
the entry of innovative medicines into the Chinese market, we set to position Yunnan Baiyao as a globally leading 
provider of comprehensive healthcare solutions, with the capability to represent China’s health industry in 
international competition. 
2. Transformation from a regional enterprise to an international enterprise with cross-regional presence 
Yunnan Baiyao has planned the establishment of regional strategic functional centers in regions such as 
Kunming, Beijing, and Shanghai. Among these, Kunming is the Group’s headquarters, the production facility, and 
the hub for TCM R&D. It still serves as the focal point from which the Company expands its influence outward. 
Once completed, Kunming R&D Center will concentrate on TCMs and natural drugs research, capitalizing on the 
abundant local flora and fauna. This will complement the Company’s traditional R&D strengths in natural plant 
extraction and further enhance its independent R&D capabilities. Shanghai Center establishes an open and 
innovative incubation industrial science park. Beijing Center utilizes the platform of the Peking University - Yunnan 
Baiyao International Medical Research Center (PKU-YBIMRC) to strengthen collaboration between enterprises, 
universities and research institutes. In addition, Beijing Center closely focuses on world cutting-edge technology 
researches, and explores new mechanisms for enterprise-university cooperation, with an aim to attract world-class 
scientists, accelerate transformation of academic and scientific research achievements, and create a competitive 
medical brand. 
The Company is creating an industrial platform that leverages resource-rich highland regions with favorable 
policies. This involves cross-regional expansion to effectively harness resources and develop core competitive 
advantages. 
3. Transformation from traditional endogenous growth to a model “driven by dual wheels” 
The R&D and innovation model of global pharmaceutical companies has shifted from the traditional 
endogenous R&D to a new model characterized by patent collaborations and M&As. Against the backdrop of 
payment system reforms such as China’s drug VBP and medical insurance fee control, Chinese pharmaceutical 
companies can no longer rely solely on domestic market-oriented business models and expansion strategies to meet 
their long-term development needs as they engage in the process of internationalization. On one hand, Yunnan 
Baiyao continues to cultivate and explore the potential of its existing business sectors, thus accumulating momentum 
for its significant leapfrog advancements. Also, the Company strives to achieve commercial collaboration, 
technological exchange, and data sharing across business sectors, and work together to create a moat for Yunnan 
Baiyao. On the other hand, the Company will continue to promote the introduction of innovative products at home 
and abroad through various business models such as M&As, patent authorization, and joint venture construction. 
Yunnan Baiyao is laying the foundation for its transformation into “a comprehensive solution provider” by 
constructing market-competitive products and services and focusing on developing comprehensive service 
capabilities around the medical sector. 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
16 
 
4. Transformation from training internal talents to “training internal talents + introducing external 
talents” 
The Company believes in the pivotal role of talent in driving its development. It has established a 
comprehensive training system and various avenues for employee growth, fostering both specialized knowledge 
and comprehensive skills, with the mutual development of talents and the Company as the objective. The Company 
will leverage its advantageous resources to actively recruit high-caliber specialists across various domains such as 
strategic investment, medical academia, drug R&D, and user operations. This aims to bolster independent R&D 
capabilities and global resource integration expertise, drive technological innovation in pharmaceuticals, 
particularly in the realm of biopharmaceuticals, and integrate emerging information technologies, for achieving a 
leapfrog development, and creating a comprehensive pharmaceutical solution that integrates multiple product forms. 
The Company is further strengthening its financial strategies to provide robust support for Yunnan Baiyao’s 
strategic objectives. It will also enhance operational capabilities in such areas as revamping the management of 
working capital along the entire value chain and improving the effectiveness of enterprise investment and 
acquisition value management. By nurturing internal talents, welcoming external experts, and fully utilizing its 
organizational environment for talent development and market resources, the Company strives to build a high-
quality talent pool aligned with its future growth requirements. 
5. Transformation from a traditional manufacturing enterprise to a smart enterprise based on digital 
operations 
The Company is committed to building a digital driving force and actively seeking for transformation to digital 
operations with customers as the center, so as to bring new value propositions to customers, and improve their 
experience. Leveraging cutting-edge digital technologies such as cloud computing, big data, artificial intelligence, 
5G, and the Internet of Things, the Company drives innovation and development. The Company also seeks for 
transformation from a function-oriented process to a process that connects customer scenarios to drive the 
Company’s management change and organizational development. Also, the Company will establish a unified “data 
base” and governance strategy, and build an intelligent decision-making system “based on facts.” In terms of talent 
management, Yunnan Baiyao has built the ONE-BY digital talent lifecycle management platform and formulated a 
digital transformation strategy for human resources. By adopting scenario-based, automated, group-oriented, role-
based, and data-driven approaches, the Company has gradually digitized its human resources practices. 
Pharmaceutical BG has leveraged IP-driven activities and projects to create a synergy between online and offline 
channels, enabling targeted marketing based on user value. Health Products BG has achieved significant 
advancements in its toothpaste factory, implementing intelligent manufacturing and digital twinning with Industry 
4.0 principles. TCM Resources BG has developed a digital Panax notoginseng industry platform, facilitating 
profound connections between users and participants in the Panax notoginseng industry. This platform enables 
automated production and fosters an industry ecosystem, ensuring that products and services can reach users more 
efficiently. Yunnan Pharma continues to expand its pharmaceutical distribution capabilities by establishing an 
intelligent drug logistics system that covers the entire province. Yunnan Baiyao Group Medicine E-commerce Co., 
Ltd has established an AI-based big data platform to support intelligent development, promoting the full-cycle 
upgrade of digital health from “medical + pharmaceutical + insurance” to “service + product + payment.” 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
17 
 
III. Analysis on Core Competitiveness 
(I) Brand strength 
Yunnan Baiyao is a well-established Chinese heritage brand with a history of over 120 years. The Company 
places the Yunnan Baiyao brand at its core, evolving from a pharmaceutical brand to cover a diverse range of sub-
brands, including personal healthcare products, crude drugs, and Big Health products. We have built a diverse 
portfolio of brands and continuously expanded our reach to target audiences, enhancing our brand value over the 
long term. With the continuous enhancement of brand market value, brands have emerged as the focal point in the 
global economic arena. Throughout its more than a century of evolution, Yunnan Baiyao has consistently pursued 
innovation and transformation. Looking ahead, the Company is poised to increase investments in technological 
innovation and expedite the optimization and transformation of its product development processes, solidifying the 
Company’s presence on the global stage. This highlighted the sustained market acknowledgment of Yunnan 
Baiyao’s brand value during the reporting period. In July 2023, Brand Finance, a British brand evaluation agency, 
released the Healthcare 2023 - The Annual Report on Ranking of the Most Valuable and Strongest Pharma, Medical 
Devices and Healthcare Services Brands by Value. Yunnan Baiyao was included in the shortlist of the global top 
25 most valuable pharmaceutical brands for the third time. In November 2023, Interbrand, a global brand strategy 
consulting and design firm, released its 2023 Best Chinese Brands Ranking. Yunnan Baiyao was ranked 35th among 
Chinese brands and secured the No.1 position in the pharmaceutical industry. 
(II) Talent team advantages 
The Company has formed a professional management team with a market awareness across various business 
sectors. In the fierce industry competition, the Company has always maintained a sharp business acumen of market 
changes and profound insight into industry trends. We persistently delve into the essence and core values of our 
century-old brand, fostering innovation and incubating high-quality product portfolios to address the iterative 
upgrades in consumer demand. This drives the integration of TCM into modern life and achieves a long-term, 
sustainable, stable and sound development of the Company. Therefore, the Company has long been among the 
forefront in TCM industry in terms of operating revenue, net profit, market value, and other indicators. 
The Company has leveraged the benefits of market-oriented institutional mechanisms to attract a diverse array 
of top-tier talents. During the reporting period, Mr. Zhao Yingming was appointed as the Company’s Chief 
Commercial Officer and Senior Vice President. The Company’s talent team building has brought fresh blood into 
its management improvement, new business incubation, business expansion, digital construction, and other fields, 
boosting its overall capacity to expand into new business ventures. Following its official launch, PKU-YBIMRC, 
an R&D platform representing a groundbreaking industry-university collaboration, has attracted renowned scientists 
from around the world. With this, the Company significantly enhanced its existing capabilities in TCM research 
and established leading-edge R&D capabilities for modern pharmaceutical products across various domains.  
At the beginning of 2024, the Board of Directors elected Mr. Zhang Wenxue as the Chairman of the Tenth 
Board of Directors. The Company embarked on a steady implementation of organizational transformation with the 
core principle of “strengthening the front-end, empowering the middle-end, and optimizing the back-end.” This 
aims to shift the management and control model from financial control to strategic control, while building a more 
focused, streamlined, and efficient organizational structure. With such measures, the Company will enhance internal 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
18 
 
connectivity and collaboration, and provide a robust foundation for the Company to focus on principal businesses, 
integrate advantageous resources, and reinforce vertical control and empowered management. 
At present, the Company is trying to capitalize on emerging development opportunities with joint efforts of all 
its employees, with an aim to advance its stability, long-term prospects, and sustainability, enabling the Company 
to reach a new stage of development. 
(III) Innovation capabilities and product portfolio strengths 
Innovation is the fundamental path for enterprises to achieve high-quality development. The core essence of 
enterprise innovation lies in creating value. High-quality products serve as the driving force for value creation and 
sustainable development within an enterprise. They also serve as the medium through which users perceive the 
value of the enterprise. Yunnan Baiyao’s enduring vitality over the span of two centuries can be attributed to its 
commitment to continuous business and product innovation, addressing the ever-evolving consumer demands. The 
Company’s innovation strategy revolves around three key areas: customer-centric innovation, social innovation 
through collaborations, and digital innovation driven by advanced technologies like artificial intelligence, big data, 
and cloud computing. The Company is committed to integrating TCM into modern life. As such, the Company has 
evolved from a single hemostatic product manufacturer into a company with broad and diversified Yunnan Baiyao 
products encompassing various sectors within the Big Health industry. Among them, aerosol, plaster, capsule, 
toothpaste, woundplast, and Baoqi Panax notoginseng products rank among the top in the segmented market share, 
creating classic cases of TCM innovation such as “Yunnan Baiyao Woundplast” and “Yunnan Baiyao Toothpaste” 
and their use in daily scenarios. 
The Company’s commitment to continuously enhancing its R&D capabilities and driving digital 
transformation has constantly boosted its innovation capacity. To support its R&D team, the Company has 
established more than 10 national and provincial-level research platforms. It has also forged partnerships with 
various research institutions and universities to establish dedicated R&D centers focusing on the pharmaceutical 
field. These collaborations facilitate talent acquisition, scientific research, and knowledge exchange. By promoting 
close collaboration between basic research and clinical practices, the Company truly translates research findings 
into practical outcomes, encourages interdisciplinary integration, and fosters innovation. Furthermore, with a 
forward-thinking perspective, the Company drives its transformation into “digital and intelligent innovation” by 
leveraging advanced technologies such as artificial intelligence, big data and cloud computing, and continuously 
enhances operational efficiency in both management and R&D. As a model for cross-border presence of TCM 
enterprises, the Company has successfully expanded its business presence in pharmaceutical products and health 
products, and holds a leading position in various market segments. 
In the new era, the Company’s vitality lies in its product innovation capability. The coordinated development 
and mutual empowerment of pharmaceutical and consumer businesses can effectively mitigate market and policy 
risks across different economic cycles, achieving stable and sustainable overall business operations for the Company. 
(IV) Full industry chain advantage 
Yunnan Baiyao relies heavily on the biological resources in Yunnan Province and has always adhered to a 
long-term approach when establishing its presence in strategic areas, especially focusing on strategic TCM varieties 
like Paris polyphylla and Panax notoginseng. Over two decades of dedicated research on Paris polyphylla, a 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
19 
 
strategic medicinal material for the Company, the Company has successfully addressed the challenges associated 
with its cultivation. The Company has transformed this once-wild and endangered plant into a cultivatable medicinal 
material suitable for industrialization. Additionally, the Company has embraced digital infrastructure and 
information-oriented approaches in the Panax notoginseng industry chain, driving the digital transformation across 
the entire supply chain. Through digital solutions, Yunnan Baiyao ensures stable quality and full traceability of 
Panax notoginseng raw materials, effectively mitigating the quality fluctuations often associated with traditional 
agricultural products due to extensive processing. This progress allows the Company to gradually establish a fair 
pricing mechanism and standardized industrial operations, thereby leading and advancing the development and 
upgrading of the Panax notoginseng industry. The Company is extending the experience gained from establishing 
the “Digital Sanqi Industrial Platform” to other TCM supply chains. It is gradually building a long-term, stable, and 
high-quality traceable supply chain system for authentic Yunnan medicinal herbs such as Panax notoginseng, Paris 
polyphylla, Carthamus tinctorius, and Poria cocos. 
Driven by its long-term and continuous investment in key strategic varieties of TCM materials, the Company 
has achieved a complete and closed-loop industry chain from seed selection and cultivation to production and 
processing. This has established a robust supply system for strategic medicinal materials, effectively ensuring the 
quality stability of TCM raw materials and controlling the price fluctuations of strategic TCM raw materials. Such 
system has laid the groundwork for the long-term and sustainable development of Yunnan Baiyao. 
(V) Channel advantages 
In terms of pharmaceuticals, the Company has built a marketing network covering medical institutions and 
retail pharmacies across various provinces, regions, counties, and towns in China. In the advantageous OTC 
channels, we have nationwide coverage, serving 5,000 top-tier chains and reaching over 400,000 retail stores. 
Especially in areas with well-developed chain pharmacies such as East China, Hunan Province, Hubei Province, 
and Yunnan Province, the Company has achieved the high coverage, the penetration rate, and strong market control 
capabilities, and implemented the special marketing cooperation under the principle of “One Province, One Strategy” 
or even “One Chain Store, One Strategy”. The Company also has conducted extensive cooperation with major e-
commerce platforms such as Alibaba, JD.com, and Douyin, for expansion of online OTC sales channels, and 
achieved efficient reach to modern consumers by virtue of customized digital marketing. 
Regarding health products, Yunnan Baiyao has established a comprehensive nationwide sales team dedicated 
to Big Health products, covering all terminals. As of 2023, Yunnan Baiyao Toothpaste had maintained the largest 
toothpaste market share in omni-channels, encompassing hypermarkets, supermarkets, mini-stores, convenience 
stores, grocery stores and cosmetics store (source: Nielsen Retail Research Data YTD2312), with a high brand 
penetration in the oral product category. Through ongoing optimization of its full chain channels, the Company has 
not only strengthened its position in traditional offline channels but also experienced significant growth in emerging 
business models such as on-demand retail, community group purchases, and interest-based e-commerce. This 
demonstrates the Company’s willingness to experiment and adapt, taking measured steps forward and learning from 
any mistakes along the way, all of which enhance its ability to quickly respond to evolving business trends. Such 
channel advantages have driven significantly enhancement to Yunnan Baiyao’s market competitiveness, laying the 
foundation for the Company to continuously commercialize new products. 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
20 
 
IV. Analysis on Principal Businesses 
1. Overview 
(1) Overview of business data 
In 2023, despite the challenges posed by significant external environmental changes, the Company achieved a 
total operating revenue of RMB 39.111 billion, representing a net increase of RMB 2.623 billion from RMB 36.488 
billion in the same period last year, with a growth rate of 7.19%. Industrial revenue grew at a rate of 7.58%. The 
Company also achieved a net profit attributable to the parent company of RMB 4.094 billion, an increase of RMB 
1.093 billion from RMB 3.001 billion in the same period last year, with a growth rate of 36.41%. The weighted 
average return on equity was 10.51%, an increase of 2.64 percentage points compared to the previous year. The 
basic earnings per share were RMB 2.29 per share. At the end of the reporting period, the Company’s total assets 
amounted to RMB 53.784 billion, representing a 0.87% year-on-year growth. The cash and bank balance recorded 
RMB 14.218 billion, while the balance of financial assets held for trading decreased significantly by 93.82% 
compared to the beginning of the year, amounting to RMB 149 million. The net assets attributable to the 
shareholders of the listed company amounted to RMB 39.879 billion, representing a 3.57% year-on-year increase. 
(2) The four BGs focus on their principal businesses, driving quality and efficiency, and achieving steady 
and high-quality growth 
1) Pharmaceutical Business Group 
During the reporting period, Pharmaceutical Business Group achieved principal business revenue of RMB 
6.481 billion, representing an 8.16% year-on-year growth. The core products of the Baiyao series maintained a 
strong growth momentum, with a gross profit margin of 70.6%. Among them, the sales revenue of Yunnan Baiyao 
Aerosol contributed over RMB 1.7 billion, with a 15.27% year-on-year growth. The sales revenue of Yunnan Baiyao 
Woundplast, Yunnan Baiyao Plaster, Yunnan Baiyao (Powder), and Yunnan Baiyao Capsule exceeded RMB 100 
million. Specifically, the sales revenue of Yunnan Baiyao Plaster surpassed RMB 900 million, while the sales 
revenue of Yunnan Baiyao Capsule exceeded RMB 600 million, and the sales revenue of Yunnan Baiyao (Powder) 
and Yunnan Baiyao Woundplast exceeded RMB 300 million. Other branded TCM products showed impressive 
growth. The sales revenue of Pudilan Anti-inflammatory Tablet and Huoxiang Zhengqi Oral Liquid both surpassed 
RMB 100 million, with year-on-year growth of nearly 16% and 124% respectively. The sales revenue of 
Gongxuening Capsule, used for gynecological inflammation, saw a 47% year-on-year increase. Botanical 
supplements also achieved significant growth, with the sales revenue of Qixuekang Oral Liquid reaching RMB 231 
million, representing a 15% year-on-year growth. 
The pharmaceutical business is Yunnan Baiyao’s core operation and a cornerstone of its vision to become a 
“comprehensive solution provider in the Big Health sector.” With an aging population, growing health 
consciousness, rising demand for sports-related products, and the rapid expansion of retail pharmacies, particularly 
in the chain OTC segment, Yunnan Baiyao is well-positioned to leverage its brand resources, including 567 drug 
approval numbers and 316 varieties (including 222 Chinese patent medicines, of which 43 are exclusive), as well 
as its OTC channel advantages, encompassing 5,000 leading service chain stores and nationwide coverage of over 
400,000 stores. These have presented significant opportunities for Yunnan Baiyao’s branded TCM retail business. 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
21 
 
During the reporting period, Pharmaceutical Business Group actively promoted self-reform, upholding 
inheritance and innovation. In terms of academic construction, the BG joined hands with professional organizations 
such as the National Trauma Center, Bai Qiu’en Foundation, and PKU-YBIMRC to carry out a number of clinical 
trials around Baiyao’s core and growth varieties, exploring product characteristics, assessing efficacy and safety, 
extending the lifecycle of mature varieties, and unlocking the market potential of growth varieties. The BG had 
established an integrated ecosystem for Yunnan Baiyao that combined research and marketing to a high degree, and 
enhanced its core competitiveness. Marketing efforts involved large-scale operations, pilot promotions, and 
increased collaboration with drugstore chains, aiming for industry and chain growth with concentrated resource 
input. Organizational improvements included talent development initiatives like the “Xuanjia Action,” enhanced 
management efficiency, continuously increased product quality and stability, and achieved significant 
breakthroughs in operational capacity. Product initiatives focused on core series of Yunnan Baiyao, shifting from a 
“scattered approach” to a “targeted strategy,” concentrating resources on flagship products and national key 
accounts, and making breakthroughs in targeted products. In the field of branded TCM, an independent team was 
established to operate Yunnan Baiyao branded TCM series products, aiming for seizing the opportunities in the 
branded TCM market, and achieving sustained sales growth. In the Panax notoginseng market, a drug intelligent 
manufacturing center characterized by cost control, high-quality, traceable and consistent Panax notoginseng raw 
materials was established to enable rapid market penetration in the Panax notoginseng sector. 
Moving forward, Pharmaceutical Business Group will focus on “leading in the field of orthopedics, expanding 
its reach to households with a diverse range of medicines, and becoming a prominent player in the Panax notoginseng 
industry.” The BG will continue to strengthen and solidify its leading position in the OTC market for musculoskeletal 
disorders while actively driving growth for other branded TCM products. Furthermore, the BG will strive to establish 
an operational system throughout the entire Panax notoginseng industry chain and cultivate competitive advantages in 
various therapeutic areas. To achieve these objectives, Pharmaceutical Business Group will focus on two key strategies. 
Firstly, it will enhance academic research and deepen partnerships with National Trauma Center, Accelerated 
Rehabilitation Alliance, PKU-YBIMRC, and medical institutions at all levels, conducting in-depth research and 
secondary development on existing products, exploring potential products and creating new growth opportunities. 
Secondly, the BG will collaborate with upstream raw material supply and manufacturing departments to achieve 
coordinated development across production, quality control, and marketing. All these will enable intelligent 
manufacturing, cost reduction and enhanced efficiency, thus providing a strong impetus for future growth. 
2) Health Products Business Group 
During the reporting period, Health Products Business Group tapped into the potential of the existing customers, 
and maintained a steady growth in the principal business income, realizing an operating income of RMB 6.422 
billion, up 6.50% year-on-year. In the field of oral care, Yunnan Baiyao Toothpaste occupied a domestic share of 
24.60% (source: Nielsen Retail Research Data, YTD2312), maintaining its No.1 position in terms of market share. 
During the “Double 11” period in 2023, Health Products Business Group secured the first place in several lists: The 
official flagship store of Yunnan Baiyao Toothpaste at Tmall achieved a breakthrough, realizing sales performance 
per store of over RMB 100 million for the first time, becoming the first flagship store to achieve the sales of over 
RMB 100 million for a single toothpaste product. It also won the first place on the list of popular toothpastes and 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
22 
 
the first place on the list of popular branded toothbrushes at Douyin. In the hair care and anti-hair loss segment, 
Yangyuanqing achieved an impressive growth throughout the year, recording a sales income of RMB 300 million, 
with an increase of 36% year on year. During the “Double 11” period, the online sales of Yangyuanqing achieved 
outstanding performance: ranking No.1 among domestic anti-hair loss shampoo brands at the Tmall platform, 
recording total sales of over RMB 100 million at Douyin in 2023. The flagship product of Yangyuanqing, the oil 
control and anti-hair loss kit, topped the list of popular anti-hair loss shampoo products at Douyin Mall, and ranked 
first in the list of best sellers for nourishing and anti-hair loss shampoo at the Pinduoduo platform.  
During the reporting period, Health Products Business Group adhered to the core guiding principle of 
“stabilizing the basic segments, expanding the incremental segments, and embracing the innovative segments.” We 
remained focused on oral health and personal care products, continuously driving high-quality development of the 
business. By leveraging “both online and offline channels” and enhancing brand exposure across multiple 
dimensions, we strengthened our existing segments and expanded the incremental segments. In the online realm, 
we collaborated with comprehensive e-commerce platforms like Tmall, JD.com, and Pinduoduo during major online 
shopping promotions such as “618, Double 11, Double 12.” Through impactful and ongoing marketing efforts, we 
actively increased our online market share by engaging live broadcasts on content e-commerce platforms like 
Douyin. Additionally, we enhanced brand exposure through partnerships with Li Jian’s online concert, Yunnan 
Baiyao Oral Health & “Divas Hit the Road - Silk Road Season” travel variety show IP content marketing, and 
collaborations with Yangyuanqing & “Fengshen Performing Arts Training Camp” variety show. In terms of offline 
realm, we unified the image of terminal activities through various promotional campaigns such as “Scientific Oral 
Care Season” and “Flying Loong Welcomes the New Year, Healthy and Happy Year” during Chinese New Year. 
During the reporting period, the offline promotional activities totaled more than 14,700 sessions, with activities and 
materials covering a total of 1,465 cities (provinces, cities and counties). Furthermore, we optimized our product 
mix, implemented iterative technological innovation, and drove category upgrades, resulting in the filing and 
packaging upgrade of 153 toothpaste products during the reporting period. 
The strategic development goal of Health Products Business Group is to become a comprehensive solution 
provider for oral health, scalp care, and body care. This will be achieved by establishing a supply chain platform for 
effective care products, developing a refined commercial big data platform, and leading the industry in technological 
innovation while committing to sustainable development. Health Products Business Group will continue to explore 
growth opportunities in new channels, cater to consumption stratification by expanding into emerging channels, 
drive product upgrades through iterative technological innovation, and leverage the e-commerce interest conversion 
as an opportunity to contribute to the Company’s long-term sales revenue and profit growth. 
3) TCM Resources Business Group 
During the reporting period, TCM Resources Business Group took customer value demands as its starting point 
and focus. It aimed to create a sustainable platform for TCM resources by upgrading its operations. While ensuring 
high-quality and efficient supply of internal resources, the BG had achieved external sales revenue of RMB 1.71 
billion, representing a year-on-year growth of approximately 22%. Notably, the external sales revenue of Panax 
notoginseng medicinal materials had experienced a significant increase of 81% compared to the previous year. On 
the other hand, the BG ensured the stability of supply and prices for strategic varieties. Despite the general increase 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
23 
 
in the price of TCM materials and a 17.3% year-on-year increase in the Kangmei TCM materials’ price index 
(source: http://cnkmprice.kmzyw.com.cn/), the BG effectively suppressed the rise in the price of the Company’s 
feeding herbs, with the Company’s feeding herbs price increase significantly lower than the average level of the 
industry’s price of TCM materials increase. The TCM Resources Business Group concentrated on Yunnan’s local 
herbs and Baiyao’s advantageous varieties, and pioneered in the Panax notoginseng sector. In the natural plant 
extracts business, we achieved refined operation from procurement to production and sales, contributing to a further 
increase in the market share of eucalyptus oil, and the sales of Capsaicin quadrupling, becoming a new growth 
driver for the business. 
To ensure high-quality and efficient completion of business orders, TCM Resources Business Group 
established a linkage between procurement and production. Early deployment was made based on the annual 
demand of each business entity, and operating inventory and reserve inventory for strategic varieties were 
established. Through initiatives such as precise planting in the Paris polyphylla seedling factory and the “One Heart 
Program,” we achieved high-quality, efficient, and low-cost supply. Supply chain upgrades, “agile planning,” 
intelligent optimization strategies, and other measures ensured quick and accurate delivery. Leveraging the 
advantages of the digitized industrial platform, high-quality inventory, and brand value in the field of Panax 
notoginseng, we provided strong support to relevant business entities in systematically creating a new pattern of 
Panax notoginseng terminal products. 
With a focus on consolidation, cultivation, and innovation, TCM Resources Business Group will rely on the rich 
resources of authentic raw materials and herbs in Yunnan Province and regional advantageous resources to build a 
sustainable and leading platform in the TCM resources industry. While ensuring the Company’s supply, centering on the 
needs of users and focusing on the excavation, cultivation, development, and utilization of Yunnan’s industry resources 
of TCM materials, we will gradually build a long-term stable, high-quality traceable supply chain system for Yunnan’s 
authentic raw materials and herbs, create long-term value for the Company and its external customers. In the branded 
medicinal materials segment, we will leverage the success of the Panax notoginseng industry platform to develop other 
advantageous medicinal materials in Yunnan, creating a branded medicinal materials ecosystem through innovative 
planting models, improved processing capacity, access to R&D resources, and tailored user solutions. In the natural plant 
extracts segment, we will enhance the operation of eucalyptus oil and promote the healthy and sustainable development 
of the flavor and fragrance industry. By deploying production technology innovation, expanding product categories, and 
gaining in-depth insights into customer demand, we will transform from a raw material provider to a comprehensive 
solution provider in the food plant extract industry, particularly with Capsaicin products. The pharmaceutical service 
segment will, focusing on the extended services of decoction pieces products such as Internet medical treatment, TCM 
decoctions, and solution restoration, create a closed loop of the business of TCM decoction pieces, and provide 
comprehensive TCM solutions for medical institutions, so as to continuously increase market share, and form a significant 
scale advantage of decoction pieces. 
4) Yunnan Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd (pharmaceutical distribution)  
During the reporting period, against the background of slowdown in the growth rate of the pharmaceutical 
distribution industry and intensified competition in the market, Yunnan Pharma realized principal business revenue 
of RMB 24.49 billion, representing a growth of 5.63% compared with the previous year. As the Group’s 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
24 
 
pharmaceutical commercial distribution segment, Yunnan Pharma effectively improved its overall operational 
efficiency throughout the year, with an increase in the integrated order fulfillment rate of 7.4%, a significant increase 
in order response speed of 22%, and an increase in the speed of commodity delivery of 19%. 
Yunnan Pharma was deeply committed to the Yunnan pharmaceutical distribution market, relying on end-to-
end process construction to provide refined services for upstream and downstream customers. In terms of the 
construction of the customer service system, we further strengthened the ability of multi-warehouse synergy and 
launched “same-day delivery, next-day delivery, two-day delivery, and agreed delivery” offerings to effectively 
improve the quality and efficiency of service. With regard to the integrated construction of the pharmaceutical 
distribution supply chain operation, through the project co-construction, we explored the value points of the 
pharmaceutical distribution supply chain, strengthened the upstream and downstream synergy, and gradually 
promoted the improvement of the quality and efficiency of the whole supply chain operation. To properly cope with 
the risk of accounts receivable, Yunnan Pharma will adopt various approaches and take the initiative to adjust the 
strategy, and comprehensively enhance the collection efforts. 
Focusing on the Yunnan pharmaceutical distribution market, Yunnan Pharma will continuously improve its 
core competitiveness, optimize the new regional circulation, and ensure the leading position in the regional 
distribution market. Insisting on stabilizing the scale, strengthening the service, improving the quality and 
controlling the risk, we will build a modern pharmaceutical supply chain distribution service platform and provide 
the most valuable distribution service solutions for upstream and downstream customers. We will integrate channel 
resources, enhance channel value, optimize business structure, explore value-added services and promote business 
model innovation. We will also strengthen budget management, risk control and cost awareness, enhance 
organizational vitality, and improve operational quality and efficiency to effectively support Yunnan Baiyao’s high-
quality, sustainable and sound development. 
(3) Actively exploring and incubating new business units (BUs)  
Based on the established development strategy, the Company upgraded its organizational capabilities and 
improved management effectiveness to align with actual business needs, resulting in the creation of an agile and 
efficient organizational structure. During the reporting period, the Company reorganized the emerging business 
segments, covering the Tonic Healthcare Products BU, Skin Beauty BU, Medical Devices BU and Teayield BU. 
Tonic Healthcare Products BU aims to capture the interest of consumers who prefer nourishment through oral paste 
and enter the field of tonic healthcare products by integrating and leveraging the advantages of TCM products such 
as Panax otoginseng. Skin Beauty BU strives to make a breakthrough in functional skincare products and introduce 
a unique beauty brand that embodies Baiyao’s characteristics, using natural herbs and highlighting gentle, non-
irritating, moisturizing, and caring product attributes. Medical Devices BU will concentrate on a specialized 
functional track focused on orthopedic and injury care. Teayield BU adheres to two core concepts: “Applying 
pharmaceutical principles to produce healthy teas” and “Enriching and nurturing the body and mind with healthy 
teas.” With these concepts in mind, Teayield BU is committed to deepening the tea industry, exploring and 
innovating tea derivatives. The exploration and incubation within these new BUs focus on developing a novel 
business model of “comprehensive solutions,” which is based on precise customization supported by a big data 
service backend, and create new avenues of growth for the Company. 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
25 
 
(4) Increasing investment in R&D and innovation, and consolidating R&D strategic objectives with 
scientific and efficient R&D management system 
1) Continuously increasing R&D investment and optimizing R&D management system 
The Company continued to increase its investment in R&D, maintaining the intensity of its R&D investment. 
Furthermore, the Company continued to strengthen the construction of R&D capabilities and set up a R&D 
Management Committee to coordinate and manage the overall R&D system, with the R&D ideas of inheriting the 
essence of Yunnan TCM, empowering the upgrading of health products, carefully deploying innovative medicines, 
and implementing AI-assisted drug design. These comprehensively promoted the scientific and integrated 
management of R&D projects, continuously strengthened the evaluation, supervision and management of R&D 
projects, and built a set of scientific, efficient and pragmatic R&D management systems. 
2) Building cross-regional R&D centers with the Central Research Institute as the core 
In terms of R&D, the Central Research Institute plays a crucial role in coordination and integration. It effectively 
integrates and coordinates cross-regional R&D resources, relying on its four major R&D centers to ensure smooth 
progress in R&D. Among them, the Kunming Center utilizes the Yunnan Institute of Materia Medica as its research 
platform. It leverages its advantages in TCM research and focuses on studying the resources, pharmacology, and 
toxicology of natural medicines, including TCM and ethnic medicines. The Beijing Center utilizes the PKU-YBIMRC 
as a platform for exploring collaborative innovation models between academia and enterprises. It undertakes the research 
and development of academic achievements and commercialization projects. The Shanghai Center utilizes the Innovation 
Drug Center, Yunhe Pharmaceutical (Tianjin) Co., Ltd, and Yunbaiyao Zhengwu Technology (Shanghai) Co., Ltd as 
research platforms. It focuses on the R&D of innovative radiopharmaceuticals (radioactive drugs) and actively builds the 
Company’s product development capabilities while fostering emerging businesses. The Wuxi Center utilizes Yunnan 
Baiyao Group Wuxi Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd as its platform for medical device R&D. It incubates medical device 
products that meet market demands, possess advanced technology, and undergo professional validation. The Wuxi Center 
specifically focuses on five major product categories: devices for TCM diagnosis and treatment of chronic diseases and 
pain, plaster series, eye health series, personal care and disinfection, as well as customized products for sports care. 
3) Scientifically planning the short-, medium- and long-term R&D projects guided by the Group’s strategy 
 
 
Based on national policies, economic conditions and Yunnan Baiyao’s distinctive characteristics, the Company 
adopts a market-driven approach and strategically plans short-, medium-, and long-term R&D projects. This 
involves comprehensively upgrading sci-tech empowerment, reinforcing evidence-based medicine, and conducting 
clinical trials to support drug development. 
Short term 
Medium term 
Long term 
To actively deploy secondary innovative 
development of marketed varieties and 
quicker development of medical devices 
To vigorously promote development of 
innovative TCM and achieve breakthroughs 
in Baiyao transdermal preparation 
To commercialize innovative 
drug R&D results and improve 
sustainability 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
26 
 
In the short term, we will dedicate our efforts to the secondary innovative development of existing 
products and expedite the development of drugs and medical devices, providing robust support for the 
Company’s business growth. During the reporting period, milestone advancements were achieved in the 
“secondary development of Gongxuening Capsule, a prominent TCM variety,” which was successfully 
declared as a major scientific and technological special project in Yunnan Province. The “Clinical 
Observation and Research on Gongxuening Capsule in the Treatment of Uterine Bleeding” has had 1,791 
subjects enrolled, and clinical trial reports can be expected by the end of 2024. Three sub-projects focusing 
on the clinical research of Yunnan Baiyao Capsule for bone healing, wound healing, and the mechanism of 
bone healing, were progressing smoothly in cooperation with the domestic Grade A tertiary hospitals. The 
study on Qixuekang Oral Liquid, aimed at improving various symptoms related to Qi deficiency and blood 
stasis in patients, was completed, and the clinical trial assessing its efficacy in improving heart and vascular 
health enrolled 70% of the subjects. Initial statistical analysis of the test results indicated preliminary 
indications of the product’s positive effect on vascular health. A clinical trial report is expected to be 
generated by the end of 2024. Regarding the research project on replacing aerosol projectiles for the classic 
drug of Yunnan Baiyao Aerosol, the initial phase of the projectile screening study has been completed, and 
a proposed projectile has been preliminarily identified. Further in-depth investigations will be conducted on 
the proposed projectile. Furthermore, vigorous promotion was made in the secondary development project 
of Shulie’an Capsule. The multi-center, open, randomized, placebo-controlled clinical pre-trial for the 
treatment of patients with type III chronic prostatitis has been actively carried out, and various 
pharmacodynamic studies are steadily advancing. 
Short-term project progress and planning 
Project name 
Project progress during the reporting period 
Next step 
Secondary development of 
Gongxuening Capsule 
A total of 1,791 subjects were enrolled for the Clinical 
Observation and Research on Gongxuening Capsule in the 
Treatment of Uterine Bleeding. 
A clinical trial report is expected 
to be generated by the end of 2024 
Secondary development of 
Qixuekang Oral Liquid 
The study on Qixuekang Oral Liquid, aimed at improving 
various symptoms related to Qi deficiency and blood stasis in 
patients, was completed. 
The clinical trial assessing its efficacy in improving heart and 
vascular health enrolled 70% of the subjects. Initial statistical 
analysis of the test results indicated preliminary indications of 
the product’s positive effect on vascular health. 
A clinical trial report is expected 
to be generated by the end of 2024 
Secondary development of 
Yunnan Baiyao Capsule 
The clinical research on Yunnan Baiyao Capsule for bone 
healing is underway  
The clinical research on Yunnan Baiyao Capsule for wound 
healing is underway 
The research on the mechanism for Yunnan Baiyao Capsule to 
promote bone healing is underway 
The clinical evidence of evidence-
based 
medicine 
for 
Yunnan 
Baiyao Capsule in dentistry and 
gastroenterology will be collected 
to explore the safety and efficacy 
of Yunnan Baiyao for use in the 
full range of specialties 
The 
research 
on 
the 
replacement of projectiles 
for Yunnan Baiyao Aerosol 
The first phase of the projectile screening study has been 
completed and the proposed projectile has been preliminarily 
identified 
An in-depth study will be carried 
out on the proposed projectile 
Secondary development of 
Shulie’an Capsule 
The multi-center, open, randomized, placebo-controlled 
clinical pre-trial for the treatment of patients with type III 
chronic prostatitis has been actively carried out, and various 
pharmacodynamic studies are steadily advancing. 
The Company will determine the 
participating 
research 
centers, 
complete 
institutional 
project 
establishment, ethical review, and 
start clinical trial enrollment 
 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
27 
 
In the medium term, we will actively promote the development of innovative TCMs, while enhancing our efforts 
in the field of Yunnan Baiyao’s transdermal preparations, with an aim to create star products of Yunnan Baiyao’s 
transdermal preparations, and deploy a comprehensive plan focusing on the country’s important needs in the field of 
trauma. During the reporting period: Panax notoginseng Tablet, an innovative drug in TCM Category 1.1 for the 
prevention and treatment of symptoms such as chest tightness and heart pain caused by stagnation of the heart veins 
in middle-aged and elderly people, was undergoing clinical Phase II research. With a cumulative enrollment of 237 
subjects and 211 discharges, a clinical summary report is expected in 2025. This project is the second new drug of 
TCM evidence category that Yunnan Baiyao owns independent intellectual property rights and has been approved. 
For the Fuqi Guben Ointment, the new Chinese medicine approved for clinical syndrome for warming kidney and 
consolidating foundation, the Phase II clinical trial has been completed, a clinical summary report has been obtained, 
the Phase II clinical trial program has passed acceptance, and the clinical trial design and preparation for the Phase III 
clinical trial is underway. For the development of two Chinese medicinal preparations with classic prescriptions (PZ-
018 and PZ-019), the research on the pilot process and the quality standards of intermediate and finished products has 
been completed, and the preparation and testing of three batches of pilot samples, the transfer of the relevant GMP 
documents for the production transition batch, and the preparation and testing of three batches of the production 
transition batch have been accomplished. It is planned to submit the registration application for Category 3.1 new 
TCMs by the end of 2024. For the preparation approval project of Yunnan medical institutions for Xianghuo Spray for 
patients during the recovery period of COVID-19 or those with wind-cold related syndrome, the kick-off meeting for 
clinical studies in the recovery period of COVID-19 has been completed and subjects are being enrolled. In terms of 
transdermal preparations under R&D, significant progress has been made in the development of three plasters; the 
Yunnan Baiyao Gel Plaster, a new and improved TCM, is undergoing a small-scale pilot study; pilot studies and 
sample testing have been completed for the 2 generic plasters to determine the quality standards of the finished products, 
while stability studies, package compatibility studies and safety evaluations have been carried out. One of them has 
been notified of the acceptance of the clinical trial application. 
Medium-term project progress and planning 
Project name 
Project progress during the reporting period 
Next step 
Panax notoginseng 
Tablet (PSQ project)  
It is undergoing clinical Phase II research, with a cumulative 
enrollment of 237 subjects and 211 discharges 
A clinical summary report 
is expected in 2025  
Fuqi Guben Ointment 
The Phase II clinical trial has been completed, clinical summary report 
has been obtained, the Phase II clinical trial program has passed 
acceptance 
The clinical trial design and 
preparation for the Phase III 
clinical trial is underway 
Development of two 
Chinese medicinal 
preparations with classic 
prescriptions (PZ-018 
and PZ-019)  
The research on the pilot process and the quality standards of 
intermediate and finished products has been completed, and the 
preparation and testing of three batches of pilot samples, the transfer of 
the relevant GMP documents for the production transition batch, and 
the preparation and testing of three batches of the production transition 
batch have been accomplished 
It is planned to apply for 
marketing approval 
(registration application for 
Category 3.1 new TCMs) in 
2024 
The preparation approval 
project of Yunnan 
medical institutions for 
Xianghuo Spray 
To carry out pharmaceutical studies that need to be supplemented in 
the approval documents, and carry out clinical studies in the recovery 
period of COVID-19 as required. The kick-off meeting has been 
completed and subjects are being enrolled 
Clinical studies in the 
recovery period of COVID-
19 
Development of three 
plasters 
Pilot studies and sample testing have been completed for the 2 generic 
plasters to determine the quality standards of the finished products, 
while stability studies, package compatibility studies and safety 
evaluations have been carried out. One of them has been notified of the 
acceptance of the clinical trial application 
For the gel plaster project, it 
is planned to carry out pilot 
and quality studies in the 
next step, and declare 
clinical trials 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
28 
 
In the long term, we will focus on the transformation of innovative drug R&D results. On one hand, we will 
focus on the advantages of exclusive varieties of TCM, as well as the needs of the community, science and 
technology empowerment, to create high-demand TCM products. On the other hand, with the development of 
radiopharmaceuticals as the center, we will deploy a number of innovative drug development, to enhance the 
momentum of sustainable development for Yunnan Baiyao. The radiopharmaceuticals pipeline was fully deployed 
and milestones were achieved during the reporting period. For the INR101 project, an innovative 
radiopharmaceutical for prostate cancer diagnosis, the precursor pilot study and GMP production, labeling process 
confirmation, quality study, analytical method validation and stability study have been completed, and in February 
2024, we received the Notice of Acceptance of Clinical Trial for INR01 Injection for in-country production of drug 
registration from the National Medical Products Administration (NMPA). For the INR102 project, an innovative 
radiopharmaceutical for prostate cancer treatment, the evaluation of drug efficacy, tissue distribution studies in 
model animals, the small-scale pilot study for the precursor non-GMP production and the process of radioactive 
formulation have been completed. The pharmacological studies have been initiated. For the INR202 and INR203 
projects, nanobody candidate molecule screening studies have been initiated. Moreover, Yunhe Pharmaceutical 
(Tianjin) Co., Ltd obtained the approval for the Environmental Impact Assessment Report of the Tianjin Project for 
the R&D Center of Radiopharmaceuticals (newly established for use and sale of radiopharmaceuticals) in early 
January 2024. The Company has officially initiated the project construction, which will effectively support the 
development of the Company’s innovative pipeline for radiopharmaceuticals. Building upon the research 
achievements of experts in radiopharmaceuticals from Peking University, the Company has engaged in in-depth 
communication and established strategic partnerships with relevant departments, enterprises, and hospitals in the 
radiopharmaceutical industry cluster. This further enhances the Company’s positioning in the upstream, midstream, 
and downstream segments of the radiopharmaceutical industry chain. 
Radiopharmaceutical project progress and planning 
Project name 
Project progress during the reporting period 
INR101 Project 
The precursor pilot study and GMP production, labeling process confirmation, quality study, analytical 
method validation and stability study have been completed, and in February 2024, we received the 
Notice of Acceptance of Clinical Trial for INR01 Injection for in-country production of drug 
registration from the National Medical Products Administration (NMPA). 
INR102 Project 
The evaluation of drug efficacy, tissue distribution studies in model animals, the small-scale pilot study 
for the precursor non-GMP production and the process of radioactive formulation have been completed. 
The pharmacological studies have been initiated. 
INR202 Project and 
INR203 Project 
Nanobody candidate molecule screening studies have been initiated. 
 
(5) Fully integrating digital intelligence into the Company’s operations, enabling end-to-end process 
management and innovative R&D, and enhancing the Company’s quality and efficiency 
1) Launching digital change from top-level design, with the Digital Intelligence Center promoting the 
Company’s digital transformation 
During the reporting period, the Company published the White Paper on Digitalization of Yunnan Baiyao, 
which provides clear guidance for the future digitalization efforts, including three major strategic projects, two 
major protection projects, and the establishment of a unified cultural system. This included actively pursuing digital 
innovation in strategic principal businesses, strengthening the foundation, and building digital capabilities, covering 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
29 
 
integrated business and finance systems, data governance, and company security system development. We remain 
attentive to future industry digitalization platforms and continue to develop Yunnan Baiyao’s digital workforce and 
artificial intelligence capabilities. 
In August 2023, the Company officially launched the Digital Intelligence Center (formerly the Smart 
Technology Business Unit). Aligned with the Company’s strategic development direction, this Center focuses on 
further enhancing the Company’s digitalization and intelligence. It seizes opportunities in the digital economy both 
internally and externally, constructing technological application scenarios and industrial ecosystems through 
intelligent digital operations and in-depth digital applications. This facilitates the creation of comprehensive digital 
solutions, enhancing enterprise efficiency and fostering business innovation. 
2) Promoting the integration of digital technology with physical business to help the Company improve 
quality and efficiency 
During the reporting period, with the purpose of improving corporate efficiency, the Company accelerated 
its digital intelligence transformation, extending from the top-level design to the daily operations of various 
industrial sectors, R&D modules, functional departments, integrating digital technology with real business, 
and thus enabling the continuous transformation and upgrading of the industry, and enhancing its 
competitiveness. 
The Company established a master data system in the field of data governance by integrating the data of the 
its functional departments and business units. For the data lake platform system, we have realized the entry of 
important data of the Company into the lake and initiated the construction of applications in various fields, thus 
laying a good foundation for enhancing the Company’s industry-finance integration, data decision-making 
effectiveness and accuracy. Meanwhile, with regard to the Company’s financial and business analysis system, 
the criteria of more than 100 assessment indicators had been unified, with the closed loop of the Company’s 
budget. In 2023, we launched the Accounting RPA Robot, and realized the automation of several standard 
business processes and dramatically improved efficiency, completing the accounting tasks which required 2 
person-days for completion in 1.5 hours, with an automation rate of 93.7%. The Treasury Invoicing RPA Robot 
dramatically improved invoicing efficiency and customer satisfaction in the retail e-commerce business, with a 
capacity of 3,500 invoices per day and an automation rate of 95.3%. In terms of talent management digitization, 
the Company built the ONE-BY digital talent full-lifecycle management platform, formulated HR digital 
transformation strategy, and gradually achieved HR digitization through scenario-based, automation, grouping, 
role-defined and data-driven operations. 
With regard to the construction of full digitalization of the production chain, the Company iteratively applied 
the successful experience of the digital Panax notoginseng industry platform to the digital TCM industry platform. 
In November 2023, the Lijiang Digital TCM Industry Platform jointly built by the People’s Government of Yulong 
County, Lijiang City and Yunnan Baiyao was officially put into operation. The platform will build a long-term 
stable, high-quality and traceable supply system of Yunnan TCM materials such as Panax notoginseng, Paris 
polyphylla, Carthamus tinctorius, Poria cocos, Angelica sinensis, and Saussurea lappa, upgrade the ecological 
resource system of TCM materials, and promote Yunnan Baiyao’s branded TCM materials project to enter a new 
stage. 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
30 
 
3) Actively exploring application scenarios of AI in TCM industry 
During the reporting period, the Company actively explored and experimented with artificial intelligence, and 
actively utilized artificial intelligence within the Company to create a digitally intelligent service experience for 
employees. In October 2023, based on an AI model, the Company launched its first digital employee, Baixiaoqi, to 
improve the office efficiency and access to internal information of the employees. In the future, the Company will 
also actively develop the ability of AI digital employees to serve consumers to enable the users of Yunnan Baiyao 
products to experience the technological services powered by digitalization and intelligence, and realize the “user-
centered” concept. On February 27, 2024, the Company signed a strategic cooperation agreement with Huawei 
Cloud Computing Technologies Co., Ltd, under which the two parties will work together on the R&D and innovative 
application of artificial intelligence technologies in the TCM industry, to create a large model of the TCM industry 
and carry out ecological cooperation. Leveraging the Company’s rich industry data and industry chain resources 
accumulated in the field of TCM, the two sides will jointly explore the data mining and reconstruction of various 
links in the TCM industry chain, to give the TCM materials industry strong momentum and vitality source for 
sustainable development and innovation. 
(6) Vigorously advancing holistic quality control, implementing targeted quality technology endeavors, 
and fortifying a robust quality-centric culture 
During the reporting period, the Company intensively advanced total quality management, continually refining 
its essence and extending its reach. Guided by the principle of “strict quality control, expert services, and customer 
approval,” the Company integrated quality across all production and operational stages. Persisting in innovation 
and universal involvement, the Company bolstered its quality management system, cultivated a robust quality 
culture, and executed diverse quality initiatives. These endeavors led to elevated quality efficiency and the 
realization of substantial quality value. 
During the reporting period, the Company reinforced its commitment to supporting and enhancing Company-
wide production and operations, solidifying its technical prowess by conducting specialized quality and technical 
initiatives across its four business units. Pharmaceutical Business Group engaged in the national drug standard 
enhancement project, formulating two TCM varieties as part of quality upgrade efforts, providing technical backing 
for medicine quality improvements. Meanwhile, with the rubber ointment quality improvement initiative, it pushed 
for extensive development and application of whole-process control technology, achieving meticulous control and 
systematic quality upgrades in rubber ointments, yielding products with consistent performance, eco-friendliness, 
and reduced allergenic potential. Health Products Business Group proactively advanced process quality control 
measures, pioneering the use of Process Analytical Technologies (PAT) within the toothpaste industry to shrink 
quality control cycles and promptly mitigate defective or rework instances via real-time, on-site, and near-line 
monitoring, coupled with mid-process controls. Within the branded medicinal materials project, TCM Resources 
Business Group utilized product imaging to digitize lifecycle data, from sourcing to production, storage, sales, and 
beyond, standardizing acceptance procedures and creating an acceptance manual to ensure proactive quality control, 
enhance efficiency, and enable full product traceability. Yunnan Pharma expedited and streamlined product recall 
management through the development of a digital recall/recovery platform, enabling swift and precise transmission 
of recall details and effectively supporting licensors and clients in executing drug recalls. 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
31 
 
To deepen quality risk awareness and strengthen quality management prowess among all personnel, the 
Company consistently reinforced quality culture. During the reporting period, it introduced the Quality Culture 
Framework of Yunnan Baiyao for the first time, embedding a tri-dimensional quality ethos, ie quality control, expert 
services, and customer approval, while upholding its “Quality First, Customer Foremost” policy, emphasizing 
superior products, services, and a commitment to safeguarding life and health with premium offerings. Throughout 
the period, the Company conducted quality culture training and promotion campaigns to solidify quality 
management foundations. The four business groups achieved synergy in co-building, sharing, integrating, and 
communicating quality culture across the upstream and downstream supply chain through proactive organization of 
quality culture publicity and training programs, covering drug quality, quality grades of key varieties of Chinese 
material medicines, and comprehensive quality risk control in warehousing and logistics processes. 
2. Revenue and cost 
(1) Operating revenue structure 
Unit: RMB 
 
2023 
2022 
Year-on-year 
increase/decrease 
Amount 
Proportion in 
operating revenue 
Amount 
Proportion in 
operating revenue 
Total operating 
revenue 
39,111,292,156.00 
100% 
36,488,372,649.73 
100% 
7.19% 
By industries 
Income from 
industrial sales 
13,740,557,061.12 
35.13% 
12,772,673,480.04 
35.00% 
7.58% 
Income from 
commercial sales 
25,295,257,277.35 
64.68% 
23,645,421,616.92 
64.80% 
6.98% 
Technical service 
10,743,024.62 
0.03% 
6,634,420.10 
0.02% 
61.93% 
Hospitality industry 
14,426,628.18 
0.04% 
13,241,078.81 
0.04% 
8.95% 
Income from 
plantation sales 
1,436,078.20 
0.00% 
1,591,729.90 
0.00% 
-9.78% 
Income from other 
businesses 
48,872,086.53 
0.12% 
48,810,323.96 
0.13% 
0.13% 
By products 
Industrial products 
(Self-made) 
13,740,557,061.12 
35.13% 
12,772,673,480.04 
35.00% 
7.58% 
Wholesale and 
retail 
25,295,257,277.35 
64.68% 
23,645,421,616.92 
64.80% 
6.98% 
Agricultural 
products 
1,436,078.20 
0.00% 
1,591,729.90 
0.00% 
-9.78% 
Other services 
25,169,652.80 
0.06% 
19,875,498.91 
0.05% 
26.64% 
Others 
48,872,086.53 
0.12% 
48,810,323.96 
0.13% 
0.13% 
By regions 
Domestic 
38,477,107,385.74 
98.38% 
36,069,070,384.37 
98.85% 
6.68% 
Overseas 
634,184,770.26 
1.62% 
419,302,265.36 
1.15% 
51.25% 
By sales model 
Industrial model 
13,740,557,061.12 
35.13% 
12,772,673,480.04 
35.00% 
7.58% 
Commercial model 
25,295,257,277.35 
64.68% 
23,645,421,616.92 
64.80% 
6.98% 
Others 
75,477,817.53 
0.19% 
70,277,552.77 
0.19% 
7.40% 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
32 
 
(2) The industries, products, or regions that account for more than 10% of the Company’s operating 
revenue or operating profit 
Applicable 
 □Not applicable 
Unit: RMB 
 
Operating revenue 
Operating cost 
Gross 
margin 
Increase/decrease 
of operating 
revenue 
compared with 
the same period 
of the previous 
year 
Increase/decrease 
of operating cost 
compared with 
the same period 
of the previous 
year 
Increase/decrease 
of gross margin 
compared with 
the same period 
of the previous 
year 
By industries 
Income from 
industrial 
sales 
13,740,557,061.12 
4,913,752,718.23 
64.24% 
7.58% 
5.30% 
0.77% 
Income from 
commercial 
sales 
25,295,257,277.35 
23,769,165,686.54 
6.03% 
6.98% 
7.20% 
-0.19% 
By products 
Industrial 
products (Self-
made)  
13,740,557,061.12 
4,913,752,718.23 
64.24% 
7.58% 
5.30% 
0.77% 
Wholesale 
and retail 
25,295,257,277.35 
23,769,165,686.54 
6.03% 
6.98% 
7.20% 
-0.19% 
By regions 
Domestic 
38,477,107,385.74 
28,153,694,975.15 
26.83% 
6.68% 
6.33% 
0.24% 
By sales model 
Industrial 
model 
13,740,557,061.12 
4,913,752,718.23 
64.24% 
7.58% 
5.30% 
0.77% 
Commercial 
model 
25,295,257,277.35 
23,769,165,686.54 
6.03% 
6.98% 
7.20% 
-0.19% 
When the statistical caliber of the Company’s principal business data is adjusted in the reporting period, the Company’s principal 
business data should be subject to the one after the statistical caliber at the end of the reporting period is adjusted in the latest year 
□Applicable 
 Not applicable 
(3) Whether the Company’s revenue from in-kind sales is greater than its revenue from labor services 
Yes  
□ No 
Industry Classification 
Item 
Unit 
2023 
2022 
Year-on-year increase/decrease 
Revenue from industrial sales 
Sales 
RMB 
13,740,557,061.12 
12,772,673,480.04 
7.58% 
Revenue from commercial sales 
Sales 
RMB 
25,295,257,277.35 
23,645,421,616.92 
6.98% 
Explanations on reasons for year-on-year changes of above 30% in the relevant data 
□Applicable 
 Not applicable 
(4) Fulfillment of significant sales contracts and significant purchase contracts entered into by the 
Company as of the reporting period 
□Applicable 
 Not applicable 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
33 
 
(5) Operating cost structure 
Industry classification 
Unit: RMB 
Industry 
Classification 
Item 
2023 
2022 
Year-on-year 
increase/decrease 
Amount 
Percentage 
in operating 
cost 
Amount 
Percentage 
in operating 
cost 
Industrial 
sales 
Direct 
Materials 
4,225,537,847.00 
14.70% 
3,961,550,491.26 
14.74% 
6.66% 
Industrial 
sales 
Direct salary 
133,775,797.05 
0.47% 
148,549,942.78 
0.55% 
-9.95% 
Industrial 
sales 
Other direct 
expenses 
7,079,064.15 
0.02% 
8,924,648.61 
0.03% 
-20.68% 
Industrial 
sales 
Manufacturing 
costs 
547,360,010.03 
1.90% 
547,468,513.40 
2.04% 
-0.02% 
Commercial 
sales 
Purchase cost 
23,769,165,686.54 
82.69% 
22,172,833,447.57 
82.48% 
7.20% 
Technical 
services 
Technology 
development 
7,388,761.76 
0.03% 
2,380,051.71 
0.01% 
210.45% 
Planting 
Planting cost 
848,028.41 
0.00% 
7,431,315.90 
0.03% 
-88.59% 
Others 
Others 
53,362,445.35 
0.19% 
34,346,894.23 
0.13% 
55.36% 
Notes: None.   
(6) Whether there was any change in the scope of consolidation during the reporting period 
Yes  
□No 
For details, please refer to Section 10 - IX Changes in the Consolidation Scope. 
(7) Significant change or adjustment of the business, product or service of the Company during the reporting 
period 
□Applicable 
 
Not applicable 
(8) Major customers and major suppliers 
Major customers 
Information of top 5 customers  
No. 
Customer name 
Sales amount (RMB)  
Percentage in annual total 
sales amount 
1 
Customer A 
2,070,036,579.60 
5.29% 
2 
Customer B 
1,607,151,400.95 
4.11% 
3 
Customer C 
1,030,977,639.65 
2.64% 
4 
Customer D 
636,238,262.68 
1.63% 
5 
Customer E 
631,940,134.03 
1.62% 
Total 
-- 
5,976,344,016.91 
15.29% 
Other information of the major customers  
□Applicable 
 
Not applicable 
Total sales amount of top 5 customers (RMB)  
5,976,344,016.91 
Percentage of total sales amount of top 5 customers in annual 
total sales amount  
15.29% 
Among the sales amount of top 5 customers, percentage of the 
sales to the related parties in the annual sales amount  
0.00% 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
34 
 
Major suppliers 
Total purchase amount of top 5 suppliers (RMB)  
2,482,562,943.72 
Percentage of total purchase amount of top 5 suppliers in annual total 
purchase amount 
8.25% 
Among the purchase amount of top 5 suppliers, percentage of the 
purchase from the related parties in the annual purchase amount 
0.00% 
Information of top 5 suppliers  
No. 
Supplier name 
Purchase amount (RMB)  
Percentage in annual total 
purchase amount 
1 
Supplier A 
788,323,382.18 
2.62% 
2 
Supplier B 
527,826,736.60 
1.75% 
3 
Supplier C 
406,363,041.72 
1.35% 
4 
Supplier D 
384,796,902.06 
1.28% 
5 
Supplier E 
375,252,881.16 
1.25% 
Total 
-- 
2,482,562,943.72 
8.25% 
Other information of major suppliers  
□Applicable 
  
Not applicable 
3. Expenses 
                                                                   Unit: RMB 
 
2023 
2022 
Year-on-year 
increase/decrease 
Explanations on significant changes 
Sales expenses 
4,992,157,591.11  4,165,563,900.91  
19.84% 
The sales volume for the current period has 
increased, accompanied by an increase in 
sales expenses. 
Administrative 
expenses 
1,058,503,523.90 
833,784,263.46 
26.95% 
The amount of employee compensation for 
the current period has increased by RMB 
243 million compared to the previous year. 
Financial expenses 
-259,243,744.88  
-342,878,381.80 
24.39% 
The interest income for the current period 
has decreased by RMB 58,551,300 
compared to the previous year, while the 
interest expenses have decreased by RMB 
18,248,300. Moreover, the net foreign 
exchange loss has increased by RMB 
58,556,400 compared to the previous year. 
R&D expenses 
336,013,434.83  
336,723,690.26 
-0.21% 
No significant changes. 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
35 
 
4. R&D investment     
Applicable 
 □Not applicable 
R&D Project 
name 
Objective of the project 
Project progress 
Goals to be achieved 
Expected impact on the future development of the 
Company 
Fuqi Guben 
Ointment 
To explore and validate the clinical 
research methodology and marketing 
registration pathway for the 
development of a new TCM for 
warming the kidneys and 
consolidating the fundamentals, which 
is designed to treat the symptoms of 
frequent nocturnal urination in 
middle-aged and elderly people due to 
kidney yang deficiency, and improve 
the quality of life of middle-aged and 
elderly people. 
The Phase II clinical trial was completed, 
clinical summary report was obtained, the 
Phase II clinical trial program passed 
acceptance in 2023. The clinical trial 
design and preparation for the Phase III 
clinical trial is underway. 
To complete Phase III clinical study 
on Fuqi Guben Ointment, clarify its 
clinical therapeutic characteristics, 
diagnostic criteria for treatment of 
disease, effective dosage for 
treatment, drug administration 
program and course of treatment, and 
register and market it as new TCM of 
Category 1.1. 
This project is the first new TCM of the evidence-
based class approved for clinical use in China, and 
this R&D project is a strong proof of the 
Company’s ability to develop and industrialize 
innovative drugs of the TCM of evidence-based 
class. In the future, it is expected to add a new TCM 
drug of evidence-based class in line with the overall 
healing characteristics of TCM, and enrich the 
Company’s TCM innovative drug product matrix. 
Panax 
notoginseng 
Tablet (PSQ 
project)  
To tap into the characteristics of 
Panax notoginseng in disease 
prevention and treatment, and develop 
Category 1 innovative TCM for the 
prevention and treatment of chest 
tightness, heart pain, palpitation and 
dizziness in middle-aged and elderly 
people due to the evidence of stasis in 
the heart veins, and reducing the 
incidence of cardiovascular events. 
It is undergoing clinical Phase II research, 
with a cumulative enrollment of 237 
subjects and 211 discharges. A clinical 
summary report is expected in 2025. 
To comprehensively utilize the 
resources of the whole Panax 
notoginseng plant and further explore 
the synergistic mechanism of 
saponins, flavonoids, polysaccharides 
and other components, and market 
the product as innovative TCM of 
Category 1.1 
This product is the first innovative drug R&D 
project for cardiovascular diseases under the 
Company’s “Big Health” strategy, which is 
conducive to the treatment of symptoms related to 
cardiovascular stasis. In the future, it is expected to 
add a new TCM drug of evidence class in line with 
the overall healing characteristics of TCM, and 
enrich the Company’s TCM innovative drug 
product matrix. 
INR102 
Project 
To develop innovative 
radiopharmaceuticals for prostate 
cancer treatment 
The evaluation of drug efficacy and tissue 
distribution studies in model animals have 
been completed and the pharmacological 
studies have been initiated. The small-
scale pilot study for the precursor non-
GMP production and the process of 
radioactive formulation has been 
completed. 
To obtain the approval for marketing 
from NMPA 
It will drive the development of the Company’s 
innovative drug segment and improve the 
Company’s deployment in cutting-edge technology. 
INR101 
Project 
To develop innovative 
radiopharmaceuticals for prostate 
cancer diagnosis 
We have received the notice from NMPA 
for the acceptance of the clinical trial 
application. 
To obtain the approval for marketing 
from NMPA 
It will drive the development of the Company’s 
innovative drug segment and improve the 
Company’s deployment in cutting-edge technology. 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
36 
 
R&D Project 
name 
Objective of the project 
Project progress 
Goals to be achieved 
Expected impact on the future development of the 
Company 
Development 
of three 
plasters 
To expand the clinical choice of 
plaster products It is planned to 
develop 1 improved TCM (Yunnan 
Baiyao Gel Plaster) and 2 generic 
plasters. 
Pilot studies and sample testing have been 
completed for the 2 generic plasters to 
determine the quality standards of the 
finished products, while stability studies, 
package compatibility studies and safety 
evaluations have been carried out. One of 
them has been notified of the acceptance 
of the clinical trial application. 
To obtain the drug registration 
certificate 
To expand the clinical choice of plaster products, 
maintain Yunnan Baiyao’s industry advantage in 
the field of topical preparations through formulation 
deployment, new product selection and dosage form 
improvement, and help the Company explore new 
growth drivers 
Secondary 
development of 
large varieties 
of TCM 
To carry out in-depth research on 
existing large varieties in the areas of 
pharmacology, non-clinical, clinical 
and economics to improve the 
efficacy and safety evaluation system 
of the products, expand and clarify the 
indications of the products and the 
applicable population, guide the 
clinical medication, and introduce 
new technologies for the improvement 
of the existing products 
At present, 11 large varieties of TCM are 
involved in secondary development. 
Taking 2 projects as an example:  
A total of 1,791 subjects were enrolled 
for the Clinical Observation and Research 
on Gongxuening Capsule in the 
Treatment of Uterine Bleeding. A clinical 
trial report is expected to be generated by 
the end of 2024. 
The clinical trial on Qixuekang Oral 
Liquid assessing its efficacy in improving 
heart and vascular health enrolled 70% of 
the subjects. Initial statistical analysis of 
the test results indicated preliminary 
indications of the product’s positive effect 
on vascular health. A clinical trial report 
is expected to be generated by the end of 
2024. 
Taking 2 projects as an example: To 
further indicate the safety and 
efficacy of Gongxuening Capsule for 
gynecological hemostasis and collect 
extensive clinical evidence; To 
explore the therapeutic effects of 
Qixuekang Oral Liquid in 
cardiovascular system diseases 
This will expand or refine the clinical application of 
the product in a disease area, guide clinical 
medication, tap into growth potential, and facilitate 
the product’s entry into guidelines, pathways and 
consensus. 
Development 
of two Chinese 
medicinal 
preparations 
with classic 
prescriptions 
(PZ-018 and 
PZ-019)  
To develop and market two classic 
famous prescriptions (PZ-018 and PZ-
019) with clinical value and market 
prospect through regulated and 
standardized research, with the help of 
modern science and technology. 
The research on the pilot process and the 
quality standards of intermediate and 
finished products has been completed, 
and the preparation and testing of three 
batches of pilot samples, the transfer of 
the relevant GMP documents for the 
production transition batch, and the 
preparation and testing of three batches of 
the production transition batch have been 
accomplished. It is planned to apply for 
marketing approval in 2024. 
According to the registration and 
market approval requirements for 
new TCMs of Category 3.1 
This will practice the Company’s strategy of deep 
cultivation in the field of TCM, contribute to 
maintaining integrity and promoting innovation in 
the field of TCM, enrich the Company’s TCM 
product echelon, and help the Company explore 
new growth drivers, and enhance market 
competitiveness. In addition, it will accumulate 
technology and project management experience for 
the development of new TCMs for the Company, 
and continuously improve the core competitiveness 
of TCM in Yunnan Province. 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
37 
 
R&D Project 
name 
Objective of the project 
Project progress 
Goals to be achieved 
Expected impact on the future development of the 
Company 
Nutritional 
Formula for 
Special 
Medical 
Purposes 
To develop 1 medical nutritional 
support supplement for people with 
limited eating, digestive and 
absorption disorders, and metabolic 
disorders (over 10 years of age)  
Filing information has been submitted 
and notification of acceptance has been 
obtained. We are preparing for onsite 
inspection.  
To complete the registration of a 
nutritional formula for special 
medical purposes and obtain the 
production permit; To construct a 
knowledge and technology system 
and industrial platform for R&D and 
registration of special medical food. 
In line with the Company’s strategic objectives, this 
project is an effective complement to the echelon of 
Big Health products. It can greatly enrich the 
Company’s product groups, and help the Company 
explore new growth drivers and enhance market 
competitiveness. 
The 
preparation 
approval 
project of 
Yunnan 
medical 
institutions for 
Xianghuo 
Spray 
To develop a healthcare organization 
formulation for people recovering 
from COVID-19 and with wind-cold 
type cold related symptoms 
To carry out pharmaceutical studies that 
need to be supplemented in the approval 
documents, and carry out clinical studies 
in the recovery period of COVID-19 as 
required. The initiation meeting has been 
completed and subjects are being 
enrolled. 
To obtain the official approval for 
medical institution preparation in 
Yunnan Province 
This will practice the Company’s strategy of deep 
cultivation in the field of TCM, contribute to 
maintaining integrity and promoting innovation in 
the field of TCM, and provide the Company with 
alternative innovative TCMs in the field of 
respiratory medicine. 
Productivity 
Improvement 
Project 
(Technology 
Reform 
Project)  
To carry out product power 
enhancement studies on the 
Company’s marketed varieties to 
improve the quality and qualification 
of the existing varieties. 
The following tasks are underway: 1. 
Study on replacement of environmentally 
friendly projectile for Yunnan Baiyao 
Aerosol: The first phase of the projectile 
screening study has been completed and 
the proposed projectile has been 
preliminarily identified. An in-depth 
study will be carried out on the proposed 
projectile; 2. Study on sugar-free dosage 
forms of three granule preparations, 
including Bupleurum Hamiltonii Granule, 
Xiangsha Stomach Harmonizing Granule, 
and Ginseng and Tuckahoe Spleen and 
Stomach Strengthening Granule.  
To complete the declaration of 
supplemental registration of drugs 
and obtain the approval of 
supplemental application. 
1. This will practice the Company’s strategy of 
focusing on the field of TCM, promote inheritance 
and innovation in the field of TCM development, 
and further stabilize and enhance our 
competitiveness in the target product market. 2. It 
will help to explore the market of sugar-free 
granules, provide a new direction to solve the 
medication limitations of diabetes and other patients 
with prohibited sugar medication, expand the scope 
of application of the product to meet the health 
needs of more patient populations, and enhance the 
quality and competitiveness of the product. 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
38 
 
R&D team member 
 
2023 
2022 
Change rate 
Number of R&D team members 
(persons)  
527 
435 
21.15% 
Percentage of R&D team members in 
total head counts  
5.97% 
4.95% 
1.02% 
Educational background structure of R&D team members 
Below bachelor 
71 
80 
-11.25% 
Bachelor 
287 
194 
47.94% 
Master 
157 
151 
3.97% 
Above master 
12 
10 
20% 
Age structure of R&D team members 
Below 30  
135 
116 
16.38% 
30-40 
300 
237 
26.58% 
Above 40 
92 
82 
12.2% 
Note: The Company’s R&D team members refer to individuals directly involved in R&D activities, as well as management 
personnel and direct service personnel closely related to R&D activities. During the reporting period, adjustments had been made to 
the statistical scope of R&D team members to align with the statistical scope of R&D expenses. In previous years, the Company’s 
R&D team members were calculated based on the scope of technical personnel (including power equipment, technical quality, 
information management, and R&D management).  
R&D investment  
 
2023 
2022 
Change rate 
R&D investment amount (RMB)  
344,441,461.28 
342,748,138.38 
0.49% 
Percentage of R&D investment in 
operating revenue  
0.88% 
0.94% 
-0.06% 
Capitalized R&D investment amount 
(RMB)  
8,428,026.45 
6,024,448.12 
39.90% 
Percentage of capitalized R&D 
investment in total R&D investment  
2.45% 
1.76% 
0.69% 
Reason for the significant change in the composition of R&D team and its impact  
□Applicable 
 Not applicable 
Reason for significant change in percentage of R&D investment in operating revenue as compared with the previous year 
□Applicable 
 Not applicable 
Reason for significant change in capitalization rate of R&D investment and its rationality 
□Applicable 
 Not applicable 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
39 
 
5. Cash flow 
Unit: RMB 
Item 
2023 
2022 
Year-on-year increase/decrease  
Subtotal of cash inflows from 
operating activities 
41,332,606,952.24 
39,117,632,071.50 
5.66% 
Subtotal of cash outflows from 
operating activities 
37,829,864,604.22  
35,908,222,038.93 
5.35% 
Net cash flows from operating 
activities 
3,502,742,348.02  
3,209,410,032.57 
9.14% 
Subtotal of cash inflows from 
investment activities 
4,973,097,122.26  
6,842,996,254.88 
-27.33% 
Subtotal of cash outflows from 
investment activities 
4,454,516,459.62  
13,159,079,055.92 
-66.15% 
Net cash flows from investment 
activities 
518,580,662.64  
-6,316,082,801.04 
108.21% 
Subtotal of cash inflows from 
financing activities 
1,378,858,273.49 
2,448,169,506.95 
-43.68% 
Subtotal of cash outflows from 
financing activities 
4,296,900,513.08  
5,181,473,239.42 
-17.07% 
Net cash flow from financing 
activities 
-2,918,042,239.59  
-2,733,303,732.47 
-6.76% 
Net increase in cash and cash 
equivalents 
1,105,605,456.02  
-5,823,704,829.85 
118.98% 
Explanation of the main factors behind the significant changes in the relevant data compared to the previous year 
Applicable 
 □Not applicable 
1. Net cash flows from operating activities increased by 9.14%, with an increase of RMB 293 million. The 
main reason was an increase of RMB 2.422 billion in cash receipts from sales of goods and services compared to 
the same period last year, and an increase of RMB 1.117 billion in cash payments for the purchase of goods and 
labor services compared to the same period last year. 
2. Net cash flows from investment activities increased by 108.21%, with an increase of RMB 6.835 billion. 
The main reason was a decrease of RMB 2.522 billion in cash receipts from the recovery of investments compared 
to the same period last year, a decrease of RMB 11.581 billion in cash payments for investments compared to the 
same period last year, and an increase of RMB 3.317 billion in cash payments related to other investment activities 
compared to the same period last year. 
3. Net cash flows from financing activities decreased by 6.76%, with a decrease of RMB 185 million. The 
main reason was a decrease of RMB 927 million in cash receipts from borrowing compared to the same period last 
year, a decrease of RMB 814 million in cash payments for debt repayment compared to the same period last year, 
an increase of RMB 646 million in cash payments for the distribution of dividends, profits, or payment of interest 
compared to the same period last year, and a decrease of RMB 716 million in cash payments related to other 
financing activities compared to the same period last year. 
Explanation of the significant difference between the net cash flows from operating activities of the Company and the net profit 
for the year during the reporting period 
□Applicable 
 Not applicable 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
40 
 
V. Analysis of Non-principal Businesses 
 Applicable 
 □Not applicable 
Unit: RMB 
 
Amount 
Percentage in 
total profit 
Reasons 
Sustainable or not 
Investment income 
 779,010,728.82 
16.17% 
It consisted mainly of the gains on 
investment in Shanghai Pharma and 
gains on disposal of equity interests in a 
subsidiary, Ban Loong Xing Ye 
Commercial Trading (Shenzhen) 
Limited. 
No 
Profits and losses 
from changes in fair 
value 
 123,566,330.46 
2.56% 
It consisted mainly of the change in the 
net value of securities and mutual fund 
units held by the Company. 
No 
Asset impairment 
-58,127,562.23 
-1.21% 
It consisted mainly of the provision for 
impairment of goodwill and the 
provision for impairment of intangible 
assets. 
No 
Non-operating 
revenue 
 12,234,049.26 
0.25% 
It consisted mainly of the income 
unrelated to the Company’s day-to-day 
operating activities. 
No 
Non-operating 
expenses 
 24,728,403.02 
0.51% 
It consisted mainly of the expenses 
unrelated to the Company’s day-to-day 
operating activities. 
No 
Credit 
impairment 
losses 
(loss 
is 
indicated with “-”)  
 -136,455,204.36 
-2.83% 
It consisted mainly of the provision for 
bad debt related to accounts receivable in 
the commercial sector. 
No 
Other income 
 83,315,147.32 
1.73% 
It consisted mainly of government 
subsidies. 
No 
Gains from disposal of 
assets 
 10,654,438.38 
0.22% 
It consisted mainly of gains from the 
disposal of non-current assets and gains 
from the disposal of rights to use assets. 
No 
 
VI. Analysis on Assets and Liabilities 
1. Significant changes in assets composition 
Unit: RMB 
 
End of 2023 
Beginning of 2023 
Increase/ 
decrease 
in 
proportion 
Statement on significant 
changes 
Amount 
Proportion 
in total 
assets 
Amount 
Proportion 
in total 
assets 
Cash and 
bank balance 
14,218,343,076.67 
26.44% 
13,056,113,712.47 
24.49% 
1.95% 
No significant changes. 
Accounts 
receivable 
9,966,170,447.21 
18.53% 
9,089,822,151.93 
17.05% 
1.48% 
Increase in accounts 
receivable from Yunnan 
Pharma during the period. 
Inventories 
6,442,194,823.67 
11.98% 
7,993,207,044.26 
14.99% 
-3.01% 
Inventory management 
efficiency was improved and 
turnover was accelerated. 
Investment 
property 
44,104,145.97 
0.08% 
55,823,776.49 
0.10% 
-0.02% 
No significant changes. 
Long-term 
equity 
investments 
11,536,660,992.93 
21.45% 
11,318,749,947.10 
21.23% 
0.22% 
No significant changes. 
Fixed assets 
2,662,900,014.03 
4.95% 
2,723,302,365.65 
5.11% 
-0.16% 
No significant changes. 
Construction 
in progress 
529,708,553.58 
0.98% 
193,993,194.93 
0.36% 
0.62% 
Increased investment in 
construction in progress 
during the reporting period. 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
41 
 
 
The proportion of overseas assets was relatively high 
 Applicable 
 Not applicable 
Right-of-use 
assets 
258,319,485.58 
0.48% 
389,975,390.73 
0.73% 
-0.25% 
Partial lease termination 
during the reporting period. 
Short-term 
loans 
1,747,303,700.34 
3.25% 
1,850,867,886.59 
3.47% 
-0.22% 
No significant changes. 
Contractual 
liabilities 
1,739,865,228.75 
3.23% 
2,578,264,621.13 
4.84% 
-1.61% 
Decrease in contractual 
payments received in 
advance at the end of the 
period. 
Long-term 
loans 
2,100,000.00 
0.00% 
2,100,000.00 
0.00% 
0.00% 
No significant changes. 
Leasing 
liabilities 
172,347,309.72 
0.32% 
285,783,728.73 
0.54% 
-0.22% 
Partial lease termination 
during the reporting period. 
Financial 
assets held 
for trading 
149,366,687.56 
0.28% 
2,415,722,075.60 
4.53% 
-4.25% 
The investment in shares of 
Xiaomi Group-W 
(HK.01810) and all fund 
investments were disposed of 
during the period. 
Notes 
receivables 
227,542,572.56 
0.42% 
789,465,084.93 
1.48% 
-1.06% 
Reclassification according to 
the business management 
mode of notes receivable 
during the period. 
Receivables 
financing 
1,590,749,810.74 
2.96% 
834,668,231.58 
1.57% 
1.39% 
Reclassification according to 
the business management 
mode of notes receivable 
during the period. 
Prepayments 
312,298,727.01 
0.58% 
542,948,440.85 
1.02% 
-0.44% 
Decrease in prepayments to 
suppliers during the period. 
Other current 
assets 
2,862,076,217.20 
5.32% 
474,340,107.76 
0.89% 
4.43% 
Increase in fixed deposits 
during the period. 
Development 
expenses 
14,452,474.57 
0.03% 
6,024,448.12 
0.01% 
0.02% 
Continued investment in the 
original capitalization project 
during the reporting period. 
Other non-
current 
assets 
541,475,331.17 
1.01% 
965,218,407.14 
1.81% 
-0.80% 
Decrease in time deposits 
with maturity dates greater 
than one year from the 
balance sheet date. 
Receipts in 
advance 
486,612.12 
0.00% 
1,569,799.63 
0.00% 
0.00% 
Decrease in rent in advance 
during the reporting period. 
Payroll 
payable 
1,067,190,665.08 
1.98% 
468,450,348.52 
0.88% 
1.10% 
Increase in outstanding 
employee compensation 
payable at the end of the 
period. 
Taxes and 
duties 
payable 
339,670,850.02 
0.63% 
509,286,922.32 
0.96% 
-0.33% 
Decrease in unpaid income 
tax and VAT due at the end 
of the period 
Other current 
liabilities 
532,943,904.40 
0.99% 
381,185,773.19 
0.71% 
0.28% 
Increase in pending output 
VAT at the end of the period. 
Deferred 
income 
238,811,111.04 
0.44% 
178,621,813.00 
0.33% 
0.11% 
Increase in balance of 
government grants related to 
income. 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
42 
 
2. Assets and liabilities at fair value 
 Applicable 
 Not applicable 
Unit: RMB 
Item 
Opening balance 
Profits or 
losses on 
changes in fair 
value during 
the reporting 
period 
Cumulative 
changes in 
fair value 
included in 
equity 
Impairment 
accrued 
during the 
reporting 
period 
Purchase 
amount 
during the 
reporting 
period 
Sales amount 
during the 
reporting period 
Other changes 
Closing balance 
Financial assets 
 
Financial assets held for trading (derivative 
financial assets excluded)  
2,415,722,075.60  179,678,085.07 
  
  75,131,442.00  2,514,689,915.11 
-6,475,000.00                              
149,366,687.56 
Other equity instrument investments 
71,745,000.00 
 
 
 
 
 
 
71,745,000.00 
Other non-current financial assets 
380,786,134.24  -56,111,754.61 
  
  
 
 
 
324,674,379.63  
Subtotal of financial assets  
2,868,253,209.84 
123,566,330.46  
  
  75,131,442.00  2,514,689,915.11  
-6,475,000.00  
545,786,067.19 
Total 
2,868,253,209.84 
123,566,330.46  
  
  75,131,442.00  2,514,689,915.11  
-6,475,000.00  
545,786,067.19 
Financial liabilities 
0.00 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.00 
Other variations: None 
Whether the Company had significant changes in measurement attributes of main assets during the reporting period 
□ Yes  
 ☑ No 
3. Restrictions on asset rights as of the end of the reporting period 
Item 
Closing book value (RMB)  
Reason for restriction 
Cash and bank balance 
48,618,045.43 
Banker’s acceptance deposit, foreign exchange performance bond and banker’s letter of guarantee 
Cash and bank balance 
2,643,393.65 
Special funds for housing reform and housing maintenance 
Cash and bank balance 
500,000.00 
The matters involved in the litigation have been successfully resolved, and efforts are underway to lift the freeze and address related 
issues 
Assets in special account for 
system reform 
627,116,169.10  
Special fund for paying the cost of employee status conversion in state-owned enterprises 
Long-term equity investments 
11,536,646,559.56 
The holdings shall not be transferred within 36 months since the ending date of the private placement in 2021 
Total 
12,215,524,167.74 
-- 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
43 
 
VII. Investment Analysis 
1. Overview 
 Applicable 
  Not applicable 
Investment during the reporting period 
(RMB)  
Investment during the same period of the 
previous year (RMB)  
Percentage of change 
4,454,516,459.62 
13,159,079,055.92 
-66.15% 
2. Significant equity investments made during the reporting period 
 Applicable 
  Not applicable 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
44 
 
3. Significant non-equity investments in progress during the reporting period 
Applicable 
 Not applicable 
Unit: RMB 
Project 
Investment 
method 
Investment 
in fixed 
assets or not 
Involved 
industry 
in 
investme
nt 
projects 
Amount 
invested in the 
reporting 
period 
Cumulative actual 
investment as of 
the end of 
reporting period 
Source of 
funding 
Progress 
of 
project 
Estimated 
income 
Cumulative 
income as of 
the end of 
the reporting 
period 
Reasons 
for unmet 
progress 
and 
estimated 
income 
Disclosure 
date (if any) 
Disclosure index (if 
any)  
Yunnan 
Baiyao 
Shanghai 
International 
Center 
Self-
established 
Yes 
Pharmace
uticals, 
daily 
chemical 
products 
273,545,193.38 
567,425,102.99 
Self-
raised 
funds 
50.89% 
 
 
N/A 
June 9, 2021 
http://www.cninfo.
com.cn/new/disclo
sure/detail?stockC
ode=000538&anno
uncementId=12102
06330&orgId=gssz
0000538&announc
ementTime=2021-
06-09 
Yunnan 
Baiyao R&D 
Platform - 
Kunming 
Center 
Construction 
Project 
Self-
established 
Yes 
Pharmace
uticals 
66,903,374.73 
87,196,805.90 
Self-
raised 
funds 
11.04% 
 
 
N/A 
 
 
Total 
-- 
-- 
-- 
340,448,568.11 
654,621,908.89 
-- 
-- 
0.00 
0.00 
-- 
-- 
-- 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
45 
 
4. Financial assets investment 
(1) Securities investment 
 Applicable 
 □Not applicable 
Unit: RMB 
Type of 
securities 
Stock 
code 
Stock 
abbreviation 
Initial 
investment cost 
Accounting 
measurement 
model 
Opening book 
value 
Profits or 
losses on 
changes in fair 
value during 
the reporting 
period 
Cumulative 
changes 
in fair 
value 
included in 
equity 
Purchase 
amount 
during the 
reporting 
period 
Sales amount 
during the 
reporting period 
Profits and 
losses during 
the reporting 
period 
Closing book 
value 
Accounting 
items 
Source 
of 
funding 
Domestic 
and 
overseas 
stocks 
HK.02633 
Jacobson 
Pharma 
238,699,200.00 
Fair value 
164,361,680.00 
-48,365,520.00 
 
 
 
14,978,562.00 
115,996,160.00 
Other non-
current 
financial 
assets 
Self-
raised 
Domestic 
and 
overseas 
stocks 
HK.03681 
SinoMab 
BioScience 
354,119,828.19 
Fair value 
81,419,271.05 
9,535,032.83 
 
 
18,408,819.22 
-5,330,367.76 
72,545,484.66 
Financial 
assets held 
for trading 
Self-
raised 
Domestic 
and 
overseas 
stocks 
HK.02161 
JBM 
(Healthcare) 
25,039,800.00 
Fair value 
21,215,162.50 
-3,425,401.60 
 
54,431,442.00 
 
-458,253.79 
72,221,202.90 
Financial 
assets held 
for trading 
Self-
raised 
Domestic 
and 
overseas 
stocks 
HK.01810 
Xiaomi 
Corporation 
1,631,800,843.40 
Fair value 
1,078,456,867.31 
146,146,733.66 
 
 
1,224,603,600.97 
157,681,844.16 
 
Financial 
assets held 
for trading 
Self-
raised 
Fund 
162712 
Guangfa Juli 
Bonds Class 
A 
400,000,000.00 
Fair value 
398,257,744.66 
9,224,385.79 
 
 
407,482,130.45 
10,013,185.79 
 
Financial 
assets held 
for trading 
Self-
raised 
Fund 
004736 
Fullgoal 
Dingli Net 
Debt 
1,700,000,000.00 
Fair value 
289,725,481.89 
6,196,610.89 
 
 
295,922,092.78 
6,807,225.83 
 
Financial 
assets held 
for trading 
Self-
raised 
Fund 
SJS623 
CICC 
Wealth 
Management 
Exclusive 
No. 516 
129,850,746.27 
Fair value 
136,804,621.97 
3,616,530.57 
 
 
140,421,152.54 
3,663,717.05 
 
Financial 
assets held 
for trading 
Self-
raised 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
46 
 
Fund 
002925 
Guangfa 
Juyuan 
Class A 
100,999,000.00 
Fair value 
123,309,198.09 
 
 
 
123,309,198.09 
668,616.43 
 
Financial 
assets held 
for trading 
Self-
raised 
Fund 
SW8334 
Le Rui 
Enhanced 
Bonds 
No.20 
88,000,000.00 
Fair value 
116,958,548.41 
 
 
 
116,958,548.41 
-1,208,297.97 
 
Financial 
assets held 
for trading 
Self-
raised 
Fund  
SEG067 
Boshi 
Robust 
Preferred 
FOF2 
25,000,000.00 
Fair value 
61,815,384.62 
1,527,692.31 
 
 
63,343,076.93 
1,479,692.31 
 
Financial 
assets held 
for trading 
Self-
raised 
Other securities investments held at the 
end of the reporting period 
50,000,000.00 
-- 
45,118,354.68 
170,741.17 
 
 
45,289,095.85 
357,596.05 
 
-- 
-- 
Total 
4,743,509,417.86 
-- 
2,517,442,315.18 
124,626,805.62 
0.00 
54,431,442.00 
2,435,737,715.24 
188,653,520.10 
260,762,847.56 
-- 
-- 
Disclosure date of the Board’s 
announcement on review and approval 
of securities investment 
December 31, 2022 
Note: In 2023, Jacobson Pharma distributed a special dividend by way of distribution in specie, whereby the Company, as a shareholder of Jacobson, was distributed 509 shares of JBM (Healthcare) 
for every 2,000 shares of Jacobson, resulting in a total of 50.9 million shares valued at RMB 54,431,442.00 being distributed. 
(2) Investments in derivatives 
□Applicable 
 Not applicable 
The Company had no investments in derivatives during the reporting period. 
5. Use of proceeds 
□Applicable 
 Not applicable 
The Company had no use of proceeds during the reporting period.


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
47 
 
VIII. Significant Assets and Equity Sales 
1. Significant assets sales 
 □Applicable 
 Not applicable 
The Company had no significant assets sales during the reporting period. 
2. Significant equity sales 
 □Applicable 
 Not applicable 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
48 
 
IX. Analysis on the Major Holding Companies and Joint-stock Companies 
Applicable 
 □Not applicable 
Major subsidiaries and joint-stock companies with a net profit impact of over 10% 
Unit: RMB 
Company name 
Company 
type 
Principal businesses 
Registered 
capital 
Total assets 
Net assets 
Operating revenue 
Operating profit 
Net profit 
Yunnan 
Pharmaceutical, 
Co., Ltd 
Subsidiary 
Wholesale and retail of pharmaceuticals 
1,000,000,000.00 
15,200,346,760.92 
5,878,586,996.71 
24,490,415,618.28 
489,491,253.02 
412,985,984.59 
Yunnan Baiyao 
Group Health 
Products Co., 
Ltd. 
Subsidiary 
Production and sales of oral hygiene products 
84,500,000.00 
8,653,605,571.01 
6,537,279,297.85 
6,422,334,217.30 
2,420,484,806.39 
2,022,491,803.68 
Shanghai 
Pharmaceuticals 
Holding Co., 
Ltd. 
Joint-
stock 
company 
R&D, manufacturing, and sales of API, 
pharmaceutical products (including but not 
limited to chemical Active Pharmaceutical 
Ingredients (APIs), chemical preparations, 
TCM materials, Chinese patent medicines, 
TCM decoction pieces, biochemical drugs, 
biological products, narcotics, psychotropic 
drugs, and toxic drugs for medical use 
[Adapted to the scope of business], vaccines) 
of various dosage forms (including but not 
limited to tablets, capsules, aerosols, immune 
preparations, granules, plasters, pills, oral 
liquids, inhalants, injections, liniments, 
tinctures, suppositories) health products, 
medical devices, and related products, 
manufacturing and sales of pharmaceutical 
equipment, engineering installation and 
maintenance, warehousing and logistics, sea, 
land, and air freight forwarding business, 
industrial investment, asset management, 
provision of international economic and trade 
information and consulting services, self-
owned house leasing, import and export 
business of various self-operated and agent 
drugs and related goods and technologies. 
3,696,414,318.00 
211,972,533,766.80 
80,326,092,964.93 
260,295,088,943.53 
7,667,234,704.32 
5,166,570,284.26 
 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
49 
 
Acquisition and disposal of subsidiaries during the reporting period 
□Applicable 
 Not applicable 
See Section X “IX. Changes in Consolidation.” 
X. Structured Entities Controlled by the Company 
Applicable 
 □Not applicable 
See Section X “X. Interest in Other Entities.” 
XI. Outlook of the Company 
(I) Future development strategy 
1. Strategic positioning 
(1) Leader of China’s pharmaceutical industry 
Committed to maintaining a leading position in China’s pharmaceutical industry and in the field of orthopedics, 
we leverage innovative methods and our competitive strength across the entire industry chain. We actively explore 
diversification, accelerate internationalization of our business and brands, and continuously expand the boundaries 
of the pharmaceutical industry. Deepening reform practices in the pharmaceutical enterprise system, we strive to 
become a model for the transformation and upgrading of traditional pharmaceutical companies. 
(2) Promoter of TCM inheritance and innovation 
Guarding and inheriting Yunnan Baiyao, a crown jewel of ethnic medicines, we tell the story of TCM brands 
entering modern life in China. By deeply cultivating innovation and development of TCM resources, we promote 
TCM to enter every household and various life scenarios through R&D and product innovation. We also focus on 
the protection, development, and utilization of authentic TCM resources, accelerating the process of 
industrialization, modernization, and scientific development of TCM. 
(3) Guardian of people’s healthy life 
In the health sector, we drive supply-side reforms, focusing on public health demands to deliver better 
healthcare products and services. We dutifully shoulder social responsibilities in guarding life and health, enhancing 
healthcare equity, accessibility, and efficacy through optimized regional distribution and sustained investments in 
manufacturing and R&D. Moreover, we consistently focus on addressing major health issues that concern society, 
such as oncology, cardiovascular and cerebrovascular care, pain management, and maternal-child health, aiming 
for groundbreaking outcomes. 
2. Terminal goals of “14th Five-Year Plan” 
By 2025, Yunnan Baiyao will have optimized its business structure, substantially boosting corporate vigor and 
effectively enhancing financial performance. The priorities entail: strengthening and expanding the quality influence 
of “Big TCM” products along the comprehensive TCM industry chain; enhancing and refining the health and 
wellness offerings through a focus on efficacious products and services in personal healthcare; stabilizing and 
improving the new regional distribution channels via market-specific commercial circulation. 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
50 
 
(II) Business plan for 2024 
In 2024, the Company will thoroughly study and fully implement the key principles outlined in the Central 
Economic Work Conference and the Yunnan Provincial Economic Work Conference. It will also align our actions 
with the Yunnan Province’s 3815 Strategy, embrace the new development concept, and strive to establish a new 
development pattern. We will continue to adhere to a long-term oriented development philosophy, and develop new 
quality productive forces. Upholding an entrepreneurial and craftsmanship spirit, we will reinforce strategic 
management and concentrate on our principal businesses. We will construct a lean operation value management 
system around the entire process of value creation, value enablement, value support, value supervision, and value 
distribution to accelerate the strategic transformation and organizational change. Bolstered by R&D, powered by 
digital intelligence, and streamlined by operational efficiency, we will deepen transformative reforms to effectively 
elevate our development quality and efficiency, thereby striving to propel our high-quality development. 
In 2024, the Company will adhere to its strategies, further concentrating on its principal businesses, and 
safeguarding the basic segments: Pharmaceuticals BG, Health Products BG, TCM Resources BG, and Yunnan 
Pharma. With the main work tone of synergizing “growth” and “efficiency,” we will focus on the goal of healthy 
and sustainable growth with efficiency and quality. In terms of scale, we will promote the core industry to realize 
growth by focusing on products related to our principal businesses and with competitive strengths. Structurally, 
focusing on the core products, we will promote the secondary development of key varieties, integrate all the 
resources of the Group, and promote the continuous optimization of the industrial structure and product mix to 
create new growth drivers. In terms of quality, we will promote internal lean operation through the competitiveness 
enhancement of the entire industry chain, realize cost reduction and efficiency enhancement, continuously 
consolidate the basic segments, and achieve a new pattern of coordinated development of scale, structure and quality. 
The aforementioned business plan should not constitute a performance commitment to investors. Investors are 
advised to pay attention to investment risks. 
(III) Key Measures 
1. Strengthening the leadership in Party building and gathering momentum for development 
Leadership in high-quality Party building is always an important basic guarantee for Yunnan Baiyao to cope 
with external complexities and risk challenges and realize high-quality development of the Company. We will 
continue to study and implement General Secretary Xi Jinping’s important expositions on Party building, and 
promote the development of the Company to a new stage by strengthening the Party building, gathering strength, 
increasing momentum, and improving the effectiveness, with the goal of “leading and ensuring the high-quality 
development of Yunnan Baiyao by high-quality Party building.” We will constantly deepen the construction of 
modern enterprise system with Chinese characteristics, promote the integration of the Party’s leadership into the 
entire process and all aspects of corporate governance, focus on “integration and inclusion,” identify the key areas 
and focus points of Party building efforts, and lead reform and development to a higher level of quality through 
high-quality Party building. 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
51 
 
2. Enhancing strategic governance and concentrating on principal businesses 
The Company upholds its mission of “to guard life and health,” consistently striving to inherit tradition while 
fostering innovation. We consider the “integration of TCM into modern life” as the driving force for our 
development. We continuously inject new vitality into traditional brands and the development of TCM, aligning 
closely with the national strategy of “focusing on the inheritance and innovation of TCM.” 
Looking ahead, the Company will firmly focus on its strategic positioning as a “provider of comprehensive 
solutions in the Big Health sector,” steadfastly deepening its roots in the “pharmaceutical” industry. The Company 
will drive all business operations to focus on the advantageous areas of Yunnan Baiyao in the Big Health sector, 
continuously strengthening its leading position in the sector. Meanwhile, the Company will scientifically, prudently 
and effectively foster new business growth drivers while continuously enhancing its core competencies. The 
Company will focus on its three principal businesses: pharmaceuticals, health, and pharmaceutical distribution, and 
further fortify its dominant position in the field of TCM, strengthen and expand the quality influence of “Big TCM” 
products to secure its status as an industry leader. By extending advantages, it will develop a premier medicine 
brand in Yunnan Province. The Company will also innovate and refine the health and wellness offerings to maintain 
its pioneering status in this domain, and stabilize and improve the new regional distribution channels to sustain its 
leadership in regional markets. While maintaining a focus on the principal businesses, the Company will adhere to 
its overall strategic deployment, leverage its business characteristics and capabilities to expand the business 
presence in related fields through scientific and prudent approaches. Following the principle of “doing what we do 
best”, the Company will continuously and effectively create new business growth opportunities. To ensure the 
healthy and efficient development of both core and innovative businesses, the Company is actively building a 
strategic investment capability system and risk management system that cover the entire investment process. This 
will drive the Company’s industrial layout and investment management to new heights, effectively promoting the 
Company’s healthy development. 
3. Enhancing lean efficiency to catalyze high-quality development 
The Company will further reinforce budget management, risk control, and cost consciousness, driving 
transformational reforms through whole-chain quality and efficiency enhancements to attain high-quality growth 
and mutual benefits for all stakeholders. Comprehensive budget management serves as a pivotal tool for translating 
the corporate strategy into action and enhancing management practices. Thus, the Company will synchronize 
strategic management and overall budget planning by developing a strategy-centric comprehensive budget system 
to facilitate strategic and organic growth and orderly performance improvement. Cultivating a strong cost 
consciousness is an important means of achieving cost reduction and efficiency improvement, which itself is a 
sustained, systemic endeavor. The Company will adopt a holistic approach to build end-to-end value chain 
capabilities, aiming to reduce costs and increase efficiency across the entire value chain. Through effective 
coordination, comprehensive consideration, and step-by-step resolution, the Company will ultimately achieve the 
optimal cost and strongest competitiveness throughout the entire chain. Moreover, the Company will consistently 
reinforce the regulation of its own professional behavior in various management processes, prevent and resolve 
operational risks, and continuously enhance employees’ awareness of bottom lines and risks to ensure the steady 
and far-reaching development of the Company. 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
52 
 
In 2024, the Company will steadily implement organizational reforms centered around “strengthening the 
front-end, consolidating the middle-end, and optimizing the back-end,” and drive the shift in management control 
from financial control to strategic control, leading to a more focused, streamlined, and efficient organizational 
structure. The Company will enhance internal coherence and collaboration, providing stronger organizational 
support for its focus on principal businesses, integration of advantageous resources, and reinforcement of vertical 
and empowerment controls. Looking ahead, the Company will continually reinforce its talent pool, emphasizing the 
cultivation of a proficient, specialized, and market-driven cadre and workforce. Deepening market-oriented 
mechanisms, the Company will continuously enhance resource allocation precision, and collective coordination, 
and further unleash the power of “breakthrough” and “perseverance.” This aims to ignite the passion and drive for 
innovation among its cadre and staff, motivating them to work tirelessly and energetically. 
4. Propelling enterprise development through sci-tech innovation 
Yunnan Baiyao’s enduring vitality over its 120-year legacy stems from its unwavering commitment to tradition, 
ceaseless innovation, and adaptability to progress. The Company embraces the digital and intelligent transformation, 
and relentlessly pursues excellence through self-renewal via innovation in raw materials, product development, and 
technological advancements. The Company establishes mechanisms, creates platforms, and fosters a culture to 
further develop a scientific, efficient, and pragmatic R&D management system. Through rigorous verification and 
efficient management, the Company continuously strengthens the full-process management of R&D projects. 
Looking ahead, Yunnan Baiyao will persist in its three pillars of scientific and technological innovation: 
customer-focused innovation centered on consumer needs, collaborative “socialized innovation” facilitated by 
partnerships among government, industry, academic, research, and medical sectors, and “digital and intelligent 
innovation” propelled by AI, big data, and cloud computing technologies. The Company will thus construct an 
innovation system aligned with national strategies, market demands, and corporate realities, thereby enhancing the 
Company’s intrinsic value. On one hand, Yunnan Baiyao will skillfully play the dual cards of TCM and innovative 
medicine. For TCM R&D, innovation, safety, and effectiveness should be the guiding principles. The Company 
will allocate resources reasonably to promote the innovation and inheritance of TCM theories, advancing the 
development of innovative Chinese medicines and the secondary development of TCM. Regarding R&D of 
innovative drugs, the Company benchmarks against technological frontiers, clinical demands, and its unique 
resource capabilities to provide momentum for long-term growth. On the other hand, the Company will adeptly 
balance short-term and mid-to-long-term R&D programs. In the near term, the Company will vigorously explore 
Yunnan Baiyao’s resource variety, hastening the conversion of products with competitive market appeal. In the 
medium term, the Company will develop a repertoire of scalable and replicable generic technologies. In the long 
term, the Company will nurture a cohort of leading experts in their respective fields to ensure that the Company’s 
high-quality development is underpinned by its sci-tech R&D and innovations. 
5. Focusing on investor returns to achieve mutual benefits for all stakeholders 
Yunnan Baiyao has consistently emphasized delivering steady and reasonable returns to its investors, sharing 
corporate achievements with shareholders. Since its listing, the Company has distributed dividends for consecutive 
30 years, with a cumulative total exceeding RMB 20.7 billion. The Company will diligently implement the guiding 
principles of “activating capital markets and boosting investor confidence” outlined at the meetings of Political 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
53 
 
Bureau of CPC Central Committee, and “further enhancing the quality and investment value of listed companies, 
and taking stronger, more effective measures to stabilize the market and improve confidence” proposed at the 
Executive Meeting of the State Council. The Company will continue to actively respond to regulatory authorities’ 
calls to increase corporate value and prioritize investor returns, focusing on its principal businesses, fostering 
innovation, continuously creating value for shareholders, and thus contributing to the growth of social wealth and 
increased consumer spending. Moreover, the Company will strictly abide by legal statutes and corporate guidelines, 
ensuring transparent, accurate, comprehensive, timely, and equitable disclosure of information. By disclosing 
information related to environmental, social, and governance (ESG) issues, the Company will deepen the concept 
of sustainable development and implement the new development philosophy. The Company will also accelerate 
its green transformation, provide investors with a more comprehensive view of its corporate value, and build an 
excellent corporate value communication system, striving tirelessly to achieve long-term, high-quality mutual 
benefits for all stakeholders. 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
54 
 
XII. Surveys, Communications, Interviews and Other Activities during the Reporting Period 
Applicable 
 □Not applicable 
Time of reception 
Place of reception 
Model of 
reception 
Type of 
guests  
Guests 
Discussions and information 
provided  
Index of basic information of the survey 
February 3, 2023 
Office building at the 
headquarters 
Field 
research 
Institution 
2 persons from CITIC 
Securities 
To understand the business 
situation of the Company and other 
related issues 
http://www.szcninfo.com/new/disclosure/detail?stockCode
=000538&announcementId=1215788816&orgId=gssz000
0538&announcementTime=2023-02-07 
February 9, 2023 
Office building at the 
headquarters 
Field 
research 
Institution 
2 persons from Western 
Securities, etc. 
To understand the business 
situation of the Company and other 
related issues 
http://www.szcninfo.com/new/disclosure/detail?stockCode
=000538&announcementId=1215852957&orgId=gssz000
0538&announcementTime=2023-02-13 
February 13, 2023 
Office building at the 
headquarters 
Field 
research 
Institution 
7 persons from 
Pharmaceutical 
Division of Hua 
Chuang Securities, etc.  
To understand the business 
situation of the Company and other 
related issues 
http://www.szcninfo.com/new/disclosure/detail?stockCode
=000538&announcementId=1215870293&orgId=gssz000
0538&announcementTime=2023-02-15 
February 14, 2023 
Office building at the 
headquarters 
Field 
research 
Institution 
4 persons from 
Guoyuan Securities, 
etc. 
To understand the business 
situation of the Company and other 
related issues 
http://www.szcninfo.com/new/disclosure/detail?stockCode
=000538&announcementId=1215881542&orgId=gssz000
0538&announcementTime=2023-02-16 
February 15, 2023 
Office building at the 
headquarters 
Field 
research 
Institution 
8 persons from 
Guosheng Securities, 
etc.  
To understand the business 
situation of the Company and other 
related issues 
http://www.szcninfo.com/new/disclosure/detail?stockCode
=000538&announcementId=1215889941&orgId=gssz000
0538&announcementTime=2023-02-17 
April 1, 2023 
Office building at the 
headquarters 
Telephone 
communic
ation  
Others 
140 persons from 
investors 
To understand the business 
situation of the Company and other 
related issues 
http://www.szcninfo.com/new/disclosure/detail?stockCode
=000538&announcementId=1216327171&orgId=gssz000
0538&announcementTime=2023-04-04 
April 6, 2023 
Office building at the 
headquarters 
Field 
research 
Institution 
3 persons from CICC, 
etc. 
To understand the business 
situation of the Company and other 
related issues 
http://www.szcninfo.com/new/disclosure/detail?stockCode
=000538&announcementId=1216364465&orgId=gssz000
0538&announcementTime=2023-04-10 
April 11, 2023 
Office building at the 
headquarters 
Field 
research 
Institution 
1 person from Broad 
Peak 
To understand the business 
situation of the Company and other 
related issues 
http://www.szcninfo.com/new/disclosure/detail?stockCode
=000538&announcementId=1216389978&orgId=gssz000
0538&announcementTime=2023-04-12 
April 13, 2023 
Office building at the 
headquarters 
Field 
research 
Institution 
1 person from Rheos 
Capital 
To understand the business 
situation of the Company and other 
related issues 
http://www.szcninfo.com/new/disclosure/detail?stockCode
=000538&announcementId=1216411350&orgId=gssz000
0538&announcementTime=2023-04-14 
April 14, 2023 
Office building at the 
headquarters 
Field 
research 
Institution 
60 persons from 
investors 
To understand the business 
situation of the Company and other 
related issues 
http://www.szcninfo.com/new/disclosure/detail?stockCode
=000538&announcementId=1216453402&orgId=gssz000
0538&announcementTime=2023-04-18 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
55 
 
April 18, 2023 
Investor Relations 
Interactive Platform 
of Quanjing.com  
Online 
exchange 
through 
Internet 
platform  
Others 
140 persons from 
investors 
To understand the business 
situation of the Company and other 
related issues 
http://www.szcninfo.com/new/disclosure/detail?stockCode
=000538&announcementId=1216489678&orgId=gssz000
0538&announcementTime=2023-04-20 
May 18, 2023 
Office building at the 
headquarters 
Field 
research 
Institution 
2 persons from 
Topsperity Securities, 
etc.  
To understand the business 
situation of the Company and other 
related issues 
http://www.szcninfo.com/new/disclosure/detail?stockCode
=000538&announcementId=1216861152&orgId=gssz000
0538&announcementTime=2023-05-19 
May 17, 2023 
Office building at the 
headquarters 
Field 
research 
Institution 
14 persons from 
Industrial Securities, 
etc. 
To understand the business 
situation of the Company and other 
related issues 
http://www.szcninfo.com/new/disclosure/detail?stockCode
=000538&announcementId=1216861154&orgId=gssz000
0538&announcementTime=2023-05-19 
June 9, 2023 
“Baiyao Park” 
Building of the 
Company  
Field 
research 
Institution 
65 persons from the 
institutional investors  
To understand the business 
situation of the Company and other 
related issues 
http://www.szcninfo.com/new/disclosure/detail?stockCode
=000538&announcementId=1217051686&orgId=gssz000
0538&announcementTime=2023-06-13 
July 14, 2023 
“Baiyao Park” 
Building of the 
Company 
Field 
research 
Others 
102 persons from 
investors  
To understand the business 
situation of the Company and other 
related issues 
http://www.szcninfo.com/new/disclosure/detail?stockCode
=000538&announcementId=1217318930&orgId=gssz000
0538&announcementTime=2023-07-18 
July 25, 2023 
“Baiyao Park” 
Building of the 
Company 
Field 
research 
Institution 
20 persons from 
Ningbo Zhiyuan, etc. 
To understand the business 
situation of the Company and other 
related issues 
http://www.szcninfo.com/new/disclosure/detail?stockCode
=000538&announcementId=1217393068&orgId=gssz000
0538&announcementTime=2023-07-26 
August 31, 2023 
Office building at the 
headquarters 
Telephone 
communic
ation 
Others 
168 persons from 
institutional and 
individual investors  
To understand the business 
situation of the Company and other 
related issues 
http://www.szcninfo.com/new/disclosure/detail?stockCode
=000538&announcementId=1217771510&orgId=gssz000
0538&announcementTime=2023-09-04 
September 1, 
2023 
Office building at the 
headquarters 
Field 
research 
Institution 
5 persons from Ronnie 
Millennium Capital 
Management (Hong 
Kong) Limited, etc. 
To understand the business 
situation of the Company and other 
related issues 
http://www.szcninfo.com/new/disclosure/detail?stockCode
=000538&announcementId=1217782348&orgId=gssz000
0538&announcementTime=2023-09-05 
September 26, 
2023 
“Baiyao Park” 
Building of the 
Company 
Field 
research 
Institution 
9 persons from Fullgoal 
Fund, etc. 
To understand the business 
situation of the Company and other 
related issues 
http://www.szcninfo.com/new/disclosure/detail?stockCode
=000538&announcementId=1217968299&orgId=gssz000
0538&announcementTime=2023-09-27 
October 13, 2023 
Office building at the 
headquarters 
Telephone 
communic
ation 
Institution 
2 persons from UBS 
Assets Management  
To understand the business 
situation of the Company and other 
related issues 
http://www.szcninfo.com/new/disclosure/detail?stockCode
=000538&announcementId=1218062501&orgId=gssz000
0538&announcementTime=2023-10-17 
October 31, 2023 
Office building at the 
headquarters 
Field 
research 
Institution 
2 persons from JunHe  
To understand the business 
situation of the Company and other 
related issues 
http://www.szcninfo.com/new/disclosure/detail?stockCode
=000538&announcementId=1218241015&orgId=gssz000
0538&announcementTime=2023-11-02 
November 9, 
2023 
Office building at the 
headquarters 
Field 
research 
Institution 
3 persons from Essence 
Securities, etc.  
To understand the business 
situation of the Company and other 
related issues 
http://www.szcninfo.com/new/disclosure/detail?stockCode
=000538&announcementId=1218324669&orgId=gssz000
0538&announcementTime=2023-11-13 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
56 
 
November 13, 
2023 
Office building at the 
headquarters 
Field 
research 
Institution 
4 persons from 
Topsperity Securities, 
etc. 
To understand the business 
situation of the Company and other 
related issues 
http://www.szcninfo.com/new/disclosure/detail?stockCode
=000538&announcementId=1218350021&orgId=gssz000
0538&announcementTime=2023-11-15 
November 14, 
2023 
Office building at the 
headquarters 
Field 
research 
Institution 
3 persons from China 
Post Securities, etc. 
To understand the business 
situation of the Company and other 
related issues 
http://www.szcninfo.com/new/disclosure/detail?stockCode
=000538&announcementId=1218361773&orgId=gssz000
0538&announcementTime=2023-11-16 
December 13, 
2023 
Office building at the 
headquarters 
Field 
research 
Institution 
1 person from Hazel 
Investment  
To understand the business 
situation of the Company and other 
related issues 
http://www.szcninfo.com/new/disclosure/detail?stockCode
=000538&announcementId=1218634851&orgId=gssz000
0538&announcementTime=2023-12-15 
December 25, 
2023 
Office building at the 
headquarters 
Telephone 
communic
ation 
Institution 
5 persons from China 
Merchants Fund, etc. 
To understand the business 
situation of the Company and other 
related issues 
http://www.szcninfo.com/new/disclosure/detail?stockCode
=000538&announcementId=1218743778&orgId=gssz000
0538&announcementTime=2023-12-27 
December 26, 
2023 
Office building at the 
headquarters 
Telephone 
communic
ation 
Institution 
4 persons from 
Tianhong Asset 
Management  
To understand the business 
situation of the Company and other 
related issues 
http://www.szcninfo.com/new/disclosure/detail?stockCode
=000538&announcementId=1218749256&orgId=gssz000
0538&announcementTime=2023-12-28 
December 26, 
2023 
Office building at the 
headquarters 
Telephone 
communic
ation 
Institution 
1 person from DH Fund 
Management  
To understand the business 
situation of the Company and other 
related issues 
http://www.szcninfo.com/new/disclosure/detail?stockCode
=000538&announcementId=1218749350&orgId=gssz000
0538&announcementTime=2023-12-28 
December 29, 
2023 
Office building at the 
headquarters 
Telephone 
communic
ation 
Institution 
1 person from Zhong 
Ou AMC  
To understand the business 
situation of the Company and other 
related issues 
http://www.szcninfo.com/new/disclosure/detail?stockCode
=000538&announcementId=1218768046&orgId=gssz000
0538&announcementTime=2023-12-29 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
57 
 
XIII. Implementation of the “Enhancement of Quality and Returns” Initiative 
Whether the Company disclosed the “Enhancement of Quality and Returns” Initiative 
Yes  
 □No 
The Company disclosed the Announcement on “Enhancement of Quality and Returns” Initiative on March 9, 
2024 (Announcement No.: 2024-12). 
In 2023, the Company achieved operating revenue of RMB 39.111 billion, an increase of 7.19% year-on-year. 
The net profit attributable to shareholders of the listed company was RMB 4.094 billion, a growth of 36.41% year-
on-year. The net profit attributable to shareholders of the listed company, excluding non-recurring profits and losses, 
reached RMB 3.764 billion, an increase of 16.45% year-on-year. Overall, the Company maintained a stable and 
progressive performance. At the same time, the Company maintained a sound financial structure, with good 
profitability and ample cash reserves. By the end of 2023, the Company’s asset-liability ratio was 25.80%, and its 
cash and bank balance at the end of the period amounted to RMB 14.218 billion. The net cash flows from operating 
activities for the year was RMB 3.503 billion. The Company’s dividend plan for 2023 is to distribute RMB 20.77 
per 10 shares, with a total dividend amount of RMB 3.706 billion, accounting for 90.53% of the 2023 net profit 
attributable to the parent company. 
On February 23, 2024, the Company held the general meeting, which considered and approved the cancellation 
of the repurchased 12,599,946 shares and the reduction of the Company’s registered capital accordingly. Through 
this share repurchase cancellation arrangement, the Company demonstrates its confidence in its development and 
enhances investors’ sense of achievement with concrete actions. This fully safeguards the interests of investors and 
stakeholders and further enhances investors’ recognition of the Company’s value. Currently, the matter is under the 
period for creditors to declare their claims, and the Company’s management will proceed with the share cancellation 
procedures in accordance with the authorization granted by the general meeting. 
Looking ahead, the Company will firmly focus on its strategic positioning as a “provider of comprehensive 
solutions in the Big Health sector,” steadfastly deepening its roots in the “pharmaceutical” industry. The Company 
will drive all business operations to focus on the advantageous areas of Yunnan Baiyao in the Big Health sector, 
continuously strengthening its leading position in the sector. Meanwhile, the Company will scientifically, prudently 
and effectively foster new business growth drivers while continuously enhancing its core competencies. The 
Company will focus on its three principal businesses: pharmaceuticals, health, and pharmaceutical distribution, and 
further fortify its dominant position in the field of TCM, strengthen the quality influence of “Big TCM” products to 
secure its status as an industry leader. By extending advantages, it will develop a premier medicine brand in Yunnan 
Province. The Company will also refine the health and wellness offerings to maintain its pioneering status in this 
domain, and improve the new regional distribution channels to sustain its leadership in regional markets. While 
maintaining a focus on the principal businesses, the Company will adhere to its overall strategic deployment, 
leverage its business characteristics and capabilities to expand the business presence in related fields through 
scientific and prudent approaches. Following the principle of “doing what we do best”, the Company will 
continuously and effectively create new business growth opportunities. To ensure the healthy and efficient 
development of both core and innovative businesses, the Company is actively building a strategic investment 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
58 
 
capability system and risk management system that cover the entire investment process. This will drive the 
Company’s industrial layout and investment management to new heights, effectively promoting the Company’s 
healthy development. 
The Company will strictly remain committed to fulfilling its responsibilities and obligations as a listed 
company. Through focusing on our principal businesses, continuous innovation, and operational improvements to 
enhance our intrinsic value, we aim to promote the healthy and sustainable development of the Company. We will 
adhere to the “investor-oriented” principle, striving to safeguard investors’ rights and interests through various 
means, enhance investment returns and bolster investors’ sense of achievement. By effectively implementing the 
“Enhancement of Quality and Returns” initiative, we seek to boost market confidence and contribute to the positive 
and healthy development of the capital market. 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
59 
 
Section IV  
Corporate Governance 
I. Basic Information of Corporate Governance 
In strict accordance with the requirements of the Company Law, the Securities Law, the Code of Governance 
for Listed Companies, the Rules Governing the Listing of Shares on Shenzhen Stock Exchange, the Shenzhen Stock 
Exchange’s Self-regulatory Guidelines for Listed Companies No. 1 - Standardized Operation of Listed Companies 
on the Main Board, and other laws and regulations, as well as internal rules and regulations, such as the Articles of 
Association, the Company keeps improving corporate governance and strengthening the awareness of compliant 
operation, and optimizing internal control. By strengthening the learning of the relevant laws and regulations of 
listed companies by all directors, supervisors, senior managements and relevant responsible personnel and 
continuously improving their ability to perform their duties, we have continuously improved our governance 
capacity, management efficiency and standardized operation, and promoted the high-quality and sustainable 
development of the Company. The basic information of the Company’s corporate governance during the reporting 
period is as follows: 
1. Shareholders and General Meetings 
The Company protects the rights of shareholders in accordance with the law, paying special attention to 
protecting the legitimate rights and interests of minority shareholders, and protects the rights of shareholders to 
know and participate in decision-making and supervision of significant events of the Company. The Company held 
the 2022 annual general meeting on May 9, 2023, and the first extraordinary general meeting for 2023 on September 
19, 2023, respectively. The convening of the meetings, the convening procedures, the qualifications of the 
participants, the qualifications of the convenor, the voting procedures and the voting results of the meetings 
complied with the provisions of laws and regulations and the Articles of Association of the Company, and all the 
motions were voted on and approved. 
2. Directors and Board of Directors 
The number and composition of the Board of Directors of the Company are in compliance with the 
requirements of laws and regulations, the professional structure is reasonable, and the directors are fully equipped 
with the necessary time and energy, knowledge reserves, professional skills and comprehensive qualities to perform 
their duties. The directors abide by the relevant laws and regulations and the Articles of Association, and perform 
their duties faithfully, diligently and prudently. The independent directors independently perform their duties 
according to laws, fully understand the Company’s operation and the contents of Board meetings, and safeguard the 
interests of the Company and all shareholders, paying particular attention to the protection of the legitimate rights 
and interests of minority shareholders. 
The Board of Directors earnestly performs the duties prescribed by the relevant laws and regulations and the 
Articles of Association, and operates in strict accordance with the Rules of Procedure for the Board of Directors to 
ensure the standardized and efficient operation of the Board and prudent and scientific decision-making. The Board 
of Directors consists of four special committees on audit, strategy, nomination, remuneration and appraisal, which 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
60 
 
are responsible to the Board of Directors and perform their duties in accordance with the Articles of Association and 
the implementation rules of the special committees. During the reporting period, the tenth Board of Directors of the 
Company held a total of 7 sessions, and all the motions were voted on and approved. All the sessions were convened 
and held in strict accordance with the Rules of Procedure for the Board of Directors, all the directors were notified 
in advance as required, and sufficient meeting materials were provided. The meeting minutes were true, accurate 
and complete. 
3. Supervisors and Supervisory Committee 
The supervisors strictly abide by the relevant laws, regulations and norms, independently and effectively 
perform the supervision function, and urge the Board of Directors and the management to operate in a standardized 
manner and make scientific decisions, thus effectively safeguarding the interests of the Company, shareholders and 
employees. During the reporting period, the tenth Supervisory Committee of the Company held a total of 4 sessions, 
and all the motions were voted on and approved. The Supervisory Committee obtained a full understanding of the 
Company’s production and operation situation, comprehensively inspected the Company’s finance, supervised the 
directors and senior management to perform their duties in a standardized manner, reviewed the Company’s periodic 
reports and put forward written review opinions, and expressed clear opinions on the cancellation of some stock 
options of the 2020 stock option incentive plan. 
4. Senior management and operation team 
During the reporting period, the tenth Board of Directors appointed Mr. Zhao Yingming as Chief Commercial 
Officer and Senior Vice President. The Company appointed senior management in strict accordance with the 
relevant laws and regulations and the Articles of Association, performed legal procedures and made timely 
disclosure. 
The operation team has clear responsibilities and strictly implements the resolutions of the general meeting of 
shareholders, resolutions of the Board of Directors and other relevant resolutions. The senior management members 
abide by the relevant laws and regulations and the Articles of Association, and perform their duties faithfully, 
diligently and prudently. 
5. Revision of corporate governance related systems 
During the reporting period, in accordance with the latest provisions of the Securities Law of the People’s 
Republic of China, the Measures for the Administration of Independent Directors of Listed Companies, the Self-
regulatory Guidelines for Listed Companies No.1 of Shenzhen Stock Exchange - Standardized Operation of Listed 
Companies on the Main Board, the Guidelines on Investor Relations Management for Listed Companies, the Rules 
on the Management of the Shares Held by Directors, Supervisors and Senior Management of Listed Companies and 
Their Changes and other laws and regulations and normative documents, and based on the actual situations of the 
Company, the Company systematically revised the Implementation Rules of the Audit Committee of the Board of 
Directors, the Implementation Rules of the Nomination Committee of the Board of Directors, and the 
Implementation Rules of the Remuneration and Appraisal Committee of the Board of Directors after consideration 
and approval by the Board of Directors, to further improve the governance structure of the Board of Directors of 
the Company. In addition, during the reporting period, the Company also revised such basic management systems 
as the Investor Relation Management System, the Management Measures on Shareholdings and Changes by 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
61 
 
Directors, Supervisors and Senior Management, the Working System for Independent Directors, the Investment and 
Financial Management System, the Management Measures on Securities Investment Risks, and formulated such 
basic management systems as the Comprehensive Risk Management System, the Management System for 
Information Disclosure of Debt Financing Instruments in the Inter-Bank Bond Market, and the Public Welfare 
Donation Management Measures.  
6. Largest shareholders of equal ranking and listed company 
Yunnan State-owned Equity Operation Management Co., Ltd (“Yunnan State-owned Equity Operation 
Management Company”) and New Huadu Industrial Group Co., Ltd (“New Huadu”) with its acting-in-concert 
parties, were equally the largest shareholders of the Company, and the Company has no de facto controller and no 
controlling shareholders. The above-mentioned largest shareholders of equal ranking shall exercise their rights as 
shareholders in accordance with law, fulfill their obligations as shareholders, and earnestly fulfill their commitments. 
The largest shareholders of equal ranking are independent from the Company in terms of personnel, assets and 
finance, and have independent institutions and businesses. There are no cases in which the Company’s funds have 
been appropriated by the largest shareholders of equal ranking and its subsidiaries or through other means, or the 
Company has provided guarantees for the largest shareholder and its subsidiaries in violation of the law. During the 
reporting period, the decision-making procedures and information disclosure obligations were strictly fulfilled for 
the related party transactions between the Company and the related parties in accordance with relevant regulations, 
and the related party transactions had commercial substance and fair pricing. 
7. Information disclosure and transparency 
During the reporting period, the Company and other information disclosure obligators disclosed information 
in a true, accurate, complete, timely and fair manner in strict accordance with laws and regulations, self-regulatory 
rules and the Articles of Association of the Company, and the disclosures were concise, clear and easy to understand. 
The Company’s designated information disclosure media are China Securities Journal, Shanghai Securities News, 
Securities Times and http://www.cninfo.com.cn, so that users can quickly and conveniently obtain information of 
the Company. Attaching importance to the management of insider information, the Company strictly controls the 
scope of persons with knowledge of insider information, registers the information of persons with knowledge of 
insider information truthfully, accurately and completely, and reports to the Exchange in a timely manner. 
8. Internal control and regulation system 
The Company has established a sound internal control system. With the form and content in line with the 
requirements of the Basic Standard for Internal Control of Enterprises, its supplementary guidelines, and other 
relevant laws, regulations and normative documents, the internal control self-evaluation can truly and accurately 
reflect the implementation status of the Company’s internal controls.  
The Company has, according to the actual situation and management needs, established and improved internal 
control to reasonably ensure the legal compliance of operation and management, asset safety, the truth and integrity 
of financial reports and related information, improve the operation efficiency and effect, promote the realization of 
development strategies, and meet the objectives of internal control. The Company has established a series of internal 
control systems for the business and matters included in the scope of internal control evaluation, which have been 
implemented in the operation and management activities, effectively preventing and controlling the Company’s 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
62 
 
internal business risks in major aspects, and ensuring the safety and integrity of the Company’s assets and the orderly 
development of operation and management activities. The internal control systems are reasonable, complete and 
effective, and conducive to achieving the strategic objectives of operation and development of the Company. The 
Company has introduced a third-party consulting agency to assist in the construction of a comprehensive risk 
management system, and promoted the integration of risk management into each business management link through 
risk identification, risk assessment, clarification of risk early warning indicators, development of risk reporting and 
response mechanisms, and the construction of a corporate responsibility and assessment system. The Company will 
constantly improve the internal control system and standardize the implementation of the internal control system 
according to the changes of internal and external environment and management requirements, and based on the 
guidelines of comprehensive risk management. Through the operation, analysis and evaluation of the internal 
control system, we will provide guarantee for the Company’s legal and compliant operation and asset safety, 
effectively prevent risks in operation and management, and promote the steady implementation of the Company’s 
strategy. 
9. Stakeholders and social responsibilities  
The Company fully respects and safeguards the legitimate rights and interests of stakeholders, with an aim to 
realize the coordination and balance of the interests of society, shareholders, the Company, employees and other 
parties. Yunnan Baiyao actively fulfills its social responsibilities in terms of environmental protection, disaster relief 
and relief assistance, and public welfare, while maintaining the Company’s sustainable development, improving its 
operating results and protecting the interests of its shareholders. In 2023, Yunnan Baiyao was again awarded an A 
rating in the MSCI-ESG rating. Based on the corporate attributes of inheritance and innovation, excellent quality, 
technology empowerment, co-construction and sharing, social responsibility and sustainable development, the 
Company will continue to optimize the governance system and governance level, constantly upgrade the industrial 
deployment, adhere to the environmentally friendly development path, and create long-term sustainable value for 
the society, the environment and various stakeholders. 
We firmly believe that good corporate governance is the cornerstone and guarantee for the sustainable and 
healthy development of enterprises, and standardized operation is the basic requirement for the sustainable and 
healthy development of the Company. Insisting on standardized operation in accordance with laws and regulations 
and the requirements of the corporate governance system, the Company has continuously improved its governance 
capacity and management effectiveness. Thanks to scientific decision-making and sound operation, we effectively 
safeguard the interests of the Company and the general investors, and achieved the Company’s high-quality and 
sustainable development. 
Whether there were any significant differences between the Company’s actual governance status and laws, administrative 
regulations and the rules issued by China Securities Regulatory Commission (“CSRC”) on listed company governance? 
□ Yes  
 No 
There was no significant difference between the Company’s actual governance status and laws, administrative regulations and the 
rules issued by CSRC on listed company governance.  


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
63 
 
II. Details Regarding the Company’s Separation from the Controlling Shareholder and De 
Facto Controller across Assets, Personnel, Finance, Institutions, and Business Operations 
Yunnan State-owned Equity Operation Management Company and New Huadu with its acting-in-concert 
parties, were equally the largest shareholders of the Company, and the Company has no de facto controller and no 
controlling shareholders. In strict accordance with the requirements of the Company Law, the Articles of Association 
and other laws, regulations and rules, the Company and the largest shareholders of equal ranking are completely 
separated in terms of business, personnel, assets, institutions, finance and other aspects. The Company has an 
independent and complete business system and the ability to operate independently in the market. The Company 
will continue to ensure the separation between the Company and the aforesaid largest shareholders in terms of 
personnel, assets, finance, institutions and business operations according to the requirements of the relevant laws 
and regulations.  
1. In terms of personnel: The Company operates completely independently in terms of labor, personnel and 
wage management system and has developed an independent management system. The directors, supervisors and 
senior management of the Company are lawfully selected and employed in accordance with the Company Law, the 
Articles of Association and other relevant laws, regulations and provisions. All senior executives of the Company 
work in the Company and receive remuneration. There is no situation in which senior executives hold dual positions 
in the Company and the companies of the aforesaid largest shareholders. There is no situation in which finance staff 
has cross appointments in related organizations. 
2. In terms of assets: The Company has a clear division of property rights with its aforesaid largest shareholders, 
has the ability to operate independently in the market, and has full control over the production system, supporting 
facilities, land use rights and other assets, and there is no situation where the aforesaid largest shareholders occupy 
or dominate the assets. 
3. In terms of finance: The Company has established an independent, complete and standardized financial 
accounting system and financial management system, as well as the corresponding internal control system and 
internal audit system to independently make financial decisions in accordance with the requirements of the 
Accounting Standards for Business Enterprises. 
4. In terms of institutions: The Board of Directors, Supervisory Committee and other internal organs of the 
Company have sound structure, operate independently, make scientific decisions, and the internal organizations are 
completely separate from the aforesaid largest shareholders. All the institutions of the Company are set according 
to the requirements of listed companies’ norms and the Company’s actual business needs and characteristics. The 
Company and its largest shareholders of equal ranking have independent office addresses, and there is no mixed 
operation and co-office. The aforesaid largest shareholders exercise their rights and undertake corresponding 
obligations according to law. 
5. In terms of business: The Company has a completely independent business operation system, business 
deployment and the ability to operate independently for the market, with independent procurement system, 
production system and sales system. There is no dependence on majority shareholders to obtain profits, and there is 
no competition with aforesaid largest shareholders and their subsidiaries. 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
64 
 
III. Horizontal Competition 
□Applicable 
 Not applicable 
IV. Annual General Meeting and Extraordinary General Meeting Held during the Reporting 
Period 
1. Shareholders’ meetings held during the reporting period  
Sessions 
Meeting type  
Proportion of 
attendance of 
the investors 
Meeting date 
Disclosure date 
Resolutions 
2022 Annual 
General 
Meeting 
Annual 
General 
Meeting 
62.74% 
May 9, 2023 
May 10, 2023 
The following proposals had been 
considered and approved: 1. 
Proposal on the 2022 Annual 
Work Report of the Board of 
Directors; 2. Proposal on the 
2022 Annual Work Report of the 
Supervisory Committee; 3. 
Proposal on the 2022 Final 
Financial Report; 4. Proposal on 
the 2022 Annual Report and its 
Summary; 5. Proposal on the 
2022 Profit Distribution Plan; 6. 
Proposal on the 2023 Financial 
Budget Report; 7. Proposal on the 
Re-appointment of the Company’s 
2023 Auditor (including internal 
control audit). 
First 
Extraordinary 
General 
Meeting for 
2023 
Extraordinary 
General 
Meeting 
61.36% 
September 19, 
2023 
September 20, 
2023 
The following proposals had been 
considered and approved: 1. 
Resolution on Applying for 
Registration and Issuance of Ultra 
Short-term Financing Bonds 
2. Extraordinary general meetings convened at the request of preferred shareholders with resumed voting rights 
□Applicable 
 
Not applicable 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
65 
 
V. Directors, Supervisors and Senior Management 
1. Basic information 
Name 
Gender 
Age 
Title  
Service 
status 
Date of 
commencement of 
service term 
Date of end of 
service term 
Number of 
shares held 
at the 
beginning 
of the 
period 
(shares)  
Increase in 
number of 
shares held 
in the current 
period 
(shares)  
Decrease in 
number of 
shares held 
in the current 
period 
(shares)  
Other 
changes 
(shares)  
Number of 
shares held 
at the end 
of the 
period 
(shares)  
Reasons 
for 
changes 
in 
shares  
Zhang 
Wenxue  
Male 
61 
Secretary of the 
Company’s Party 
Committee, 
Chairman 
Incumbent  
February 23, 2024 
November 7, 
2025 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
N/A 
Chen 
Fashu  
Male 
64 
Director 
Incumbent 
August 21, 2019 
November 7, 
2025 
12,527,495 
0 
0 
0 
12,527,495 
N/A 
Dong 
Ming 
Male 
48 
Director, CEO and 
President 
Incumbent 
March 3, 2021 
November 7, 
2025 
13,280 
0 
0 
0 
13,280 
N/A 
Lu 
Hongdong  
Male 
57 
Deputy Secretary of 
the Company’s Party 
Committee, Director  
Incumbent 
November 7, 2022 
November 7, 
2025 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
N/A 
Xie 
Yunshan  
Male 
49 
Director 
Incumbent 
November 7, 2022 
November 7, 
2025 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
N/A 
Li 
Hongshen 
Male 
45 
Director 
Incumbent 
November 7, 2022 
November 7, 
2025 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
N/A 
Chen 
Yanhui  
Male 
38 
Director 
Incumbent 
August 21, 2019 
November 7, 
2025 
177,345 
0 
0 
0 
177,345 
N/A 
Dai Yang 
Male 
55 
Independent 
Director  
Incumbent 
August 21, 2019 
November 7, 
2025 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
N/A 
Zhang 
Yongliang  
Male 
56 
Independent 
Director 
Incumbent 
August 21, 2019 
November 7, 
2025 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
N/A 
Liu 
Guo’en  
Male 
67 
Independent 
Director 
Incumbent 
May 25, 2021 
November 7, 
2025 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
N/A 
He Yong 
Male 
54 
Independent 
Director 
Incumbent 
November 7, 2022 
November 7, 
2025 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
N/A 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
66 
 
Zhu 
Zhaoyun  Female 
70 
TCM Strategy 
Scientist 
Incumbent 
August 21, 2019 
November 7, 
2025 
56,000 
0 
0 
0 
56,000 
N/A 
Qin 
Wanmin 
Male 
60 
Chief Innovation 
Officer, Senior Vice 
President, President 
of Health Products 
BG 
Incumbent 
August 21, 2019 
November 7, 
2025 
504,000 
0 
0 
0 
504,000 
N/A 
Yang 
Yong 
Male 
60 
Chief Compliance 
Officer, Senior Vice 
President, Executive 
Director of Yunnan 
Pharma 
Incumbent 
August 21, 2019 
November 7, 
2025 
101,024 
0 
0 
0 
101,024 
N/A 
Zhao 
Yingming 
Male 
52 
Chief Commercial 
Officer, Senior Vice 
President 
Incumbent 
March 13, 2023 
November 7, 
2025 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
N/A 
Zhang 
Ning 
Male 
53 
Chief Scientist  
Incumbent 
January 24, 2022 
November 7, 
2025 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
N/A 
Ma Jia 
Male 
47 
Chief Financial 
Officer 
Incumbent 
June 1, 2022 
November 7, 
2025 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
N/A 
Li Jin 
Male 
59 
Secretary of the 
Disciplinary 
Committee, Chief 
Quality and Process 
Officer  
Incumbent 
August 21, 2019 
November 7, 
2025 
56,000 
0 
0 
0 
56,000 
N/A 
Qian 
Yinghui  
Male 
40 
Secretary of Board 
of Directors  
Incumbent 
January 17, 2022 
November 7, 
2025 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
N/A 
You 
Guanghui  
Male 
53 
Chairman of 
Supervisory 
Committee 
Incumbent 
August 21, 2019 
November 7, 
2025 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
N/A 
Zhong Jie  
Male 
60 
Vice Chairman of 
Supervisory 
Committee 
Incumbent 
August 21, 2019 
November 7, 
2025 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
N/A 
Qu Huaxi 
Male 
58 
Supervisor, 
Chairman of Trade 
Union 
Incumbent 
August 21, 2019 
November 7, 
2025 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
N/A 
He 
Yingxia  
Female 
52 
Supervisor, Vice 
Chairman of Trade 
Union 
Incumbent 
August 21, 2019 
November 7, 
2025 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
N/A 
Wang 
Minghui  
Male 
62 
Former Chairman  
Resigned  
August 21, 2019 
March 5, 2023 
1,008,000 
0 
0 
0 
1,008,000 
N/A 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
67 
 
Yin 
Pinyao 
Male 
55 
Former Chief 
Operation Officer, 
Senior Vice 
President, President 
of TCM Resources 
BG 
Resigned 
August 21, 2019 
February 7, 2024 
336,000 
0 
0 
0 
336,000 
N/A 
Wang Jin 
Female 
54 
Former Chief Sales 
Officer, Senior Vice 
President, President 
of Pharmaceutical 
BG  
Resigned 
August 21, 2019 
March 13, 2023 
504,000 
0 
0 
0 
504,000 
N/A 
Yu Juan 
Female  
52 
Former Chief 
Human Resources 
Officer 
Resigned 
August 21, 2019 
February 7, 2024 
140,000 
0 
0 
0 
140,000 
N/A 
Total 
-- 
-- 
-- 
-- 
-- 
-- 
15,423,144 
0 
0 
0 
15,423,144 
-- 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
68 
 
Whether there was any departure of directors and supervisors and dismissal of senior management during the term of office during 
the reporting period 
Yes  
□No 
On March 7, 2023, the Company disclosed the Announcement on the Resignation of the Chairman 
(Announcement number: 2023-03), stating that Mr. Wang Minghui resigned from the chairman of the tenth Board 
of Directors of the Company, director, member of the Strategic Committee and all the positions in the Company 
and its controlling subsidiaries due to personal reasons. 
On March 15, 2023, the Company disclosed the Announcement on the Resignation of Senior Management 
(Announcement number: 2023-06), stating that Ms. Wang Jin resigned from the Company’s Chief Sales Officer, 
Senior Vice President and all the positions in the Company and its controlling subsidiaries due to personal reasons. 
On February 7, 2024, the Company disclosed the Announcement on the Resignation of Senior Management 
(Announcement number: 2024-06), stating that Mr. Yin Pinyao resigned from the Chief Operating Officer and 
Senior Vice President of the Company and all positions in the Company and its controlling subsidiaries due to 
personal reasons; and Ms. Yu Juan resigned from the Company’s Chief Human Resources Officer and all the 
positions in the Company and its controlling subsidiaries due to personal reasons. 
Changes of directors, supervisors and senior management of the Company 
Applicable 
 □Not applicable 
Name 
Position held 
Type 
Date 
Reason 
Zhang 
Wenxue 
Chairman 
Elected  
February 23, 2024 
For improving the governance structure of 
the Company’s Board of Directors further, 
he was elected as chairman 
Zhao 
Yingming 
Chief Commercial 
Officer and Senior 
Vice President 
Appointed 
March 13, 2023 
For improving the Company’s management 
structure further 
Wang 
Minghui 
Former Chairman 
Resigned 
March 6, 2023 
Resigned as Chairman and Director due to 
personal reasons 
Wang Jin 
Former Chief Sales 
Officer and Senior 
Vice President 
Dismissed 
March 15, 2023 
Resigned as Chief Sales Officer and Senior 
Vice President due to personal reasons  
Yin Pinyao 
Former Chief 
Operation Officer 
and Senior Vice 
President 
Dismissed 
February 7, 2024 
Resigned as Chief Operation Officer and 
Senior Vice President due to personal 
reasons  
Yu Juan 
Former Chief 
Human Resources 
Officer 
Dismissed 
February 7, 2024 
Resigned as Chief Human Resources 
Officer due to personal reasons  
2. Appointment 
Professional background, main working experience and main duties in the Company of current directors, 
supervisors, and senior management of the Company 
Zhang Wenxue, male, Han nationality, born in June 1963, a member of the Communist Party of China, holding 
an on-the-job master’s degree, is a Senior Economist. He was a member of the Tenth Yunnan Provincial Committee 
of the Communist Party of China and the 12th Yunnan Provincial Committee of the CPPCC. He served as Deputy 
General Manager of Yunnan Phosphorus Chemical Industry (Group) Company, General Manager and Deputy 
Secretary of the Party Committee of Yunnan Phosphate Group Co., Ltd, Secretary of the Party Committee and 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
69 
 
General Manager of Yunnan Phosphate Group Co., Ltd, Director, Deputy General Manager and Standing 
Committee Member of the Party Committee of Yuntianhua Group Co., Ltd, General Manager, Deputy Secretary of 
the Party Committee and Deputy Chairman of Yuntianhua Group Co., Ltd, Secretary of the Party Committee and 
Chairman of Yuntianhua Group Co., Ltd. He is currently Secretary of the Party Committee and Chairman of Yunnan 
Baiyao (and Chairman of Chongqing Polycomp International Corporation). 
Chen Fashu, male, born in October 1960, was a member of All-China Youth Federation, a member of the 
Executive Committee of the Ninth All-China Federation of Industry and Commerce, a member of the Ninth and 
Tenth Fujian Provincial Committee of the CPPCC, Chairman of the Committee of Fujian Provincial Federation of 
Industry and Commerce, Chairman of Baiyao Holdings, and Co-chairman of Yunnan Baiyao. He currently serves 
as Chairman of Fujian Fashu Charity Foundation, Legal Representative and Chairman of New Huadu, and Director 
of Yunnan Baiyao.  
Dong Ming, male, born in October 1976, is a doctoral candidate in management, holding a bachelor’s degree. 
He served as Vice President of the CIS Regional Department, Director of VIP System Department, General Manager 
of Beijing Branch, Director of Mobile System Department, and Vice President for China of Huawei Technologies 
Co., Ltd. He is currently Legal Representative, Director, CEO and President of Yunnan Baiyao.  
Lu Hongdong, male, born in December 1966, holds a master’s degree. He served as a lecturer, political 
counselor and director of Administrative Teaching and Research Department of Yunnan University of Finance and 
Economics; Principal Staff Member of the Cadre Examination Office and the Cadre Supervision Office of the 
Organization Department of Yunnan Provincial Party Committee; Deputy Director of Enterprise Cadres Office, 
Deputy Director and Director of the Fifth Cadres Division, Member of the Party Committee and Deputy Secretary 
of Baiyao Holdings, Director of Yunnan Baiyao. He is currently Deputy Secretary of the Party Committee and 
Director of Yunnan Baiyao. 
Xie Yunshan, male, born in September 1975, is a member of the Communist Party of China, a doctor of 
economics, postdoctoral, and Certified Public Accountant. He once worked at the Southwest Management 
Headquarters of Xiangcai Securities, the First Secretariat of the General Office of the Yunnan Provincial 
Government, the Investment Research Institute of Yunnan University of Finance and Economics, the Finance 
Research Institute of the People’s Bank of China, Zhonghe Zhengxin Accounting Firm, the Investment Banking 
Department of Hongta Securities, the Investment Banking Department of Dongguan Securities, and the Investment 
Banking Headquarters of Pacific Securities. He is currently Director of Yunnan Baiyao. 
Li Hongshen, male, born in August 1978, is a doctor of economics, and engineer. He served as Vice President 
(presiding over work) of Chuncheng Road Sub-branch, General Manager of International Business Department of 
Kunming Branch of China Merchants Bank, Manager Assistant, Deputy Manager and Manager of Qujing Cigarette 
Factory of Hongyun Honghe Tobacco (Group) Co., Ltd, Manager of Kunming Cigarette Factory of Hongyun 
Honghe Tobacco (Group) Co., Ltd, Vice President and Deputy General Manager of Hongyun Honghe Tobacco 
(Group) Co., Ltd. He is currently General Manager of Yunnan Hehe, and Director of Yunnan Baiyao, KPC 
Pharmaceuticals, Inc, Yunnan Hongta Bank Co., Ltd, and Zhongwei Capital Holdings Co., Ltd. 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
70 
 
Chen Yanhui, male, born in April 1986, holding a bachelor’s degree, used to work in Essence Securities, and 
served as Supervisor of Baiyao Holdings, and Director of Yunnan Baiyao Qingyitang Industrial Co., Ltd. He is 
currently Director of Yunnan Baiyao, Director and General Manager of New Huadu, Legal Representative and 
Executive Director of New Huadu Industrial Group (Shanghai) Investment Co., Ltd, Legal Representative and 
Chairman of Teh-Ho Canned Food Company, Legal Representative and Executive Director of Fujian New Huadu 
Enterprise Management Co., Ltd. 
Resume of Independent Directors:  
Dai Yang, male, born in January 1969, holding a bachelor’s degree, served as Deputy Principal Staff, Principal 
Staff, Deputy Director of General Affairs Department, Deputy Director of General Office (Party Office), Director 
and Head of Listed Company Supervision Department of Tibet Securities Regulatory Bureau of China Securities 
Regulatory Commission, Deputy Secretary of Party Committee, General Manager, Secretary of the Party 
Committee and Chairman of Tibet Mineral Development Co., Ltd, Vice President of Yongtai Group Co., Ltd, 
Chairman and Vice Chairman of Hainan Haide Industrial Co., Ltd, and Independent Director of Tibet Water 
Resources Limited. He is currently an Independent Director of KSEC Intelligent Technology Co., Ltd, Wondershare, 
and Yunnan Baiyao. 
Zhang Yongliang, male, born in March 1968, holding a master of law, is a practicing lawyer. He was a member 
of the fourth and fifth Review Committees of Listed Companies M&A and Reorganization of China Securities 
Regulatory Commission. He is currently an Independent Director of Yunnan Baiyao, and a Partner of King & Wood 
Law Firm. His main practice areas are corporate mergers and acquisitions, securities, debt restructuring, etc. 
Liu Guo’en, male, born in October 1957, a doctor of economics, is a Special Professor of Economics 
Changjiang Scholar of Ministry of Education. He used to teach at the University of Southern California and the 
University of North Carolina, and served as President of the Chinese Economist Society and President of the Asia-
Pacific Federation of International Society for Pharmacoeconomics and Outcomes Research. He is currently a 
Distinguished Professor of Liberal Arts of Peking University, Dean of Global Health Development Institute of 
Peking University, Member of Faculty of Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Chinese Convener of China-US 
Track II Dialogue on Health, Chairman of Pharmacoeconomics Professional Committee of Chinese Pharmaceutical 
Association, Independent Director of MicroPort Scientific Corporation, Independent Director of SciClone 
Pharmaceuticals (Holdings) Limited, and Independent Director of Yunnan Baiyao. 
He Yong, male, born in October 1970, holding a bachelor’s degree, is a partner of ShineWing Certified Public 
Accountants, Deputy Director of Chengdu Branch, Chinese Certified Public Accountant (senior member of CICPA), 
Chinese Certified Asset Appraiser, Leading Accounting Talent of the Ministry of Finance, and Member of the First 
Listing Committee of ChiNext of Shenzhen Stock Exchange. He is currently an Independent Director of Yunnan 
Baiyao.  
Resume of Shareholder Supervisors:  
You Guanghui, male, born in December 1971, holding a bachelor’s degree, is a Certified Management 
Accountant (CMA), Senior Corporate Culture Engineer, and Senior Corporate Compliance Engineer. He was Chief 
Accountant of Fujian Industrial Bank Wuyishan Sub-branch, Chief Accountant and Head of the Finance Section of 
New Huadu Engineering Co., Ltd, Supervisor, Deputy Manager and Manager of the Planning and Finance 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
71 
 
Department of Fujian Wuyishan Tourism Development Company Limited, Director and Chief Financial Officer of 
Fujian Wuyishan Tourism Development Company Limited, Supervisor of Kanas Xinjiang Tourism Development 
Limited By Share Ltd, and Chief Financial Officer of Baiyao Holdings. He is currently Chairman of the Supervisory 
Committee of Yunnan Baiyao. 
Zhong Jie, male, born in March 1964, holding a master’s degree, is an economist and engineer. He served as 
Assistant Engineer of Yunnan Textile Research Institute, Director of Infrastructure Technical Reform Department 
of Yunnan Textile Industry Bureau, Principal Staff of Technical Reform Division, Deputy Director of the Second 
Industrial Division of Yunnan Economic and Trade Commission, Chief Supervisor of the sixth Supervisory 
Committee of Yunnan State-owned Enterprise Supervisory Committee Working Office, Deputy General Manager 
(Temporary) of Yunnan Jiehua Group Co., Ltd, Chairman of the Supervisory Committee of Yunnan Industrial 
Investment Holding Group Company, Director of Property Rights Management Department of Yunnan SASAC, 
General Liaison Officer of Bankruptcy Administrator of Yunnan Coal Chemical Industry Group Co., Ltd, Chairman 
of the Supervisory Committee of Baiyao Holdings. He is currently Vice Chairman of the Supervisory Committee 
of Yunnan Baiyao. 
Resume of Employee Supervisors:  
Qu Huaxi, male, born in June 1966, holding a university degree of the provincial Party School, is a member 
of the Communist Party of China and a lecturer. He served as a cadre in the Office of Menglian County Party 
Committee of Simao City, Deputy Secretary of the Party Committee of Labei Township of Menglian County of 
Simao City, Principal Staff (Director) of the Comprehensive Division of the Yunnan Provincial Poverty Alleviation 
Office, Deputy Researcher of the Micro-credit Division of the Yunnan Provincial Poverty Alleviation Office, 
Deputy Director of the Yunnan Provincial Poverty Alleviation Office’s Project Management Office, Director of the 
Yunnan Provincial Poverty Alleviation Office’s Program and Financial Affairs Division (during which time he 
served as Head of the General Team of the New Rural Workers of Wuding County of Chuxiong Prefecture, and as 
Deputy Secretary of the County Party Committee), Director of Non-local Poverty Alleviation and Development 
Division of the Yunnan Provincial Office of Poverty Alleviation, Director of the Discipline Inspection Group and 
Member of the Party Group of the Yunnan Provincial Federation of Supply and Marketing Cooperatives. In August 
2016, he was transferred to Baiyao Holdings. He is currently Chairman of Trade Union and Supervisor of Yunnan 
Baiyao. 
He Yingxia, female, born in March 1972, holding an on-the-job master’s degree, is a Party member and 
political engineer. She was a workshop worker of Yunnan Baiyao, Deputy Sales Manager of Southwest region, 
Deputy Secretary of the Group Youth League Committee, Vice Chairman of the Trade Union, Director of 
Organization and Publicity Department, Deputy Secretary of the Discipline Commission, Chairman of the Trade 
Union and Secretary of the first Party branch of the Group headquarters. Currently, she is a Member of the Party 
Committee of Yunnan Baiyao, Vice Chairman of the Trade Union, Supervisor, and Director of the Party and Mass 
Work Department. She is a Member of the Seventh Women Workers Committee of the All-China Federation of 
Trade Unions, Member of the Twelfth Committee of the Provincial Federation of Trade Unions, Member of the 
Standing Committee of the Sixth Women Workers Committee, Member of the Standing Committee of the Third- 
and Fourth-People’s Congresses of Chenggong District, Kunming. 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
72 
 
Resume of Senior Management:  
Zhu Zhaoyun, female, born in March 1954, is a Senior Engineer and Academician of the Chinese Academy 
of Engineering. She served as Secretary of the Party Committee and Director of Yunnan Institute of Materia Medica, 
Party Committee Member, R&D Director, Director of TCM R&D of Yunnan Baiyao. She is currently Member of 
the Party Committee and TCM Strategy Scientist of Yunnan Baiyao. 
Qin Wanmin, male, born in December 1964, is a master of medicine. He served as Marketing Manager and 
Deputy General Manager of Yunnan Baiyao Medicine E-commerce Co., Ltd, Assistant to President of Yunnan 
Baiyao, Deputy General Manager and General Manager of Health Products BG of Yunnan Baiyao. He is currently 
Member of the Party Committee, Chief Innovation Officer and Senior Vice President of Yunnan Baiyao. 
Yang Yong, male, born in December 1964, holding a master’s degree, served as Deputy General Manager of 
Yunnan Pharma, Director and Deputy General Manager of Yunnan Baiyao, General Manager and President of 
Yunnan Pharma. He is currently Member of the Party Committee, Chief Compliance Officer and Senior Vice 
President of Yunnan Baiyao, and Executive Director of Yunnan Pharma. 
Zhao Yingming, Male, born in November 1972, is a CPC member, holding a doctoral degree. He served in 
Wangfujing Department Store Group, Maoye Group, and JD.com as Assistant President of Wangfujing Department Store 
Group, General Manager of Maoye Commercial, Vice President of JD.com, and President of Retail Fashion & Home 
Business Group of JD.com. He is currently Chief Commercial Officer and Senior Vice President of Yunnan Baiyao Group 
Co., Ltd, an independent director of Zhejiang Red Dragonfly Shoes Co., Ltd, and an independent director of Aimer. 
Zhang Ning, male, born in November 1970, is a professor at Peking University and a doctor of biochemistry, 
cell and molecular biology at School of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University. He served as Deputy Director of 
Peking University Health Science Center, Director of Research Department of Peking University, Vice President of 
Tianjin Medical University, Professor of Affiliated Cancer Hospital of Tianjin Medical University, Deputy Director 
of Tianjin Cancer Research Institute, and Deputy Director of Department of Chemical Biology of School of 
Chemistry of Peking University. He is currently Deputy Director of Peking University-Yunnan Baiyao International 
Medical Research Center, Deputy Director of Peking University International Cancer Institute, Executive Deputy 
Director of the Center for Translational Tumor Research at Peking University First Hospital, Deputy Director of 
Peking University International Research Institute for Big Data in Health, and Chief Scientist of Yunnan Baiyao. 
Ma Jia, male, born in March 1977, is a master and Party member. He served as Director of Financial 
Management Department of Beijing Panasonic Lighting Co., Ltd, Financial Director of CIS Regional subsidiary of 
Huawei Technologies, IFS Transformation Project Manager (China), Chief Financial Officer of Shandong 
Representative Office, Chief Financial Officer of China Operator BG, Chief Financial Officer of China 
Region/Member of China Region Administrative Management Team, responsible for operation management, risk 
control, sales and financing, taxation, subsidiaries and other financial business of Huawei China (excluding Hong 
Kong, Macao and Taiwan) ICT, as well as financial organization construction. He is currently Chief Financial 
Officer of Yunnan Baiyao. 
Li Jin, male, born in August 1965, a master of business administration, licensed pharmacist, and senior engineer. 
He served as Deputy Chief Engineer and Director of Technology Department of Yunnan Baiyao, general manager of 
Yunnan Baiyao Tianzihong Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd, and Technical Quality Director of Yunnan Baiyao. He is currently 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
73 
 
Secretary of Discipline Inspection Committee and Chief Quality and Process Officer of Yunnan Baiyao. 
Qian Yinghui, male, born in September 1983, is a master of law in international trade law and commercial 
law from Durham University in the UK, and a bachelor of law from China Youth University of Political Studies. 
He served as Project Manager of the Strategy Committee Office of Yunnan Baiyao and Project Director of the 
Strategy Development Center of Yunnan Baiyao, and obtained the Qualification Certificate of Board Secretary in 
May 2021. He is currently Secretary of the Board of Directors of Yunnan Baiyao. 
Engagement in shareholding companies 
Applicable 
 □Not applicable 
Name of person 
Name of 
shareholding 
company 
Position held in 
shareholding company 
Date of 
commencement of 
service term 
Date of end of 
service term 
Whether to 
receive 
remuneration and 
allowances from 
the shareholding 
company 
Chen Fashu 
New Huadu 
Industrial Group 
Co., Ltd. 
Legal Representative, 
Chairman 
November 16, 2019 
 
Yes 
Chen Yanhui 
New Huadu 
Industrial Group 
Co., Ltd. 
Director and President  
November 16, 2019 
 
Yes 
Li Hongshen 
Yunnan Hehe 
(Group) Co., Ltd. 
Deputy Secretary of the 
Company’s Party 
Committee, General 
Manager 
May 25, 2022 
 
Yes 
Position at other entities 
Applicable 
 □Not applicable 
Name of person 
Name of other entity 
Position held in other 
entity 
Date of 
commencement of 
service term 
Date of end of 
service term 
Whether to 
receive 
remuneration and 
allowances from 
the other entity 
Zhang Wenxue 
Chongqing Polycomp 
International 
Corporation 
Chairman 
November 27, 2020 
 
No 
Chen Fashu 
New Huadu Group (HK) 
Investment Limited 
Director 
August 1, 2006 
 
No 
Chen Fashu 
Shanghai 
Pharmaceuticals 
Holding Co., Ltd. 
Director 
June 29, 2023 
 
No 
Chen Fashu 
Fujian New Huadu 
Property Development 
Co., Ltd. 
Legal Representative, 
Chairman 
June 27, 2003 
 
No 
Chen Fashu 
Xiamen New Huadu 
Investment Management 
Consulting Co., Ltd. 
Legal Representative, 
Executive Director 
and General Manager 
November 4, 1997 
 
No 
Chen Fashu 
Fuzhou Haiyue Hotel 
Property Management 
Co., Ltd.  
Supervisor 
September 27, 2018 
 
No 
Chen Yanhui 
New Huadu Industrial 
Group (Shanghai) 
Investment Co., Ltd. 
Legal Representative 
and Executive 
Director 
October 1, 2018 
 
Yes 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
74 
 
Penalties to the current directors, supervisors and senior management of the Company and those leaving office during the reporting 
Chen Yanhui 
Teh-Ho Canned Food 
Company 
Legal Representative 
and Chairman 
September 9, 2016 
 
No 
Chen Yanhui 
Kunming Teh-Ho 
Canned Food Factory of 
Teh-Ho Canned Food 
Company 
Person in Charge 
October 21, 2016 
 
No 
Chen Yanhui 
Fujian New Huadu 
Enterprise Management 
Co., Ltd. 
Legal Representative 
and Executive 
Director 
April 19, 2022 
 
No 
Chen Yanhui 
Baoting Banshan 
Bandao Rainforest 
Property Co., Ltd. 
Legal Representative 
and Executive 
Director 
September 16, 2019 
 
No 
Chen Yanhui 
Fujian New Huadu 
Property Development 
Co., Ltd. 
Supervisor 
August 17, 2016 
 
No 
Chen Yanhui 
Qujing Dexuan 
Agriculture and Animal 
Husbandry Technology 
Co., Ltd.  
Supervisor 
May 7, 2020 
 
No 
Chen Yanhui 
Xuanwei Brothers Food 
Technology Co., Ltd. 
Supervisor 
June 1, 2020 
 
No 
Dong Ming 
Shanghai 
Pharmaceuticals 
Holding Co., Ltd. 
Director 
June 29, 2023 
 
No 
Li Hongshen 
Yunnan Hongta Bank 
Co., Ltd 
Director 
October 20, 2022 
 
No 
Li Hongshen 
Zhongwei Capital 
Holdings Co., Ltd. 
Director 
June 28, 2023 
 
No 
Li Hongshen 
KPC Pharmaceuticals, 
Inc. 
Director 
February 2, 2024 
December 08, 2024 
No 
Xie Yunshan 
Yunnan Yunqin Service 
Group Co., Ltd. 
External Director 
March 1, 2022 
February 28, 2023 
Yes 
Xie Yunshan 
Yunnan Aviation 
Industry Investment 
Group Co., Ltd. 
External Director 
July 1, 2022 
February 28, 2023 
Yes 
Dai Yang 
KSEC Intelligent 
Technology Co., Ltd 
Independent Director 
March 22, 2021 
March 21, 2024 
Yes 
Dai Yang 
Wondershare 
Independent Director 
May 7, 2021 
May 16, 2025 
Yes 
Liu Guo’en 
Peking University 
Professor 
January 1, 2006 
 
Yes 
Zhang 
Yongliang 
Beijing King & Wood 
Mallesons 
Partner 
October 20, 1997 
 
Yes 
He Yong 
ShineWing Certified 
Public Accountants (SGP)  
Partner 
July 1, 2009 
 
Yes 
He Yong 
Chengdu Branch of 
ShineWing Certified 
Public Accountants 
(SGP)  
Deputy Chief 
Accountant 
August 4, 2022 
 
Yes 
Zhao Yingming 
Zhejiang Red Dragonfly 
Shoes Co., Ltd. 
Independent director 
September 13, 2022 
September 12, 2025 
Yes 
Zhao Yingming 
Aimer Co., Ltd. 
Independent director 
May 22, 2023 
May 21, 2026 
Yes 
Zhang Ning 
Peking University 
Professor 
October 9, 2017 
 
Yes 
Zhang Ning 
Affiliated Cancer 
Hospital of Tianjin 
Medical University 
Part-time Professor 
October 9, 2017 
 
Yes 
Ma Jia 
Shanghai 
Pharmaceuticals 
Holding Co., Ltd. 
Supervisor 
June 29, 2023 
 
 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
75 
 
period by securities regulatory agencies in the latest three years 
□Applicable 
 Not applicable 
3. Remuneration of Directors, Supervisors and Senior Management 
Decision-making procedures, determination basis and actual payment of remuneration for directors, supervisors, and senior 
management 
Decision-making procedures of remuneration of 
directors, supervisors, and senior management 
The Remuneration Management Committee shall submit the proposal to 
the board of directors for consideration and approval prior to 
implementation. 
Basis for determination of the remuneration of 
directors, supervisors, and senior management 
Remuneration shall be determined based on operating conditions, industry 
standard, responsibilities assumed, and other relevant factors. 
Actual payment of remuneration of directors, 
supervisors, and senior management 
Allowances for directors and supervisors will be paid on a monthly basis, 
while those for senior management will be paid based on established 
assessment standards. 
Composition of remuneration of directors, supervisors, 
and senior management 
The remuneration actually received by directors, supervisors, and senior 
management of the company in 2023 includes a basic salary, performance 
bonus, allowances, and other cash income. 
Remuneration for directors, supervisors, and senior management during the reporting period 
Unit: RMB0’000 
Name 
Gender 
Age 
Title 
Service 
status 
Total pre-tax 
remunerations 
received from 
the Company 
Whether 
remuneration was 
received from 
related parties of 
the Company 
Chen Fashu  
Male 
64 
Director 
Incumbent 
0.00  
Yes 
Dong Ming 
Male 
48 
Director, CEO, and President  
Incumbent 
425.10  
No 
Lu Hongdong  
Male 
57 
Deputy Secretary of the Company’s 
Party Committee and Director 
Incumbent 
116.79  
No 
Xie Yunshan  
Male 
49 
Director 
Incumbent 
100.69  
No 
Li Hongshen  
Male 
45 
Director 
Incumbent 
0 
Yes 
Chen Yanhui  
Male 
38 
Director 
Incumbent 
113.09 
Yes 
Dai Yang 
Male 
55 
Independent Director 
Incumbent 
25.71 
No 
Zhang Yongliang  
Male 
56 
Independent Director 
Incumbent 
25.60 
No 
Liu Guo’en  
Male 
67 
Independent Director 
Incumbent 
25.71 
No 
He Yong 
Male 
54 
Independent Director 
Incumbent 
25.71 
No 
Zhu Zhaoyun 
Female 
70 
TCM Strategic Scientist 
Incumbent 
170.70 
No 
Qin Wanmin 
Male 
60 
Chief Innovation Officer, Senior Vice 
President, and President of the Health 
Products Business Group 
Incumbent 
363.68 
No 
Zhao Yingming 
Male 
52 
Chief Commercial Officer & Senior 
Vice President 
Incumbent 
363.68 
No 
Yang Yong 
Male 
60 
Chief Compliance Officer, Senior Vice 
President, and Executive Director of 
Yunnan Pharma 
Incumbent 
275.84 
No 
Zhang Ning 
Male 
53 
Chief Scientist 
Incumbent 
360.69 
No 
Ma Jia 
Male 
47 
Chief Financial Officer 
Incumbent 
183.68 
No 
Li Jin 
Male 
59 
Secretary of the Discipline Inspection 
Incumbent 
123.68  
No 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
76 
 
Committee, and Chief Quality and 
Process Officer 
Qian Yinghui 
Male 
40 
Secretary of the Board of Directors 
Incumbent 
110.66  
No 
You Guanghui 
Male 
53 
Chairman 
of 
the 
Supervisory 
Committee 
Incumbent 
105.95  
No 
Zhong Jie 
Male 
60 
Deputy Chairman of the Supervisory 
Committee 
Incumbent 
105.95  
No 
Qu Huaxi 
Male 
58 
Supervisor and Chairman of the Trade 
Union 
Incumbent 
105.95  
No 
He Yingxia 
Female 
52 
Supervisor and Deputy Chairman of the 
Trade Union 
Incumbent 
56.20  
No 
Wang Minghui 
Male 
62 
Former Chairman 
Resigned 
45.89  
No 
Yin Pinyao 
Male 
55 
Former Chief Operation Officer, Senior 
Vice President, and President of the 
TCM Resources Business Group 
Resigned 
403.67 
No 
Wang Jin 
Female 
54 
Former Chief Sales Officer, Senior 
Vice President, and President of 
Pharmaceutical Business Group 
Resigned 
90.92 
No 
Yu Juan 
Female 
52 
Former 
Chief 
Human 
Resources 
Officer 
Resigned 
183.91 
No 
Total 
-- 
-- 
-- 
-- 
3,909.45 
-- 
Notes: 1. On March 7, 2023, the Company disclosed the Announcement on the Resignation of the Chairman 
(Announcement No.: 2023-03), stating that Mr. Wang Minghui has resigned from his position as Chairman of the 
Tenth Board of Directors, as well as from his roles as a director and a member of the Strategic Committee of the 
Board of Directors, and from all his positions in the Company and its holding subsidiaries for personal reasons. 
On March 15, 2023, the Company disclosed the Announcement on the Resignation of Senior Management 
(Announcement No.: 2023-06), stating that Ms. Wang Jin has resigned from her position as the Company’s Chief 
Sales Officer and Senior Vice President, as well as all her positions in the Company and its holding subsidiaries for 
personal reasons. 
On February 7, 2024, the Company disclosed the Announcement on the Resignation of Senior Management 
(Announcement No.: 2024-06), stating that Mr. Yin Pinyao has resigned from his position as the Company’s Chief 
Operating Officer and Senior Vice President, as well as all his positions in the Company and its holding subsidiaries 
for personal reasons; Ms. Yu Juan has resigned from her position as the Chief Human Resources Officer of the 
Company and all her positions in the Company and its holding subsidiaries for personal reasons. 
The disclosed remuneration in this form represents the remuneration received by the aforementioned personnel 
during their service in 2023. 
2. On February 23, 2024, the Company disclosed the Announcement on Resolutions of the Second Session of 
the Tenth Board of Directors for 2024 (Announcement No.: 2024-09), stating that the tenth Board of Directors of 
the Company had elected Mr. Zhang Wenxue as Chairman of the Company, and he did not receive any pre-tax 
remuneration from the Company as a director, supervisor or senior management during the year 2023. 
Explanation on other matters 
□Applicable 
    Not applicable 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
77 
 
VI. Duty Performance of Directors during the Reporting Period 
1. Board meetings held during the reporting period 
Sessions 
Meeting date 
Disclosure date 
Resolutions 
The first session of the 
Tenth Board of 
Directors for 2023 
March 13, 2023 
March 15, 2023 
http://www.cninfo.com.cn/new/disclosure/detail?plate=sz
se&orgId=gssz0000538&stockCode=000538&announce
mentId=1216123120&announcementTime=2023-03-
15%2011:46 
The second session of 
the Tenth Board of 
Directors for 2023 
March 29, 2023 
March 31, 2023 
http://www.cninfo.com.cn/new/disclosure/detail?plate=sz
se&orgId=gssz0000538&stockCode=000538&announce
mentId=1216280786&announcementTime=2023-03-31 
The third session of the 
Tenth Board of 
Directors for 2023 
April 25, 2023 
April 27, 2023 
http://www.cninfo.com.cn/new/disclosure/detail?plate=sz
se&orgId=gssz0000538&stockCode=000538&announce
mentId=1216610744&announcementTime=2023-04-27 
The fourth session of 
the Tenth Board of 
Directors for 2023 
July 5, 2023 
July 7, 2023 
http://www.cninfo.com.cn/new/disclosure/detail?plate=sz
se&orgId=gssz0000538&stockCode=000538&announce
mentId=1217227167&announcementTime=2023-07-07 
The fifth session of the 
Tenth Board of 
Directors for 2023 
August 28, 2023 
August 30, 2023 
http://www.cninfo.com.cn/new/disclosure/detail?plate=sz
se&orgId=gssz0000538&stockCode=000538&announce
mentId=1217699939&announcementTime=2023-08-30 
The sixth session of the 
Tenth Board of 
Directors for 2023 
October 27, 2023 
October 31, 2023 
http://www.cninfo.com.cn/new/disclosure/detail?plate=sz
se&orgId=gssz0000538&stockCode=000538&announce
mentId=1218200816&announcementTime=2023-10-31 
The seventh session of 
the Tenth Board of 
Directors for 2023 
December 27, 
2023 
December 29, 
2023 
http://www.cninfo.com.cn/new/disclosure/detail?plate=sz
se&orgId=gssz0000538&stockCode=000538&announce
mentId=1218750587&announcementTime=2023-12-29 
2. Attendance of directors at the Board meetings and general meetings 
Attendance of directors at the Board meetings and general meetings 
Name of 
directors 
Number of 
attendances 
required for 
the 
reporting 
period 
Number of 
on-site 
attendances 
to Board 
meetings 
Number of 
attendances to 
Board 
meetings 
through 
communication 
Number of 
Board meetings 
attended by 
directors 
appointed as the 
proxy 
Number 
of 
absences 
from 
Board 
meetings 
Non-
attendance in 
person for 
two 
consecutive 
times or not 
Number of 
attendances 
to general 
meetings 
Chen Fashu 
7 
1 
6 
0 
0 
No 
1 
Dong Ming 
7 
2 
5 
0 
0 
No 
2 
Lu Hongdong 
7 
2 
5 
0 
0 
No 
2 
Xie Yunshan 
7 
2 
5 
0 
0 
No 
2 
Li Hongshen 
7 
2 
5 
0 
0 
No 
2 
Chen Yanhui 
7 
2 
5 
0 
0 
No 
1 
Dai Yang 
7 
2 
5 
0 
0 
No 
2 
Zhang 
Yongliang 
7 
1 
6 
0 
0 
No 
2 
Liu Guo’en 
7 
0 
7 
0 
0 
No 
2 
He Yong 
7 
1 
6 
0 
0 
No 
2 
Explanation on two consecutive absences from Board meetings: None.  


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
78 
 
3. Objections raised by directors to relevant matters of the Company 
Did directors object to relevant matters of the Company? 
□ Yes  
 No 
During the reporting period, no directors objected to relevant matters of the Company. 
4. Other circumstances in the performance of duties by directors  
Was advice to the Company from directors adopted? 
Yes      □ No 
Explanation on whether advice to the Company from directors was adopted or not 
During the reporting period, in strict accordance with the Company Law, the Securities Law, the Governance 
Guidelines for Listed Companies, the Several Provisions on Strengthening the Protection of the Rights and interests 
of Shareholders of Public Shares and other laws, regulations and normative documents, as well as the Articles of 
Association, the Rules of Procedure for the Board of Directors and other relevant requirements, all the members of 
the Tenth Board of Directors of the Company, honoring the principles of integrity, faithfulness and diligence, and 
abiding by the code of conduct for the performance of duties as a director, attended the Board meetings and the 
general meetings in earnest, actively understanding the operation of the Company and fully expressing our opinions, 
and carefully, independently and objectively considering 40 motions, including the revision of the Company’s 
corporate governance documents, organizational structure, related party transactions, misappropriation of funds, 
and the appointment of senior management personnel. They carefully understood the contents for consideration 
during the Board meetings and expressed corresponding opinions and suggestions, which have played a positive 
role in promoting the Board of Directors to make strategic decisions that are more in line with the development of 
the Company and more scientific and reasonable, and have effectively safeguarded the legitimate rights and interests 
of the Company and all the shareholders, in particular the minority shareholders.


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
79 
 
VII. Performance of Special Committees under the Board of Directors during the Reporting Period 
Name of 
Committee 
Members 
Number 
of 
Meetings 
Date of convention 
Agenda of meeting 
Important 
opinions and 
recommendations 
proposed  
Other 
circumstances 
in the 
performance 
of duties 
Particulars of 
objections (if 
any)  
Strategy 
Committee 
Chen Fashu, Lu 
Hongdong, Li 
Hongshen, Dong 
Ming, Liu Guo’en 
3 
March 20, 2023 
(I) The first meeting of Strategy Committee of the Tenth 
Board of Directors for 2023 
1. Proposal on the 2023 Organizational Structure Plan of 
Yunnan Baiyao. 
2. Proposal on Delegation of Power by the Board of Directors 
to the Group Office Meeting 
3. Proposal  
Number of bonus shares for every 10 shares (share)  
on Public Welfare Donation Management Measures of 
Yunnan Baiyao 
Result: 5 voted in favor, 0 voted against, 0 abstained 
None 
None 
None 
Strategy 
Committee 
Chen Fashu, Lu 
Hongdong, Li 
Hongshen, Dong 
Ming, Liu Guo’en 
3 
July 31, 2023 
(II) The second meeting of Strategy Committee of the Tenth 
Board of Directors for 2023 
1. Proposal on Revising the Investment and Financial 
Management System of the Company 
2. Proposal on Applying for Registration and Issuance of Ultra 
Short-term Financing Bonds 
Result: 5 voted in favor, 0 voted against, 0 abstained 
None 
None 
None 
Strategy 
Committee 
Chen Fashu, Lu 
Hongdong, Li 
Hongshen, Dong 
Ming, Liu Guo’en 
3 
December 18, 2023 
(III) The third meeting of Strategy Committee of the Tenth 
Board of Directors for 2023 
1. Proposal on the Use of Self-owned Idle Funds for 
Investment and Financial Management in 2024 
Result: 5 voted in favor, 0 voted against, 0 abstained 
None 
None 
None 
Nomination 
Committee 
Dai Yang, Zhang 
Yongliang, Chen 
Yanhui 
1 
February 28, 2023 
(I) The first meeting of Nomination Committee of the Tenth 
Board of Directors for 2023 
1. Proposal on Appointment of Senior Management  
Result: 3 voted in favor, 0 voted against, 0 abstained 
None 
None 
None 
Remuneration 
and Appraisal 
Committee 
Zhang Yongliang, Dai 
Yang, Chen Fashu  
6 
February 14, 2023 
(I) The first meeting of Remuneration and Appraisal 
Committee of the Tenth Board of Directors for 2023 
1. Proposal on Adjustment of the Remuneration for the 
Secretary of the Board of Directors 
Result: 3 voted in favor, 0 voted against, 0 abstained 
None 
None 
None 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
80 
 
Remuneration 
and Appraisal 
Committee 
Zhang Yongliang, Dai 
Yang, Chen Fashu 
6 
February 23, 2023 
(II) The second meeting of Remuneration and Appraisal 
Committee of the Tenth Board of Directors for 2023 
1. Proposal on Adjustment of the Remuneration for TCM 
Strategy Scientist 
Result: 3 voted in favor, 0 voted against, 0 abstained 
None 
None 
None 
Remuneration 
and Appraisal 
Committee 
Zhang Yongliang, Dai 
Yang, Chen Fashu 
6 
February 28, 2023 
(III) The third meeting of Remuneration and Appraisal 
Committee of the Tenth Board of Directors for 2023 
1. Proposal on Adjustment of the Remuneration for Chief 
Commercial Officer and Senior Vice President  
Result: 3 voted in favor, 0 voted against, 0 abstained 
None 
None 
None 
Remuneration 
and Appraisal 
Committee 
Zhang Yongliang, Dai 
Yang, Chen Fashu 
6 
March 23, 2023 
(IV) The fourth meeting of Remuneration and Appraisal 
Committee of the Tenth Board of Directors for 2023 
1. Proposals on the Implementation of the Measures for the 
Remuneration and Appraisal of Core Personnel such as 
Directors, Supervisors and Senior Management in 2022 
Result: 3 voted in favor, 0 voted against, 0 abstained 
None 
None 
None 
Remuneration 
and Appraisal 
Committee 
Zhang Yongliang, Dai 
Yang, Chen Fashu 
6 
May 31, 2023 
(V) The fifth meeting of Remuneration and Appraisal 
Committee of the Tenth Board of Directors for 2023 
1. Proposal on the Implementation of Short-term Incentive 
Distribution for Directors, Supervisors and Senior 
Management in 2022 
Result: 3 voted in favor, 0 voted against, 0 abstained 
None 
None 
None 
Remuneration 
and Appraisal 
Committee 
Zhang Yongliang, Dai 
Yang, Chen Fashu 
6 
July 17, 2023 
(VI) The sixth meeting of Remuneration and Appraisal 
Committee of the Tenth Board of Directors for 2023 
1. Proposal on Cancelling the Third Exercisable Period of the 
Initially Granted Part of the 2020 Stock Option Incentive Plan 
and the Second Exercisable Period of Its Reserved Granted 
Part 
Result: 3 voted in favor, 0 voted against, 0 abstained 
None 
None 
None 
Audit 
Committee 
He Yong, Xie 
Yunshan, Zhang 
Yongliang  
7 
March 13, 2023 
(I) The first meeting of Audit Committee of the Tenth Board 
of Directors for 2023 
1. Preliminary Audit Opinion on the 2022 Annual Report 
Issued by the Certified Public Accountant 
Result: 3 voted in favor, 0 voted against, 0 abstained 
None 
None 
None 
Audit 
Committee 
He Yong, Xie 
Yunshan, Zhang 
Yongliang 
7 
March 16, 2023 
(II) The second meeting of Audit Committee of the Tenth 
Board of Directors for 2023 
1. 2022 Summary Report on Internal Audit and 2023 Internal 
Audit Plan 
Result: 3 voted in favor, 0 voted against, 0 abstained 
None 
None 
None 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
81 
 
Audit 
Committee 
He Yong, Xie 
Yunshan, Zhang 
Yongliang 
7 
March 27, 2023 
(III) The third meeting of Audit Committee of the Tenth 
Board of Directors for 2023 
1. 2022 Annual Report and its summary  
2. Annual Final Account Report for 2022 
3. Proposal on the special audit report of the accounting firm 
on the summary of the non-operational funds occupied by the 
related parties and the transactions of other related funds 
4. 2022 Profit Distribution Plan 
5. Proposal on Estimation of the Daily Related Party 
Transactions in 2023 
6. Report on the Company’s Financial Budget for 2023 
7. Proposal on Provision for Asset Impairment in 2022 
8. Proposal on Change of Accounting Policies 
9. Self-evaluation Report on the Company’s Internal Control 
for 2022 
10. Proposal on paying the audit fees (including internal 
control audit) of Mazars Certified Public Accountants LLP in 
2022 
11. Proposal on Renewing the Engagement with the 
Company’s Audit Organization (Including Internal Control 
Audit) for 2023 
12. Proposal on Revising the Implementation Rules of the 
Audit Committee of the Board of Directors 
Result: 3 voted in favor, 0 voted against, 0 abstained 
None 
None 
None 
Audit 
Committee 
He Yong, Xie 
Yunshan, Zhang 
Yongliang 
7 
April 24, 2023 
(IV) The fourth meeting of Audit Committee of the Tenth 
Board of Directors for 2023 
1. Proposal on the Report of the First Quarter in 2023 
Result: 3 voted in favor, 0 voted against, 0 abstained 
None 
None 
None 
Audit 
Committee 
He Yong, Xie 
Yunshan, Zhang 
Yongliang 
7 
August 25, 2023 
(V) The fifth meeting of Audit Committee of the Tenth Board 
of Directors for 2023 
1. Proposal on Interim Report for 2023 and its summary  
Result: 3 voted in favor, 0 voted against, 0 abstained 
None 
None 
None 
Audit 
Committee 
He Yong, Xie 
Yunshan, Zhang 
Yongliang 
7 
October 25, 2023 
(VI) The sixth meeting of Audit Committee of the Tenth 
Board of Directors for 2023 
1. Proposal on the Report of the Third Quarter in 2023 
Result: 3 voted in favor, 0 voted against, 0 abstained 
None 
None 
None 
Audit 
Committee 
He Yong, Xie 
Yunshan, Zhang 
Yongliang 
7 
November 22, 2023 
(VII) The seventh meeting of Audit Committee of the Tenth 
Board of Directors for 2023 
1. Proposal on 2023 Annual Report Audit Plan  
Result: 3 voted in favor, 0 voted against, 0 abstained 
None 
None 
None 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
82 
 
VIII. Work of the Supervisory Committee 
Whether the Supervisory Committee identified any risks to the Company in its supervisory activities during the reporting period 
□Yes 
 No 
The Supervisory Committee had no objections to the supervisory matters during the reporting period. 
IX. Employees of the Company 
1. Number of employees, professional composition, and education 
Number of in-service employees of the parent company at the end of the reporting 
period (person)  
3,961 
Number of in-service employees of major subsidiaries at the end of the reporting 
period (person)  
4,873 
Total number of in-service employees at the end of the reporting period (person)  
8,834 
Total number of salaried employees in the current period (person)  
8,834 
Number of retired pensioners whose expenses shall be borne by the parent company 
and its main subsidiaries (person) 
1,872 
Professional Composition 
Category of Professional Composition 
Number of Professional Composition 
(Person) 
Production staff 
1,676 
Sales staff 
5,099 
Technical staff 
1,265 
Including: R&D staff 
527 
Financial staff 
308 
Administrative staff 
486 
Total 
8,834 
Education 
Category of Education 
Number (person) 
Doctor 
35 
Master 
532 
Undergraduate 
3,804 
College 
2,877 
Technical secondary school and below 
1,586 
Total 
8,834 
2. Remuneration policy 
In accordance with the Social Insurance Law of the People’s Republic of China, Yunnan Baiyao has 
purchased pension, medical, unemployment, work-related injury, maternity, and other insurance for 
employees, as well as has provided housing provident fund and enterprise annuity to ensure that employees 
enjoy the rights stipulated by law. In addition, the Company has purchased commercial insurance to avoid 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
83 
 
the risk of accidental injury and protect the health of employees. In 2023, the Company improved its 
compensation system, focusing on value creation, promoting labor efficiency, optimizing the personnel 
structure, as well as enhancing capacity. The Company assessed the reasonableness and effectiveness of 
human resource investment by analyzing the operation and allocation efficiency of human resources to 
enhance the value-creating ability of its employees. The Company also established a positive incentive 
culture, implemented an over-sharing mechanism for improving quality and efficiency, taken performance 
results as a part of the remuneration system, encouraged the complement of special tasks with project 
rewards, and rewarded quality and efficiency based on the incremental part of revenue and profit 
contribution. 
3. Training program 
Yunnan Baiyao adheres to the concept of “People-first, Talent-integrated,” and establishes and 
improves the talent training system through scientific talent strategy planning. By offering employees 
diverse avenues for development and comprehensive training support, the Company fosters the personal 
growth of its workforce, enabling them to continuously enhance their skills and capabilities. This ensures a 
mutually beneficial relationship between the enterprise and its employees. To further empower the 
organization, its business operations, and its personnel, the Company has formulated and implemented 
special training programs for management and professional talents, and has conducted a dynamic talent 
inventory based on competency models and talent assessment, focusing on the identification and training of 
key talents to ensure that their competency enhancement matches the Company’s future needs. By 
implementing effective cadre management mechanisms and talent pool management tools, we cultivate 
high-quality management talents who align with the Company’s future development needs. 
During the reporting period, the Company achieved end-to-end digitization of the training program by 
embracing digital transformation, and bestowed digital “wings” upon the entire process of “business 
strategy-talent planning-training program-talent growth” with digital capabilities. With the continuous 
enhancement of the “Blossoming Flowers” talent training system, the Company delivered tailor-made 
training programs that catered to the needs and development requirements of different employees, such as 
Panax Notoginseng Flower Training Program for Project Manager, Paris Polyphylla Flower Training 
Program for Middle-level Management, New Apprenticeship Project, and National Senior Workshop. 
4. Labor outsourcing 
□Applicable 
 Not applicable 
X. Profit Distribution and Conversion of Capital Reserve into Share Capital of the 
Company 
Profit distribution policies during the reporting period, especially the formulation, implementation, or adjustment of the 
cash dividend policies 
Applicable 
 □Not applicable 
The Company’s ongoing commitment revolves around creating value and ensuring reasonable returns 
for investors. The Company extensively gathers and incorporates shareholders’ perspectives regarding profit 
distribution. It follows sustainable, stable, compliant, and transparent distribution policies that prioritize the 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
84 
 
protection of minority shareholders’ legitimate rights and interests. The standards and ratios for dividend 
distribution are clearly defined. The profit distribution plan of the Company is submitted to the shareholders’ 
general meeting for consideration, and the decision-making and implementation of profit distribution 
comply with the relevant provisions of the Articles of Association and the requirements of the resolutions of 
the shareholders’ general meeting. 
The Company’s annual equity distribution plan for 2022 was as follows: Based on the total share capital 
of the Company of 1,796,862,549 shares as at the end of 2022 less 12,599,946 shares repurchased by the 
special securities account for share repurchase, i.e., on the basis of 1,784,262,603 shares, a cash dividend of 
RMB 15.2 (tax inclusive) for every 10 shares would be paid to all shareholders, 0 bonus shares (tax inclusive) 
would be distributed, and no share capital would be converted from capital reserve. In accordance with the 
distribution proportion of this plan, the total amount of distribution was finally determined based on the 
number of shares entitled to profit distribution on the equity registration date when the distribution plan was 
implemented in the future. The remaining undistributed profits were reserved for distribution in subsequent 
years. 
On May 19, 2023, the Company completed the implementation of equity distribution for 2022, with a 
total cash dividend of RMB 2,712,079,156.56 distributed. 
Special Description of Cash Dividend Policy 
Whether it complies with the provisions of the Articles of Association or the requirements of 
resolutions of shareholders’ general meetings: 
Yes 
Whether the standards and ratios for dividend distribution are clearly defined: 
Yes 
Whether relevant decision-making procedures and mechanisms are complete: 
Yes 
Whether the independent directors perform their duties and play their due role: 
Yes 
If the Company does not pay cash dividends, it shall disclose the specific reasons and the next steps 
to be taken to enhance the return of investors: 
No 
Whether minority shareholders have sufficient opportunities to express their opinions and 
demands, and whether their legitimate rights and interests are fully protected: 
Yes 
Whether the conditions and procedures for adjusting or changing the cash dividend policies are 
compliant and transparent: 
Yes 
The Company made profits during the reporting period and the profit available for distribution to shareholders of the parent 
company was positive, but no cash dividend distribution plan was proposed 
□Applicable 
     Not applicable 
Distribution of profits and capital reserve converted into share capital during the reporting period 
Applicable 
 □Not applicable 
Number of bonus shares for every 10 shares (share)  
0 
Number of dividends for every 10 shares (RMB) (tax included)  
20.77 
Number of shares transferred for every 10 shares (share)  
0 
Base of Share capital of the distribution plan (share)  
1,784,262,603.00 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
85 
 
Cash dividend amount (RMB) (tax included)  
3,705,913,426.43 
Cash dividend amount in other ways (such as repurchase of 
shares) (RMB)  
0.00 
Total cash dividend (including other methods) (RMB)  
3,705,913,426.43 
Distributable profits (RMB)  
3,750,505,582.48 
Proportion of total cash dividends (including other methods) to 
total profit distribution 
100% 
This Cash Dividend 
If the Company is in the mature phase and there is no significant capital expenditure arrangement, the cash dividend shall account 
for at least 80% of the profit distribution when profit distribution is made. 
Details of Plan on Profit Distribution and Conversion of Capital Reserve into Share Capital 
The profit distribution plan of the Company considered and approved by the Board of Directors is as follows: Based on the total 
share capital of the Company of 1,796,862,549 shares as at the end of 2023 less 12,599,946 shares repurchased by the special 
securities account for share repurchase, i.e., on the basis of 1,784,262,603 shares, a cash dividend of RMB 20.77 (tax inclusive) for 
every 10 shares will be paid to all shareholders, 0 bonus shares (tax inclusive) will be distributed, and 0 shares will be issued to all 
shareholders for every 10 shares by way of conversion of capital reserve. 
 
XI. Implementation of the Company’s Equity Incentive Plan, Employee Stock Ownership Plan 
(ESOP), or Other Employee Incentive Measures 
Applicable 
 □Not applicable 
1. Equity incentive 
(1) On June 8, 2021, the Company held the fifth session of the Ninth Board of Directors for 2021, at which the 
Proposal on Fulfillment of Exercise Conditions for First Exercisable Period of Stock Options Initially Granted 
under the 2020 Stock Option Incentive Plan had been considered and approved. Those 670 incentive participants 
initially granted with stock options under the 2020 Stock Option Incentive Plan could exercise a total of 6,746,400 
exercisable stock options in the first exercisable period by using the independent exercise method. 
(2) On May 5, 2022, the Proposal on the Adjustment of the Number and Exercise Price of Stock Options Initially 
Granted under the 2020 Stock Option Incentive Plan had been considered and approved at the seventh session of the 
ninth Board of Directors in 2022. As the Company’s 2021 Annual Equity Distribution Plan had been implemented, a 
cash dividend of RMB 16.00 (including tax) for every 10 shares would be paid to all shareholders on the basis of 
1,796,221,975 shares. According to the Company’s 2020 Stock Option Incentive Plan (Draft), the number of 
unexercised options initially granted under the Company’s 2020 Stock Option Incentive Plan was adjusted from 
11,257,220 to 15,760,108 and the exercise price was adjusted from RMB 74.05/share to RMB 51.75/share. 
(3) On August 8, 2022, the Proposal on Cancellation of Certain Stock Options Granted under the 2020 Stock 
Option Incentive Plan had been considered and approved at the ninth session of the Ninth Board of Directors for 
2022, canceling 947,054 stock options initially granted that had not been exercised upon expiration of the first 
exercisable period. As the Company’s return on equity in 2021 was less than 10.5%, the exercise conditions for the 
second exercisable period had not been satisfied; therefore 7,086,240 stock options initially granted corresponding 
to the second exercisable period and 840,000 stock options under reserved grant corresponding to the first 
exercisable period could not be exercised and would thus be canceled by the Company accordingly. After 
cancellation, the number of stock options initially granted under the Company’s 2020 Stock Option Incentive 
Plan was adjusted from 15,119,534 to 6,772,080, the number of options under reserved grant was adjusted from 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
86 
 
1,680,000 to 840,000, and the number of incentive participants was adjusted from 671 to 653. 
(4) On September 7, 2022, the Shenzhen Branch of China Securities Depository and Clearing Corporation 
reviewed and confirmed that the cancellation conducted by the Company had been completed. According to the 
relevant provisions of the Measures for the Administration of Equity Incentives of Listed Companies and the 2020 
Stock Option Incentive Plan (Draft), the Company canceled certain stock options under the 2020 Stock Option 
Incentive Plan. In particular: 
1) Upon expiration of the first exercisable period of the stock options initially granted under the 2020 Stock 
Option Incentive Plan, 6,252,954 stock options had been exercised and 947,054 stock options had not been exercised; 
947,054 stock options initially granted that had not been exercised upon were canceled. 
2) As the Company’s 2021 performance indicators failed to fully meet the performance assessment 
requirements set forth in the 2020 Stock Option Incentive Plan, 7,086,240 stock options initially granted 
corresponding to the second exercisable period and 840,000 stock options under reserved grant corresponding to 
the first exercisable period (1,200,000 stock options were under reserved grant, which were adjusted to 1,680,000 
after equity distribution in 2021, and thus 840,000 stock options were not exercised corresponding to the first 
exercisable period) could not be exercised and would thus be canceled by the Company accordingly. 
3) For the stock options initially granted under the 2020 Stock Option Incentive Plan, 17 incentive participants 
resigned and 1 incentive participant passed away due to other reasons than performing duties, being no longer 
eligible for exercising the stock options. Those 314,160 stock options granted but not exercised by the 
aforementioned incentive participants could not be exercised and would thus be canceled by the Company 
accordingly. On September 7, 2022, the Shenzhen Branch of China Securities Depository and Clearing Corporation 
reviewed and confirmed that the Company had completed the cancellation of 9,187,454 stock options mentioned 
above. 
(5) On August 28, 2023, the Proposal on Cancelling the Third Exercisable Period of the Initially Granted Part 
of the 2020 Stock Option Incentive Plan and the Second Exercisable Period of Its Reserved Granted Part had been 
considered and approved at the fifth session of the Tenth Board of Directors for 2023 and the third session of the 
Tenth Supervisory Committee for 2023. As the Company’s 2022 performance indicators failed to fully meet the 
performance assessment requirements set forth in the 2020 Stock Option Incentive Plan of Yunnan Baiyao Group, 
4,837,200 stock options initially granted corresponding to the third exercisable period would not be exercised for it 
was adjusted to 6,772,080 stock options and 840,000 stock options under reserved grant corresponding to the second 
exercisable period after the equity distribution adjustment for 2021 (A total of 1,200,000 stock options under 
reserved grant, for it was adjusted to 1,680,000 stock options after the equity distribution adjustment for 2021. Out 
of these, 840,000 stock options corresponding to the first exercisable period have been cancelled, and the remaining 
840,000 stock options correspond to the second exercisable period). All of these stock options could not be exercised 
and would thus be canceled by the Company (the actual cancellation will be based on the records of the Shenzhen 
Branch of China Securities Depository and Clearing Corporation). 
(6) On September 7, 2023, following the review and confirmation by the Shenzhen Branch of China Securities 
Depository and Clearing Corporation, the Company had completed the cancellation of the aforementioned 
7,612,080 stock options. After the cancellation of all the aforementioned stock options, the Company’s 2020 Stock 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
87 
 
Option Incentive Plan had been completely terminated. 
Equity incentives obtained by directors and senior management of the Company 
□Applicable 
     Not applicable 
Evaluation mechanism and incentives for senior management 
The Company has formulated an objective, fair, motivation-oriented, economic, and legitimate performance 
appraisal system for senior management in accordance with the relevant national labor policies and in light of the 
actual operation of the industry and the Company. The senior management of the Company shall be appointed by 
the Board of Directors uniformly, and the Remuneration and Appraisal Committee under the Board is responsible 
for evaluating the working capability and performance of the senior management of the Company, formulating a 
scientific and reasonable remuneration incentive mechanism based on the industry landscape and the actual 
operation of the Company, and submitting it to the Board for approval. The remuneration of senior management 
includes basic salary, performance rewards, incentive funds, etc. The performance of senior management is 
appraised based on the completion rate of overall operation indicators to encourage them to complete the stage 
operation objectives. During the reporting period, to improve and perfect the incentive and restraint mechanism of 
the Company, enhance the sense of responsibility and mission of directors, supervisors, senior management, middle 
management, business backbones, and key technical backbones to achieve the sustainable and healthy development 
of the Company, and ensure the realization of strategic objectives, the Company complied with relevant national 
laws, adhered to the concept of creating and sharing value and launched a stock option incentive plan which 
integrated the interests of the Company, shareholders and key employees to promote the sustainable and healthy 
development of the Company, thereby creating greater value and rewarding investors. 
2. Implementation of the ESOP 
Applicable 
 □Not applicable 
All active ESOPs during the reporting period 
Scope of employees 
Number of 
employees 
Number of 
shares held 
(share)  
Status of change 
Proportion in the 
total share capital 
of listed company 
Source of funding to 
implement the Plan 
1. Directors (excluding 
independent directors), 
supervisors, and senior 
management of the 
Company; 2. 
Employees of the 
Company and its 
holding subsidiaries. All 
participants are required 
to be employed by the 
Company (including its 
holding subsidiaries) 
and sign a labor 
contract/ service 
contract with the 
Company. 
1,312 
23,379,996 
1. The sensitive period 
in the ESOP will be 
revised in accordance 
with the latest 
regulations. 2. The 
number of members in 
the ESOP 
Management 
Committee will be 
increased, and 
corresponding 
elections will be 
conducted to fill the 
vacancies. 
1.30% 
Employee’s statutory 
compensation, self-
raised funds, funds 
raised through 
financing under the 
Plan, incentive funds 
set aside by the 
Company, and funds 
obtained by any other 
means permitted by 
laws and regulations. 
 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
88 
 
Shareholdings of the directors, supervisors, and senior management in ESOPs during the reporting period 
Name 
Position 
Number of shares 
held at the beginning 
of the reporting period 
(share)  
Number of shares 
held at the end of 
the reporting period 
(share) 
Proportion to the total 
share capital of listed 
company 
Dong Ming 
Director, CEO, President 
303,666 
0 
0 
Lu Hongdong 
Director  
26,028 
0 
0 
Zhu Zhaoyun 
TCM Strategy Scientist 
86,762 
0 
0 
Qin Wanmin 
Chief Innovation Officer, Senior Vice 
President 
303,666 
0 
0 
Yang Yong 
Chief Compliance Officer, Senior 
Vice President 
303,666 
0 
0 
Li Jin 
Chief Quality and Process Officer 
86,762 
0 
0 
Qian Yinghui 
Secretary of the Board of Directors 
21,690 
0 
0 
You Guanghui 
Chairman of the Supervisory 
Committee 
43,381 
0 
0 
Zhong Jie 
Deputy Chairman of the Supervisory 
Committee 
43,381 
0 
0 
Qu Huaxi 
Chairman of the Trade Union, 
Employee Supervisor 
26,028 
0 
0 
He Yingxia 
Vice Chairman of the Trade Union, 
Employee Supervisor 
21,690 
0 
0 
Wang Minghui  Former Chairman  
520,570 
0 
0 
Yin Pinyao  
Former Chief Operating Officer and 
Senior Vice President 
303,666 
0 
0 
Wang Jin 
Former Chief Sales Officer and 
Senior Vice President 
303,666 
0 
0 
Yu Juan 
Former Chief Human Resources 
Officer 
173,523 
0 
0 
Changes in asset management institutions during the reporting period 
□Applicable 
 Not applicable 
Changes in equity caused by shares disposal by holders during the reporting period 
□Applicable 
 Not applicable 
Exercise of the shareholders’ rights during the reporting period: Not applicable 
Other relevant circumstances and statements of the ESOP during the reporting period 
□Applicable 
 Not applicable 
Changes in the membership of the management committee of the ESOP 
□Applicable 
 Not applicable 
The financial impact of the ESOP on the listed company during the reporting period and related accounting treatment 
□Applicable 
 Not applicable 
Termination of the ESOP during the reporting period 
Applicable 
 □Not applicable 
On July 5, 2023, the Company convened the fourth session of the Tenth Board of Directors for 2023, at 
which the Proposal on the Early Termination of the ESOP was considered and approved. The lock-up period 
of the Company’s 2021 ESOP expired on June 30, 2022. As of May 26, 2023, all 23,379,996 shares of the 
Company held under this ESOP had been reduced, and assets under the ESOP currently were all cash and bank 
balance. The Proposal on the Early Termination of the ESOP had been considered and approved at this Board 
meeting, agreeing to this early termination. Thereafter, the ESOP would be liquidated by its management 
committee and the proceeds would be distributed in proportion to the shares held by the participants. The above 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
89 
 
information can be found in the Announcement on the Resolution of the Fourth Session of the Tenth Board of 
Directors of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd for 2023 (Announcement No.: 2023-26) and the Announcement 
on the Early Termination of the 2021 ESOP of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd (Announcement No.: 2023-27), 
both disclosed by the Company at http://www.cninfo.com.cn on July 7, 2023. 
3. Other employee incentive measures 
□Applicable 
    Not applicable 
XII. Establishment and Implementation of Internal Control System during the Reporting 
Period 
1. Establishment and implementation of internal control 
The Company has established a scientifically designed and effective internal control system in accordance 
with the Company Law, the Basic Rules for Enterprise Internal Control, and related laws and regulations, and 
has continuously improved the internal control system and working mechanism by reference to the industry 
characteristics and the practice of the Company. During the reporting period, the Company promoted 
comprehensive risk management of key business entities and key risk areas to improve its overall risk defense 
capability. 
The form and content of the Company’s internal control evaluation can truly and accurately reflect the 
current implementation of the Company’s internal control work, without any false records, misleading 
statements, or material omissions. The internal control system has been fully established for businesses and 
matters included in the scope of internal control evaluation and has been fully implemented in the operation 
and management activities, which can effectively prevent and control the internal operation risks of the 
Company in major aspects, and ensure the legal and compliant operation of the Company and the safety and 
integrity of assets, achieving the expected objectives of internal control and safeguarding the interests of the 
Company and all shareholders. 
2. Details of significant internal control defects discovered during the reporting period 
□Yes  No 
XIII. Management Control of Subsidiaries during the Reporting Period 
None. 
XIV. Internal Control Evaluation Report or Internal Control Audit Report 
1. Internal control evaluation report 
Full-Text Disclosure Date of Internal Control Evaluation Report 
March 30, 2024 
Full-Text Disclosure Index of Internal Control Evaluation Report 
http://www.cninfo.com.cn/new/index 
Total assets of units included in the evaluation scope as a percentage of total assets of the 
Company’s consolidated financial statements 
98.98% 
Operating income of units included in the scope of evaluation as a percentage of operating 
income of the Company’s consolidated financial statements 
99.99% 
Defect Identification Criteria 
Category 
Financial Report 
Non-Financial Report 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
90 
 
Qualitative Criteria 
1. Major defects: Frauds among directors, 
supervisors, and senior managers of the Company 
are discovered; Significant internal control 
deficiencies identified and reported to management 
are not corrected after a reasonable time; Control 
environment is ineffective; The oversight of 
internal controls by Audit Committee and internal 
audit bodies is ineffective; There are defects 
affecting earnings trends; Material misstatements 
detected by external audit are not first detected by 
the Company; The Company corrects published 
financial statements. 
2. Important defects: Accounting policies fail to be 
selected and applied by GAAP; Controls or 
compensatory measures for non-conventional or 
special transaction accounting treatment fail to be 
established or implemented.  
3. General defects: Defects other than major defects 
and important defects are classified as general defects. 
1. Major defects: Those defects that have 
been formally disclosed and have a 
negative impact on the Company’s 
periodic reporting disclosure; and have 
violated national laws and regulations, 
causing heavy losses to the Company. 
2. Important defects: Those defects that 
are punished by national government 
authorities but have not had a negative 
impact on the Company’s periodic report 
disclosures. 
3. General defects: Those defects are 
punished by provincial (including 
provincial) and below government 
departments but do not have a negative 
impact on the disclosure of the 
Company’s periodic reports. 
Quantitative Criteria 
Internal control defects with financial misstatement 
amount less than 3% of total profit shall be 
identified as general defects; Internal control 
defects with an absolute amount greater than or 
equal to 3% but less than 5% of total profit shall be 
identified as important defects; Internal control 
defects with an absolute amount greater than or 
equal to 5% of total profit shall be identified as 
major defects. 
By reference to the identification criteria 
for internal control defects in financial 
reports, internal control defects that may 
cause direct property losses with an 
absolute amount less than 3% of total 
profits are identified as general defects; 
Internal control defects with an absolute 
amount greater than or equal to 3% but 
less than 5% of total profit shall be 
identified as important defects; Internal 
control defects with an absolute amount 
greater than or equal to 5% of total profit 
shall be identified as major defects. 
Number of Major Defects in 
Financial Reports (Item)  
0 
Number of Major Defects in Non-
Financial Reports (Item)  
0 
Number of Important Defects in 
Financial Reports (Item)  
0 
Number of Important Defects in 
Non-Financial Reports (Item)  
0 
2. Internal control audit report 
Applicable 
 □Not applicable 
Considerations about Internal Control Audit Report 
We believe that Yunnan Baiyao has maintained effective internal control over financial reports in all material respects as of 
December 31, 2023, in accordance with the Basic Rules for Enterprise Internal Control and relevant regulations. 
Disclosure of Internal Control Audit Report 
Disclosed 
Full-Text Disclosure Date of Internal Control Audit Report 
March 30, 2024 
Full-Text Disclosure Index of Internal Control Audit Report 
http://www.cninfo.com.cn/new/index 
Opinion Type of Internal Control Audit Report 
Unqualified opinion 
Whether There are Major Defects in Non-Financial Reports 
No 
Does the accounting firm issue internal control audit reports with qualified opinion? 
□Yes 
 No 
Whether the internal control audit report issued by the accounting firm is consistent with the self-evaluation report of the Board 
of Directors? 
Yes 
 □No 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
91 
 
XV. Rectification of Self-inspection Issues in Special Actions for Governance of Listed Companies 
Not applicable 
 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
92 
 
Section V 
Environmental and Social Responsibilities 
I. Significant Environmental Issues 
Whether the listed company and its subsidiaries are the key pollutant discharge unit announced by the environmental protection 
departments 
☑Yes    □No 
Environmental protection related policies and industry standards 
The Company has strictly complied with laws and regulations such as the Law of the People’s Republic of 
China on Environmental Protection, the Law of the People’s Republic of China on Air Pollution Prevention and 
Control, the Law of the People’s Republic of China on Water Pollution Prevention and Control, the Law of the 
People’s Republic of China on Solid Waste Pollution Prevention and Control, and the Law of the People’s Republic 
of China on Environmental Noise Pollution Prevention and Control, and internally formulated and implemented 
environmental management policies such as the Environmental Protection Management System, Environmental 
Protection Responsibility System, Environmental Protection Approval Management System, and Hazardous Waste 
Management System. 
Administrative permits for environmental protection 
Yunnan Baiyao applied for the pollution discharge permit at June 30, 2022, which will be valid until June 29, 
2027 
Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) Approvals for Yunnan Baiyao Group Traditional Chinese Medicine 
Resources Co., Ltd: YHXZH (2008) No.55, YHSH (2009) No.261; Approval for Acceptance of Completed 
Environmental Protection Projects: Phase I YH Acceptance (2013) No. 1, Phase II YH Acceptance (2015) No. 30, 
and YH Acceptance (2014) No. 16 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
93 
 
Industry emission standards and specific situations of pollutant emissions involved in production and operation activities 
Name of Company 
or Subsidiary 
Types of Main 
Pollutants and 
Characteristic 
Pollutants 
Names of Main 
Pollutants and 
Characteristic 
Pollutants 
Emission 
Method 
Number of 
Discharge 
Outlets 
Distribution of 
Discharge Outlets 
Emission Concentration/Intensity 
Pollutant Emission Standards 
Implemented 
Total Emissions 
Approved 
Total 
Emissions 
Emissions 
Exceeding 
Standards 
Yunnan Baiyao 
Group Co., Ltd. 
Particulate 
matter 
Particulate matter 
Organized 
emissions 
7 
1.Main 
discharge outlet 
for boiler 
exhaust gas 
2. Main 
discharge outlet 
for alcohol 
extraction 
exhaust gas 
4t/h boiler (with an average 
particulate matter concentration of 
5.9mg/m³); 
10t/h boiler (with an average 
particulate matter concentration of 
5.3mg/m³); 
15t/h boiler (with an average 
particulate matter concentration of 
5.3mg/m³); 
Alcohol extraction exhaust gas 
discharge outlet 1 (with an 
average particulate matter 
concentration of 4.3mg/m³); 
Alcohol extraction exhaust gas 
discharge outlet 2 (with an 
average particulate matter 
concentration of 4.1mg/m³); 
Alcohol extraction exhaust gas 
discharge outlet 3 (with an 
average particulate matter 
concentration of 4.7mg/m³); 
Alcohol extraction exhaust gas 
discharge outlet 4 (with an 
average particulate matter 
concentration of 3.85mg/m³). 
Standards for the Emission 
of Air Pollutants in the 
Pharmaceutical Industry 
GB37823-2019; Standards 
for the Emission of Air 
Pollutants from Boilers 
GB13271-2014 
Subject to 
simplified 
management, 
with no total 
emission 
indicator 
available 
None 
None 
Yunnan Baiyao 
Group Co., Ltd. 
Exhaust gas 
SO2 
Organized 
emissions 
3 
Main discharge 
outlet for boiler 
exhaust gas 
4t/h boiler (with an average SO2 
concentration of 0mg/m³); 
10t/h boiler (with an average SO2 
concentration of 0mg/m³); 
15t/h boiler (with an average SO2 
concentration of 0mg/m³). 
Standards for the Emission 
of Air Pollutants in the 
Pharmaceutical Industry 
GB37823-2019; Standards 
for the Emission of Air 
Pollutants from Boilers 
GB13271-2014 
Subject to 
simplified 
management, 
with no total 
emission 
indicator 
available 
None 
None 
Yunnan Baiyao 
Group Co., Ltd. 
Exhaust gas 
NOX 
Organized 
emissions 
3 
Main discharge 
outlet for boiler 
exhaust gas 
4t/h boiler (with an average NOX 
concentration of 73.8mg/m³); 
10t/h boiler (with an average NOX 
concentration of 94.8mg/m³); 
15t/h boiler (with an average NOX 
concentration of 90.5mg/m³); 
Standards for the Emission 
of Air Pollutants in the 
Pharmaceutical Industry 
GB37823-2019; Standards 
for the Emission of Air 
Pollutants from Boilers 
GB13271-2014 
Subject to 
simplified 
management, 
with 3.182 tons of 
NOX emissions 
in 2023 
11.0667 tons 
of approved 
total 
emissions 
None 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
94 
 
Yunnan Baiyao 
Group Co., Ltd. 
Exhaust gas 
Non-methane 
total 
hydrocarbons 
Organized 
emissions 
4 
Alcohol 
extraction 
exhaust gas 
discharge outlet 
Alcohol extraction exhaust gas 
discharge outlet 1 (with an average 
concentration of non-methane total 
hydrocarbons of 19.75mg/m³); 
Alcohol extraction exhaust gas 
discharge outlet 2 (with an average 
concentration of non-methane total 
hydrocarbons of 18.6mg/m³); 
Alcohol extraction exhaust gas 
discharge outlet 3 (with an average 
concentration of non-methane total 
hydrocarbons of 15.9mg/m³); 
Alcohol extraction exhaust gas 
discharge outlet 4 (with an average 
concentration of non-methane total 
hydrocarbons of 15.3mg/m³); 
Standards for the Emission 
of Air Pollutants in the 
Pharmaceutical Industry 
GB37823-2019 
Subject to 
simplified 
management, 
with no total 
emission 
indicator 
available 
 
None 
None 
Yunnan Baiyao 
Group Co., Ltd. 
Wastewater 
COD, ammonia 
nitrogen 
Drainage 
outlet 
2 
1. Main 
drainage outlet 
2. Rainwater 
drainage outlet 
Average concentration at main 
drainage outlet: COD 
40.20mg/L, 
Ammonia nitrogen: 2.37mg/L; 
Average concentration at 
rainwater drainage outlet: COD 
19.6mg/L 
Wastewater Quality 
Standard for Discharge to 
Municipal Sewers GB/T 
31962-2015; Integrated 
Wastewater Discharge 
Standards GB8978-1996 
 
Subject to 
simplified 
management, 
with no total 
emission 
indicator 
available 
None 
None 
Yunnan Baiyao 
Group TCM 
Resources Co., Ltd. 
Combustion 
exhaust 
emissions outlet 
Non-methane 
total 
hydrocarbons 
Organized 
emissions 
1 
Pre-treatment 
roof 
3.83mg/m³ 
Non-methane total 
hydrocarbons ＜ 
100mg/Nm³ 
/ 
/ 
None 
Yunnan Baiyao 
Group TCM 
Resources Co., 
Ltd. 
Dust removal 
discharge outlet 
for crushing 
Particulate matter Unorganized 
emissions 
5 
Pre-treated 
crushing 
＜ 20mg/m³ 
Particulate matter ＜ 
30mg/Nm³ 
/ 
/ 
None 
Yunnan Baiyao 
Group TCM 
Resources Co., 
Ltd. 
Factory 
boundary 
Hydrogen sulfide; 
ammonia; 
odor 
concentration; 
non-methane total 
hydrocarbons 
Unorganized 
emissions 
5 
Factory area 
Hydrogen sulfide: 0.006mg/m³ 
Ammonia: 0.2mg/m³ 
Odor concentration: 15 mg/m³ 
Non-methane total hydrocarbons: 
1.4mg/m³ 
Hydrogen sulfide ＜ 
0.06mg/Nm³ 
Ammonia ＜ 1.5mg/Nm³ 
Odor concentration 20 
dimensionless 
Non-methane total 
hydrocarbons ＜ 
4.0mg/Nm³ 
/ 
/ 
None 
Yunnan Baiyao 
Group TCM 
Resources Co., 
Ltd. 
Boiler discharge 
outlet 
Sulfur dioxide; 
nitrogen oxide; 
particulate matter; 
Lingeman 
blackness 
Organized 
emissions 
3 
Boiler room 
/ 
Sulfur dioxide ＜ 
50mg/Nm³ 
Nitrogen oxides ＜ 
200mg/Nm³ 
Particles ＜ 20mg/Nm³ 
/ 
Nitrogen 
oxide:  
32.18t/a 
None 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
95 
 
Lingeman blackness level 1 
Yunnan Baiyao 
Group TCM 
Resources Co., Ltd. 
Main drainage 
outlet 
Total nitrogen 
/ 
1 
Sewage station 
drainage outlet 
/ 
70mg/L 
/ 
/ 
/ 
Yunnan Baiyao 
Group TCM 
Resources Co., 
Ltd. 
Main drainage 
outlet 
Chroma 
/ 
1 
Sewage station 
drainage outlet 
30-60 
64 
/ 
/ 
/ 
Yunnan Baiyao 
Group TCM 
Resources Co.,Ltd. 
Main drainage 
outlet 
Total dissolved 
solids 
/ 
1 
Sewage station 
discharge outlet 
1500-1800mg/L 
2000mg/L 
/ 
/ 
/ 
Yunnan Baiyao 
Group Traditional 
Chinese Medicine 
Resources Co., Ltd. 
Main drainage 
outlet 
Flows 
/ 
1 
Sewage station 
drainage outlet 
/ 
mg/L 
/ 
/ 
/ 
Yunnan Baiyao 
Group TCM 
Resources Co., 
Ltd. 
Main drainage 
outlet 
Ammonia 
nitrogen 
/ 
1 
Sewage station 
drainage outlet 
0.30mg/L 
45mg/L 
/ 
/ 
/ 
Yunnan Baiyao 
Group TCM 
Resources Co., 
Ltd. 
Main drainage 
outlet 
Acute toxicity 
/ 
1 
Sewage station 
drainage outlet 
0.04mg/L 
mg/L 
/ 
/ 
/ 
Yunnan Baiyao 
Group TCM 
Resources Co., 
Ltd. 
Main drainage 
outlet 
Animal and 
vegetable oils 
/ 
1 
Sewage station 
drainage outlet 
0.06 
100mg/L 
/ 
/ 
/ 
Yunnan Baiyao 
Group TCM 
Resources Co., 
Ltd. 
Main drainage 
outlet 
PH value 
/ 
1 
Sewage station 
drainage outlet 
7.8 
6.5-9.5 
/ 
/ 
/ 
Yunnan Baiyao 
Group TCM 
Resources Co., 
Ltd. 
Main drainage 
outlet 
Total organic 
carbon 
/ 
1 
Sewage station 
drainage outlet 
12.4mg/L 
mg/L 
/ 
/ 
/ 
Yunnan Baiyao 
Group TCM 
Resources Co., 
Ltd. 
Main drainage 
outlet 
Total cyanide 
/ 
1 
Sewage station 
drainage outlet 
0.004mg/L 
0.5mg/L 
/ 
/ 
/ 
Yunnan Baiyao 
Group TCM 
Resources Co., 
Ltd. 
Main drainage 
outlet 
Chemical oxygen 
demand 
/ 
1 
Sewage station 
drainage outlet 
50-80mg/L 
500mg/L 
/ 
/ 
/ 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
96 
 
Yunnan Baiyao 
Group TCM 
Resources Co., 
Ltd. 
Main drainage 
outlet 
Suspended solids 
/ 
1 
Sewage station 
drainage outlet 
18mg/L 
400mg/L 
/ 
/ 
/ 
Yunnan Baiyao 
Group TCM 
Resources Co., 
Ltd. 
Main drainage 
outlet 
Five-day 
biochemical 
oxygen demand 
/ 
1 
Sewage station 
drainage outlet 
13mg/L 
350mg/L 
/ 
/ 
/ 
Yunnan Baiyao 
Group TCM 
Resources Co., 
Ltd. 
Main drainage 
outlet 
Total phosphorus 
/ 
1 
Sewage station 
drainage outlet 
4.4mg/L 
8mg/L 
/ 
/ 
/ 
Yunnan Baiyao 
Group Dali 
Pharmaceutical 
Co., Ltd. 
Exhaust gas 
Particulate matter Bag for dust 
removal 
4 
Direct emissions 
/ 
GB16297-1996 
/ 
/ 
/ 
Yunnan Baiyao 
Group Dali 
Pharmaceutical 
Co., Ltd. 
Exhaust gas 
Nitrogen oxide 
Chimney 
1 
Direct emissions 
48mg/m3 
GB16297-1996, 
GB13271-2014 
0.247t 
/ 
None 
Yunnan Baiyao 
Group Dali 
Pharmaceutical 
Co., Ltd. 
Wastewater 
COD 
Main drainage 
outlet 
1 
Discharged into 
a municipal 
sewage pipe 
network 
45mg/L 
GB14554-93, 
GB16297-1996,  
GB21908-2008 
0.151t 
/ 
None 
Yunnan Baiyao 
Group Dali 
Pharmaceutical 
Co., Ltd. 
Wastewater 
BOD5 
Main drainage 
outlet 
1 
Discharged into 
a municipal 
sewage pipe 
network 
12.7mg/L 
GB14554-93, 
GB16297-1996,  
GB21908-2008 
0.043t 
/ 
None 
Yunnan Baiyao 
Group Dali 
Pharmaceutical 
Co., Ltd. 
Wastewater 
Ammonia 
nitrogen 
Main drainage 
outlet 
1 
Discharged into 
a municipal 
sewage pipe 
network 
0.91mg/L 
GB14554-93, 
GB16297-1996,  
GB21908-2008 
0.007t 
/ 
None 
Yunnan Baiyao 
Group Dali 
Pharmaceutical 
Co., Ltd. 
Wastewater 
Total nitrogen Main drainage 
outlet 
1 
Discharged into 
a municipal 
sewage pipe 
network 
7.12mg/L 
GB14554-93 
GB16297-1996,  
GB21908-2008 
0.113t 
/ 
None 
Yunnan Baiyao 
Group Dali 
Pharmaceutical 
Co., Ltd. 
Wastewater 
Total phosphorus Main drainage 
outlet 
1 
Discharged into 
a municipal 
sewage pipe 
network 
0.12mg/L 
GB14554-93 
GB16297-1996,  
GB21908-2008 
0.002t 
/ 
None 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
97 
 
Yunnan Baiyao 
Group Wenshan 
Qihua Co., Ltd. 
Exhaust gas 
Sulfur dioxide; 
particle matter; 
nitrogen oxides 
Organized 
emissions 
2 
 
Boiler main 
exhaust gas 
outlet 
Boiler 2 (with a sulfur dioxide 
concentration of ＜ 3mg/m³, 
an average particulate matter 
concentration of 2.1mg/m³, an 
average nitrogen oxide 
concentration of 46.5mg/m³) 
has a smoke density of ≤ 1; 
Boiler 3 (with a sulfur dioxide 
concentration of ＜ 3mg/m³, 
an average particulate matter 
concentration of 2.1mg/m³, an 
average nitrogen oxide 
concentration of 49.75mg/m³) 
has a smoke density of ≤ 1. 
 
Sulfur dioxide: ≤50mg/m³; 
particulate matter≤20mg/m³; 
nitrogen oxide≤200mg/m³; 
smoke density of ≤ 1 
Subject to 
simplified 
management, 
with no total 
emission 
indicator 
available 
None 
None 
Yunnan Baiyao 
Group Wenshan 
Qihua Co., Ltd. 
Wastewater 
COD; BOD5, 
suspended solids; 
ammonia nitrogen 
Organized 
emissions 
1 
Main sewage 
discharge outlet 
in the factory 
area 
With an average COD 
concentration of 33.5mg/L, 
An average BOD5 
concentration of 12.1mg/L, 
an average suspended solids 
concentration of 7mg/L, 
an average ammonia nitrogen 
concentration of 0.67mg/L 
COD≤500mg/L; 
BOD5≤300mg/L; suspended 
solids≤400mg/L; ammonia 
nitrogen≤45mg/L 
Subject to 
simplified 
management, 
with no total 
emission 
indicator 
available 
None 
None 
 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
98 
 
Treatment of pollutants 
The Company strictly follows the requirements of environmental impact assessment (EIA) in construction of 
pollution prevention and control facilities, and has obtained complete related environmental protection approvals. 
In 2023, the Company and its subsidiaries actively carried out third-party environmental testing, showing the 
emissions of various pollutants such as wastewater, waste gas, solid waste, and noise, were in strict line with the 
standards, with no excessive emissions. 
Yunnan Baiyao Group Wenshan Qihua Co., Ltd: 
I. This Company adopts a physical-biological contact oxidation process for sewage treatment (3,000m³/day), 
a closed treatment process, which can efficiently treat organic compounds in high-concentration wastewater from 
TCM pharmaceuticals and mainly has the following characteristics: 
1. The acid-base regulation tank, pre-acidification tank, anoxic tank, aerobic tank, and sludge 
concentration tank, etc, all have a closed design. Volatile gases (odor, hydrogen sulfide, ammonia, etc) are 
collected through pipelines and then transported to photocatalytic oxidation deodorization equipment, for 
decomposing and purifying harmful gases to reduce air pollution. 
2. The methane gas produced during the anaerobic reaction stage is transported, through the biogas 
recovery system, to the boiler for combustion, which not only protects the environment, but also provides energy 
for the Company and saves costs. 
II. The 40t/h boiler burns clean energy natural gas, and the data of the produced flue gas emission are connected 
to an environmental protection platform through online monitoring devices, achieving real-time online monitoring 
of main indicators to meet emission standards. 
III. For the auxiliary material crushing and other work sections in the production OU, bags for dust removal are used. 
The collected drugs, environmentally friendly and cost-effective, can be reused for production and extraction. 
The wastewater and exhaust gas facilities are operating normally, and the discharges of various pollutant 
factors (wastewater, exhaust gas, noise) meet the standards. 
Environmental self-monitoring plan 
Yunnan Baiyao itself prepared an environmental self-monitoring plan in 2023 and filed it with the 
environmental protection department. In 2023, it carried out self-monitoring work in strict accordance with this plan, 
with all indicators of pollutants meeting the required emission standards. 
In August 2017, Yunnan Baiyao Group Wenshan Qihua Co., Ltd completed the preparation of the EIA report 
for the Relocation and Expansion Project Phase I. On August 27, 2017, it received the Approval WHSH [2017] No. 
53 from the Wenshan Branch of the Wenshan Prefecture Ecological Environment Bureau. In January 2021, it 
completed the environmental protection acceptance report for the construction project and obtained the pollutant 
discharge permit No. 91532600709893942X002R on August 3, 2021. 
Yunnan Baiyao Group Dali Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd strictly followed the requirements of the permit and 
discharged nitrogen oxides were monitored once a month and 12 times a year; particulate matter, sulfur dioxide, 
and smoke density monitored once a year; particulate matter, non-methane total hydrocarbons, odor concentration, 
ammonia, H2S, etc. monitored every six months and twice a year; pH, SS, BOD, COD, T-N, T-P, NH3-N, etc, 
monitored once a quarter and four times a year; and LAeq monitored once a quarter and four times a year. 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
99 
 
Emergency plans for sudden environmental events 
The Company has prepared relevant plans and submitted them to competent department of the Chenggong 
Branch of Kunming Ecological Environment Bureau for record keeping. In 2023, we conducted practical drills in 
collaboration with the Chenggong Branch of Kunming Ecological Environment Bureau. 
As required by the approval of the EIA report for the Relocation and Expansion Project Phase I of Yunnan 
Baiyao Group Wenshan Qihua Co., Ltd, the emergency plan for sudden environmental events was prepared on 
December 25, 2020, and filed with the Wenshan Branch of the Wenshan Prefecture Ecological Environment Bureau 
on January 5, 2021, No. 532601-2021-002-L. Emergency drills were conducted annually according to the relevant 
content. 
Investment in environmental governance and protection and payment of environmental protection taxes 
The Company pays environmental protection taxes on a quarterly basis in a timely manner based on its own 
emissions. 
Measures taken to reduce carbon emissions and their effects during the reporting period 
Applicable 
 Not applicable 
In 2023, under China’s “carbon peak and carbon neutrality” strategy, as a key unit under close regulation 
in terms of energy consumption, the Company further optimized its online energy monitoring system platform, 
completed the annual energy-saving goals and the action implementation plan for energy efficiency 
improvement, and ensured the achievement of energy-saving goals through the implementation of the energy-
saving target responsibility system, the sound energy management system, the energy-saving technology 
transformation and application, energy-saving publicity and training, and other means. 
Yunnan Baiyao Group Dali Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd was gradually phasing out outdated and high energy 
consuming equipment, striving to achieve energy conservation and emission reduction. 
Administrative punishments for environmental issues during the reporting period 
None. 
Other environmental information that should be disclosed 
In accordance to the requirements as set out in the pollutant discharge permits, the Company has completed 
the preparation of its environmental self-monitoring plan and filed it with competent ecological environment 
bureau. The Company tests the pollutant discharge factors monthly/quarterly/annually. 
Other environmental protection related information 
None 
II. Social Responsibility 
Please refer to the 2023 Annual Corporate Social Responsibility and ESG (Environmental, Social, and 
Governance) Report disclosed by the Company on the same day at www.cninfo.com.cn. 
III. Consolidated and Expanded Achievements in Poverty Alleviation and Rural Revitalization 
Yunnan Baiyao Group has always conscientiously implemented the relevant requirements from the Party 
Central Committee and The State Council. By leveraging its inherent strengths, the Company has dedicated itself 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
100 
 
to a targeted approach towards multiple objectives and tasks. With well-defined work concepts, the Company has 
developed precise plans and fine-tuned work strategies, and consistently extended support to Weixi County. 
Eventually, the Company successfully accomplished its phase-specific tasks. In 2023, the Company’s solid 
achievements in rural revitalization were recognized by various sectors of society. It received the “Best Practice 
Case among Listed Companies in Rural Revitalization” award and was also acknowledged for its efforts in poverty 
alleviation and rural revitalization in Weixi County, earning the title of “China’s National Excellent Case in Rural 
Revitalization.” 
Yunnan Baiyao has always been committed to leveraging its corporate advantages. Relying on Yunnan’s 
distinctive geographical advantages, the Company has been unwavering in its support for poverty alleviation and 
rural revitalization in areas like Weixi County and Fugong County in Yunnan. Through initiatives such as industry 
cultivation, physician training, medical donations, and educational assistance, the Company has achieved significant 
outcomes. Its continuous 8-year efforts in linked poverty alleviation in Weixi County and 16-year training of 
grassroots rural doctors in Fugong County have garnered increasing attention and recognition from all sectors of 
society.  
In 2023, Yunnan Baiyao kept placing orders for medicinal materials from poverty-stricken counties and 
establishing a long-term benefit linkage mechanism for the development of the TCM industry. The Company 
entered into a strategic partnership with Weixi Weihong Agricultural Resources Development Co., Ltd, designating 
the enterprise for the acquisition and initial processing of TCM through a unified order-based procurement approach. 
During this period, the Company also provided technical support in various aspects, including conducting technical 
guidance on TCM cultivation and training on drug traceability. The village task force regularly carried out dynamic 
early warning monitoring and assistance work at the assistance sites to prevent them from falling back into poverty 
again, with “a monthly calculation, analysis and assessment” of the income of farmers there and a thorough 
investigation of farmers facing poverty-returning risks before including them in early warning monitoring according 
to the process. Also, targeted investigations and verifications were carried out for households with substandard 
income, and assistance plans were formulated on a per-household and per-person basis. Support policies were re-
fined, and income-increasing measures were precisely implemented for each household. 
Yunnan Baiyao remains committed to its mission of “To Guard Life and Health.” It consistently and effectively 
contributes to the course of rural revitalization, bringing health and well-being to people of all ethnic groups in border 
areas. 
 
 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
101 
 
Section VI Significant Events 
I. Performance of Commitments 
1. Commitments of the Company’s De Facto Controller, Shareholders, Related Parties and Acquirers, as well as the Company Itself and Other Related Entities 
Fulfilled during the Reporting Period or Ongoing at the Period-End 
Applicable     □Not applicable 
Commitments 
Commitment 
Party 
Commitment 
Type 
Contents 
Commitment 
Time 
Commitment 
Period 
Performance 
Status 
Commitments 
made in the 
acquisition report 
or equity change 
report 
Yunnan 
Provincial 
Investment 
Holdings 
Group Co., 
Ltd (“Yunnan 
Investment 
Group”) 
Commitments 
regarding 
horizontal 
competition 
1. Our company is not engaged in any business or activity that is the same as, similar to, or resembling, 
and constitutes or may constitute directly or indirectly a competition in any aspect with, the listed 
company’s any existing business, nor will we actively provide, in any way, any assistance in finance, 
business, management, etc or any trade secrets such as technical information, business operations, 
sales channels, to any enterprises, agencies or other economic organizations that compete with the 
listed company in any of its existing business. 2. As of the date of issuance of this commitment letter, 
our company will legally take necessary and possible measures to avoid, and urge any other enterprises 
under our actual control to avoid, any businesses or activities that may in any way substantially or 
potentially constitute a horizontal competition or a conflict of interest, with the principal businesses of 
the listed company. If, in the future, a material conflict of interest arising from substantial or potential 
horizontal competition between our company and any enterprises under our control and the listed 
company, our company and such enterprises under our actual control will give up that business 
opportunity that may result in a material horizontal competition and thus lead to a substantial conflict 
of interest or take appropriate measures permitted by other laws and regulations to eliminate the 
potential impact of material horizontal competition. 3. Our company will not, by virtue of any 
information learned or known from the listed company, assist our company itself or any third party in 
engaging in any business activities that may in any way substantially or potentially constitute a 
horizontal competition with the principal businesses of the listed company. 
December 10, 
2021 
Remain 
effective 
during the 
period of 
holding 
indirect stake 
in Yunnan 
Baiyao 
In progress 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
102 
 
Commitments 
made in the 
acquisition report 
or equity change 
report 
Yunnan 
Investment 
Group 
Commitments 
to maintain 
the 
independence 
of the listed 
company 
To protect the legitimate rights and interest of any and all of the shareholders of the listed company, our 
company undertakes to warrant: 1. The personnel independence of the listed company, that is: (1) The 
general manager, deputy general manager, chief financial officer, secretary of the Board of Directors, and 
other senior management personnel of the listed company will work full-time and receive compensation 
in the listed company, with holding no positions other than directors or supervisors or receiving no 
compensation in any other enterprises under the control of our company, for continuously maintaining 
the independence of personnel of the listed company; (2) The listed company has a complete and 
independent labor, personnel, and salary management system, which is fully independent from our 
company and any other enterprises under our control; (3) The directors, supervisors, and senior 
management personnel of the listed company are elected or appointed in accordance with legal 
procedures, and our company will not interfere with the personnel appointment and removal decisions 
already made by the Board of Directors and the general meeting of the listed company. 2. The asset 
independence of the listed company, that is: (1) The listed company has independent and complete assets, 
all of which are under the control of the listed company and are independently owned and operated by 
the listed company; (2) Our company and any other enterprises under our control do not and will not in 
any way occupy the funds, assets, and other resources of the listed company in violation of laws and 
regulations; (3) Our company and any other enterprises under our control will not use the assets of the 
listed company as guarantee for our and their debts in violation of regulations. 3. The financial 
independence of the listed company, that is: (1) The listed company continues to maintain its independent 
financial department and independent financial accounting system; (2) The listed company opens an 
independent bank account and does not share a bank account with our company or any other enterprises 
under our control; (3) The listed company is able to make independent financial decisions, without our 
company’s illegal interference with its asset utilization scheduling; (4) The independence of the listed 
company’s financial personnel who will not work part-time or receive remuneration in any other 
enterprises under our control; (5) The listed company legally pays taxes independently. 4. The 
institutional independence of the listed company, that is: (1) The listed company continues to maintain a 
sound corporate governance structure and has an independent and complete organizational structure; (2) 
The general meeting, Board of Directors, independent directors, Supervisory Committee, general 
manager, etc of the listed company independently exercise their powers in accordance with laws, 
regulations, and the listed company’s articles of association; (3) The listed company has an independent 
and complete organizational structure, without institutional confusion with any other enterprises under 
our control. 5. The business independence of the listed company, that is: (1) The listed company has the 
assets, personnel, qualifications, and capabilities to independently carry out business activities, and also 
has the capabilities to independently and continuously operate in the market; (2) The listed company has 
minimized related party transactions between our company and any other enterprises under our control 
and the listed company as much as possible, and fairly carry out necessary and inevitable related party 
transactions at fair prices in accordance with market-oriented principles, with transaction procedures and 
information disclosure obligations fulfilled in accordance with relevant laws, regulations, and normative 
documents. 6. The listed company maintains independence from our company and any other enterprises 
under our control in any other aspects. 
December 10, 
2021 
Remain 
effective 
during the 
period of 
holding 
indirect stake 
in Yunnan 
Baiyao 
In progress 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
103 
 
Commitments 
made in the 
acquisition report 
or equity change 
report 
Yunnan 
Investment 
Group 
Commitments 
regarding 
related party 
transactions 
1. After the completion of this equity transfer, our company will consciously safeguard the interest of 
the listed company and any and all of its shareholders, and minimize and avoid related party 
transactions with the listed company. We will not, by virtue of our indirect stake in the listed company, 
seek for improper benefits or harm any interest of the listed company and any and all of its shareholders 
in related party transactions. 2. Our company does not and will not, by virtue of our indirect stake in 
the listed company and its own controlling influence, seek from the listed company for better 
commercial terms for business cooperation than that given to the third parties in the market for itself 
or for any other enterprises under our control. 3. Our company does not and will not, by virtue of our 
indirect stake in the listed company and its own controlling influence, seek for privileges for itself or 
any other enterprises under our control to enter into transactions with the listed company. 4. After 
completing this equity transfer, our company will strictly adhere to the provisions of the Company 
Law of the People’s Republic of China, the Articles of Association of Yunnan Baiyao Group, the 
Rules of Procedure for the General Meetings, and the Decision System for Related Party Transactions 
of the Listed Company when engaging in inevitable related party transactions with the listed company. 
We are committed to conducting these transactions in a transparent, fair, and equitable manner. This 
involves adhering to commercial principles such as “fairness, impartiality, and voluntariness.” We will 
enter into fair and reasonable transaction contracts with the listed company, ensuring that pricing 
policies are developed based on market fairness, impartiality, and openness. This approach guarantees 
the fairness of transaction prices. 5. After the completion of this equity transfer, our company and any 
other enterprises under our control will not illegally occupy the funds and assets of the listed company, 
and under no circumstances will the listed company be required to provide any form of guarantees to 
our company or any other enterprises under our control. 
December 10, 
2021 
Remain 
effective 
during the 
period of 
holding 
indirect stake 
in Yunnan 
Baiyao 
In progress 
Commitments 
made in the 
acquisition report 
or equity change 
report 
State-owned 
Assets 
Supervision 
and 
Administratio
n Commission 
of Yunnan 
Provincial 
People’s 
Government 
(“SASAC of 
Yunnan 
Province”), 
New Huadu 
Commitments 
regarding 
horizontal 
competition 
In the future, when the time is ripe, SASAC of Yunnan Province and New Huadu shall urge Baiyao 
Holdings to gradually inject the high-quality assets related to Yunnan Baiyao’s existing business and 
future development areas into Yunnan Baiyao Group. Both SASAC of Yunnan Province and New 
Huadu will also strictly comply with the regulations to avoid horizontal competition. 
March 23, 2017 
Remain 
effective 
during the 
period of 
holding the 
shares of 
Yunnan 
Baiyao 
(directly and 
indirectly) 
In progress 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
104 
 
Commitments 
made in the 
acquisition report 
or equity change 
report 
New Huadu 
Commitments 
regarding 
related party 
transactions 
1. New Huadu and any other enterprises under our control will try the best to avoid related party transactions 
with Yunnan Baiyao. For inevitable related party transactions or those occurring for reasonable reasons, 
New Huadu will undertake to conduct such transactions on an equal and voluntary basis in the principles of 
fairness, impartiality, and compensation for equal value, with the transaction prices to be determined based 
on the reasonable prices recognized in the market. 2. New Huadu and any other enterprises under our control 
will strictly comply with the avoidance provisions on related party transactions set out in Yunnan Baiyao’s 
articles of association and in other relevant regulations. All related party transactions involved will be carried 
out in accordance with the decision-making procedures for related party transactions for Yunnan Baiyao, 
and legal procedures will be followed to ensure not to harm any legitimate rights and interest of Yunnan 
Baiyao and any other shareholders through related party transactions. 3. If New Huadu and any other 
enterprises under our control violate any of the above statements and commitments, leading to any damages 
to any rights and interest of Yunnan Baiyao, New Huadu agrees to bear any and all of the corresponding 
compensation liabilities for such damages so caused to Yunnan Baiyao. 
March 23, 2017 
Remain 
effective 
during the 
period of 
holding the 
shares of 
Yunnan 
Baiyao 
(directly and 
indirectly) 
In progress 
Commitments 
made during asset 
restructuring 
Yunnan State-
owned Equity 
Operation 
Management 
Company, 
New Huadu 
and its acting-
in-concert 
parties, 
Jiangsu Yuyue 
Science & 
Technology 
Development 
Co., Ltd 
(“Jiangsu 
Yuyue”) 
Commitments 
regarding 
related party 
transactions 
1. Yunnan State-owned Equity Operation Management Company has undertaken the previous 
commitments of SASAC of Yunnan Province: After the completion of this significant asset restructuring, 
SASAC of Yunnan Province will try its best to avoid related party transactions with the listed company. For 
inevitable related party transactions or those occurring for reasonable reasons, SASAC of Yunnan Province 
will undertake to conduct such transactions on an equal and voluntary basis in the principles of fairness, 
impartiality, and compensation for equal value, with the transaction prices to be determined based on the 
reasonable prices recognized in the market. SASAC of Yunnan Province will strictly comply with the 
provisions of relevant laws, regulations, normative documents, and the articles of association of the listed 
company, perform the decision-making procedures and information disclosure obligations for related party 
transactions, and warrant not to harm any legitimate rights and interest of the listed company and any other 
shareholders through related party transactions. This commitment letter shall come into effect and be 
irrevocable as of the date of official signature by SASAC of Yunnan Province. SASAC of Yunnan Province 
warrants the effective fulfillment of these commitments, and the listed company has the right to supervise 
its fulfillment of this commitment letter. If SASAC of Yunnan Province fails to effectively fulfill this 
commitment letter, leading to any actual losses to the listed company, SASAC of Yunnan Province will 
compensate for any and all of such direct or indirect losses so caused to the listed company. 
2. New Huadu and its acting-in-concert parties undertake that: after the completion of this merger and overall 
listing, our company/I and any enterprises under our/my control will try the best to avoid related party 
transactions with the listed company. For inevitable related party transactions or those occurring for 
reasonable reasons, our company/I undertake (s) to conduct such transactions on an equal and voluntary 
basis in the principles of fairness, impartiality, and compensation for equal value, with the transaction prices 
to be determined based on the reasonable prices recognized in the market. Our company/I and any other 
enterprises under our/my control will strictly comply with the provisions of relevant laws, regulations, 
normative documents, and the articles of association of the listed company, perform the decision-making 
procedures and information disclosure obligations for related party transactions, and warrant not to harm 
any legitimate rights and interest of the listed company and any other shareholders through related party 
transactions. This commitment letter shall come into effect and be irrevocable as of the date of official 
signature by our company/me. Our company/I warrant(s) the effective fulfillment of these commitments, 
and the listed company has the right to supervise the fulfillment of this commitment letter. If our company/I 
fail(s) to effectively fulfill this commitment letter, leading to any actual losses to the listed company, our 
October 31, 
2018 
Remain 
effective 
during the 
period of 
holding the 
shares of 
Yunnan 
Baiyao 
(directly and 
indirectly) 
In progress 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
105 
 
company/I will compensate for any and all of such direct or indirect losses so caused to the listed company. 
3. Jiangsu Yuyue undertakes that: after the completion of this merger and overall listing, our company and 
any enterprises under our control will try the best to avoid related party transactions with the listed company. 
For inevitable related party transactions or those occurring for reasonable reasons, our company undertakes 
to conduct such transactions on an equal and voluntary basis in the principles of fairness, impartiality, and 
compensation for equal value, with the transaction prices to be determined based on the reasonable prices 
recognized in the market. Our company and any enterprises under our control will strictly comply with the 
provisions of relevant laws, regulations, normative documents, and the articles of association of the listed 
company, perform the decision-making procedures and information disclosure obligations for related party 
transactions, and warrant not to harm any legitimate rights and interest of the listed company and any other 
shareholders through related party transactions. This commitment letter shall come into effect and be 
irrevocable as of the date of official signature by our company. Our company warrants the effective 
fulfillment of these commitments, and the listed company has the right to supervise the fulfillment of this 
commitment letter. If our company fails to effectively fulfill this commitment letter, leading to any actual 
losses to the listed company, our company will compensate for any and all of such direct or indirect losses 
so caused to the listed company. 
Commitments 
made during asset 
restructuring 
Yunnan State-
owned Equity 
Operation 
Management 
Company, 
New Huadu, 
Jiangsu 
Yuyue 
Commitments 
to maintain 
the 
independence 
of the listed 
company 
After the completion of this merger and overall listing, our company/institution will maintain 
independence from the listed company in terms of personnel, assets, business, institutions, and finance 
in accordance with relevant laws, regulations, and normative documents. We will not, by virtue of the 
identity as a related party of the listed company, engage in the acts that affect the independence of the 
listed company’s personnel, assets, business, institutions, and finances, or harm any rights and interest 
of the listed company and any other shareholders. Instead, we will effectively ensure the independence 
of the listed company in terms of personnel, assets, business, institutions, finance, etc. This 
commitment letter shall come into effect and be irrevocable as of the date of official signature by our 
company/institution. Our company/institution warrants the effective fulfillment of these commitments, 
and the listed company has the right to supervise the fulfillment of this commitment letter. If our 
company/institution fails to effectively fulfill this commitment letter, leading to any actual losses to 
the listed company, our company/institution will compensate for any and all of such direct or indirect 
losses so caused to the listed company. 
October 31, 
2018 
Remain 
effective 
during the 
period of 
holding the 
shares of 
Yunnan 
Baiyao 
(directly and 
indirectly) 
In progress 
Commitments 
made during asset 
restructuring 
Jiangsu 
Yuyue 
Commitments 
regarding 
lock-up shares 
The shares of the listed company subscribed by our company through this transaction shall not be 
transferred during the period from the end of the issuance of these shares to June 26, 2023 (inclusive). 
After the expiration of the aforementioned lockup period, the transfer and trading of such shares shall 
be handled in accordance with the then effective laws and regulations, as well as the regulations and 
rules of the CSRC and Shenzhen Stock Exchange (“SZSE”). After the completion of this transaction, 
our company will also arrange a lockup period as described above for our any increased stake in the 
listed company after it issues bonus shares or convert public reserve funds into share capital. 
October 31, 
2018 
June 26, 2023 
Completed 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
106 
 
Commitments 
made during asset 
restructuring 
Baiyao 
Holdings, 
Yunnan State-
owned Equity 
Operation 
Management 
Company, 
New Huadu, 
Jiangsu 
Yuyue 
Commitments 
regarding real 
estate 
business 
If Yunnan Baiyao and its subsidiaries within the scope of its consolidated financial statements, and, 
Baiyao Holdings and its subsidiaries within the scope of its consolidated financial statements engaged 
in any illegal activities in the domestic real estate development business during the reporting period, 
such as undisclosed land vacancy, speculation of land, property hoarding, and price gouging, which 
have caused any losses to Yunnan Baiyao and investors, our company/institution will bear any and all 
of corresponding compensation liabilities for such losses as required by relevant laws, regulations and 
securities regulatory authorities. 
December 11, 
2018 
Remain 
effective 
during the 
period of 
holding the 
shares of 
Yunnan 
Baiyao 
(directly and 
indirectly) 
In progress 
Commitments 
made during asset 
restructuring 
Directors and 
senior 
management 
of the listed 
company 
Commitments 
regarding real 
estate 
business 
If Yunnan Baiyao and its subsidiaries within the scope of its consolidated financial statements, and, Baiyao 
Holdings and its subsidiaries within the scope of its consolidated financial statements engaged in any illegal 
activities in the domestic real estate development business during the reporting period, such as undisclosed 
land vacancy, speculation of land, property hoarding, and price gouging, which have caused any losses to 
Yunnan Baiyao and investors, I will bear any and all of the corresponding compensation liabilities for such 
losses as required by relevant laws, regulations and securities regulatory authorities. 
December 11, 
2018 
Remain 
effective 
In progress 
Commitments 
made during asset 
restructuring 
Baiyao 
Holdings, 
Yunnan State-
owned Equity 
Operation 
Management 
Company, 
New Huadu, 
Jiangsu 
Yuyue 
Commitments 
regarding 
compensatory 
measures after 
dilution of 
immediate 
returns 
1. Our company/institution will not interfere with any operation and management activities of the 
listed company beyond authority, nor will it encroach on any interest of the listed company. 
2. After the date of issuance of this commitment letter, if the securities regulatory authorities make 
other regulatory requirements regarding compensatory measures and related commitments, and the 
above commitments fail to meet such new regulatory regulations of the securities regulatory 
authorities, our company/institution will undertake to issue supplementary commitments in 
accordance with their then latest relevant regulations. 
3. Our company/institution undertakes to effectively fulfill the relevant compensatory measures 
formulated by the listed company and the relevant commitments made by our company/institution. If 
our company/institution violates these commitments and causes any losses to the listed company or 
investors, our company/institution is willing to legally bear any and all of the corresponding 
compensation liabilities for such losses. 
December 11, 
2018 
Remain 
effective 
during the 
period of 
holding the 
shares of 
Yunnan 
Baiyao 
(directly and 
indirectly) 
In progress 
Commitments 
made during asset 
restructuring 
Directors, 
supervisors, 
and senior 
management 
of the listed 
company 
Commitments 
regarding 
compensatory 
measures after 
dilution of 
immediate 
returns 
1. I undertake not to transfer benefits to any other units or individuals without compensations or under 
unfair conditions, nor to harm any interest of the listed company in any other way. 2. I undertake to 
restrain my official consumption. 3. I undertake not to use the assets of the listed company to engage 
in investment or consumption activities unrelated to my duties. 4. I undertake that the compensation 
system to be formulated by the Board of Directors or Remuneration Committee in the future will be 
linked to the implementation of compensatory measures taken by the listed company. 5. I undertake 
that the exercise conditions of the listed company’s equity incentives to be announced in the future 
will be linked to the implementation of the compensatory measures taken by the listed company. 6. I 
undertake to effectively fulfill the relevant compensatory measures formulated by the listed company 
and any commitments made by myself regarding compensatory measures. If I violate or refuse to 
fulfill any of the above commitments, leading to any losses to the listed company or any and all of its 
shareholders, I’m willing to legally bear any and all of the corresponding compensation liabilities. 
This commitment letter shall come into effect as of the date of my signature and shall constitute a 
binding legal document on me upon its effectiveness. If I violate this commitment letter, I’m willing 
December 11, 
2018 
Remain 
effective 
In progress 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
107 
 
to bear any and all of the corresponding legal liabilities. 
Commitments 
made during asset 
restructuring 
Yunnan State-
owned Equity 
Operation 
Management 
Company, 
New Huadu 
Commitments 
regarding 
horizontal 
competition 
1. Yunnan State-owned Equity Operation Management Company has undertaken the previous 
commitments of SASAC of Yunnan Province: In order to avoid horizontal competition with the listed 
company and safeguard the legitimate rights and interest of the listed company and other shareholders, 
Yunnan State-owned Equity Operation Management Company solemnly makes the following 
statements and commitments: After the completion of this transaction, Yunnan State-owned Equity 
Operation Management Company will not directly engage in any businesses that are the same as or 
similar to, and constitute a competition with, the principal businesses of the listed company. 
2. New Huadu undertakes that: As of the issuance date of this commitment letter, our company and 
any enterprises under our control have not invested in any company, enterprise or other operating 
entity engaged in any business the same as, or similar to, the principal businesses of the listed company 
or co-operating or co-engaged, with others, in business the same as, or similar to, the principal 
businesses of the listed company. 
After the completion of this transaction, our company and any enterprises under our control will not 
directly or indirectly engage in any form (including but not limited to investment, M&A, affiliation, 
joint ventures, cooperation, partnership, contracting or leasing operations, and equity participation) in 
businesses that are the same as or similar to, and constitute a competition with, the principal businesses 
of the listed company, nor will we directly or indirectly own any absolute or relative control over any 
other companies, enterprises or operating entities that engage in businesses that are the same as or 
similar to, and constitute a competition with the principal businesses of the listed company. 
During the commitment period mentioned above, if the listed company actually further expands its 
existing principal businesses, and our company and any enterprises under our control have not yet 
engaged in production or operation of such new businesses, our company and any enterprises under 
our control will not engage in such new businesses that compete with the principal businesses of the 
listed company unless the listed company notifies us in writing that it would no longer engage in such 
new businesses. 
During the aforementioned commitment period, if our company and any enterprises under our control 
obtain from any third party any business opportunity that competes or may compete with the principal 
businesses of the listed company, we shall immediately notify the listed company. If the listed 
company provides a positive response that it is willing to take advantage of that business opportunity 
within the reasonable period specified in the notice, our company and any enterprises under our control 
will abandon that business opportunity. If our company and any enterprises under our control violate 
any of the above statements and commitments, leading to any damages to any rights and interest of 
the listed company, our company agrees to bear any and all of the corresponding compensation 
liabilities for such damages so caused to the listed company. 
October 31, 
2018 
Remain 
effective 
during the 
period of 
holding the 
shares of 
Yunnan 
Baiyao 
(directly and 
indirectly) 
In progress 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
108 
 
Commitments 
made during asset 
restructuring 
Directors, 
supervisors, 
and senior 
management 
of the listed 
company 
Commitments 
regarding the 
authenticity, 
accuracy, and 
completeness 
of the 
information 
provided 
Our company/I has/have provided necessary, authentic, accurate, complete, and effective documents, 
materials, or oral statements and explanations for this transaction at this stage, without any 
concealments, false records, or significant omissions. The provided copy materials or photocopies are 
consistent and aligned with the original materials or originals. The signatures and seals on the provided 
documents and materials are authentic, with necessary legal procedures for such signatures and seals 
having been fulfilled, and legal authorizations having been obtained. All statements and explanations 
of facts are consistent with the facts that occurred. According to the progress of this transaction, our 
company/I will provide relevant information and documents in a timely manner in accordance with 
relevant laws, regulations, rules, and relevant provisions of the CSRC and the stock exchange, and 
ensure that the information and documents to be constantly provided still meet the requirements of 
authenticity, accuracy, completeness, and effectiveness. Our company/I undertake (s) and warrant (s) 
the information provided or disclosed in this transaction is authentic, accurate, complete, and effective, 
without false records, misleading statements, or material omissions, and is/am willing to bear any and 
all of the corresponding individual and joint legal liabilities for that. 
June 10, 2021 
Remain 
effective 
In progress 
Commitments 
made during asset 
restructuring 
Yunnan State-
owned Equity 
Operation 
Management 
Company 
Commitments 
regarding the 
authenticity, 
accuracy, and 
completeness 
of the 
information 
provided 
As of the date of the issuance of this commitment, our company has provided necessary, authentic, accurate, 
complete, and effective documents, materials, or oral statements and explanations for this transaction at this 
stage, without any concealments, false records, or significant omissions. The provided copy materials or 
photocopies are consistent and aligned with the original materials or originals. The signatures and seals on 
the provided documents and materials are authentic, with necessary legal procedures for such signatures and 
seals having been fulfilled, and legal authorizations having been obtained. All statements and explanations 
of facts are consistent with the facts that occurred. According to the progress of this transaction, our company 
will provide relevant information and documents in a timely manner in accordance with relevant laws, 
regulations, rules, and relevant provisions of the CSRC and the stock exchange, and ensure that the 
information and documents to be constantly provided still meet the requirements of authenticity, accuracy, 
completeness, and effectiveness. Our company undertakes and warrants the information provided or 
disclosed in this transaction is authentic, accurate, complete, and effective, without false records, misleading 
statements, or material omissions, and is willing to bear any and all of the corresponding individual and joint 
legal liabilities for that. 
June 10, 2021 
Remain 
effective 
In progress 
Commitments 
made during asset 
restructuring 
New Huadu 
and its 
acting-in-
concert parties 
Commitments 
regarding the 
authenticity, 
accuracy, and 
completeness 
of the 
information 
provided 
Our company and our acting-in-concert parties have provided necessary, authentic, accurate, complete, and 
effective documents, materials, or oral statements and explanations for this transaction at this stage, without 
any concealments, false records, or significant omissions. The provided copy materials or photocopies are 
consistent and aligned with the original materials or originals. The signatures and seals on the provided 
documents and materials are authentic, with necessary legal procedures for such signatures and seals having 
been fulfilled, and legal authorizations having been obtained. All statements and explanations of facts are 
consistent with the facts that occurred. According to the progress of this transaction, our company and our 
acting-in-concert parties will provide relevant information and documents in a timely manner in accordance 
with relevant laws, regulations, rules, and relevant provisions of the CSRC and the stock exchange, and 
ensure that the information and documents to be constantly provided still meet the requirements of 
authenticity, accuracy, completeness, and effectiveness. Our company and our acting-in-concert parties 
undertake and warrant the information provided or disclosed in this significant asset restructuring is 
authentic, accurate, complete, and effective, without false records, misleading statements, or material 
omissions, and are willing to bear any and all of the corresponding individual and joint legal liabilities for 
that. 
June 10, 2021 
Remain 
effective 
In progress 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
109 
 
Commitments 
made during asset 
restructuring 
Directors, 
supervisors, 
and senior 
management 
of the listed 
company 
Commitments 
regarding 
compensatory 
measures after 
diluting 
immediate 
returns by this 
restructuring 
1. I undertake not to transfer benefits to any other units or individuals without compensations or under 
unfair conditions, nor to harm any interest of the listed company in any other way. 2. I undertake to 
restrain my official consumption behavior. 3. I undertake not to use the assets of the listed company 
to engage in investment or consumption activities unrelated to my duties. 4. I undertake that the 
compensation system to be formulated by the Board of Directors or Remuneration Committee in the 
future will be linked to the implementation of compensatory measures taken by the listed company. 5. 
If the listed company subsequently introduces equity incentive policies, I undertake that the exercise 
conditions of the listed company’s equity incentives to be announced in the future will be linked to the 
implementation of the compensatory measures taken by the listed company. 6. If, during the period 
after the date of issuance of this commitment letter and before the completion of this transaction by 
the listed company, the CSRC makes other regulatory requirements regarding compensatory measures 
and related commitments, and the above commitments fail to meet such new regulatory regulations of 
the CSRC, I undertake to issue supplementary commitments in accordance with the then latest CSRC 
regulations. 7. If I violate any of the above commitments, leading to any losses to the listed company 
or investors, I’m willing to legally bear any and all of the corresponding compensation liabilities for 
such losses so caused to the listed company or investors. 
June 10, 2021 
Remain 
effective 
In progress 
Commitments 
made during asset 
restructuring 
Yunnan State-
owned Equity 
Operation 
Management 
Company 
Commitments 
regarding 
compensatory 
measures after 
diluting 
immediate 
returns by this 
restructuring 
1. Our company will not interfere with any operation and management activities of the listed company 
beyond authority, nor will it encroach on any interest of the listed company. 2. If, during the period 
after the date of issuance of this commitment letter and before the completion of this transaction by 
the listed company, the CSRC makes other regulatory requirements regarding compensatory measures 
and related commitments, and the above commitments fail to meet such new regulatory regulations of 
the CSRC, our company undertakes to issue supplementary commitments in accordance with the then 
latest CSRC regulations. 3. Our company will effectively fulfill this commitment letter. If our company 
violates any of these commitments and causes any losses to the listed company or investors, our 
company is willing to legally bear any and all of the corresponding compensation liabilities for such 
losses so caused to the listed company or investors. 
June 10, 2021 
Before the 
major assets 
purchases and 
related-party 
transactions 
are completed 
In progress 
Commitments 
made during asset 
restructuring 
New Huadu 
and its 
acting-in-
concert parties 
Commitments 
regarding 
compensatory 
measures after 
diluting 
immediate 
returns by this 
restructuring 
1. Our company and our acting-in-concert parties will not interfere with any operation and 
management activities of the listed company beyond authority, nor will they encroach on any interest 
of the listed company. 
2. If, during the period after the date of issuance of this commitment letter and before the completion 
of this transaction by the listed company, the CSRC makes other regulatory requirements regarding 
compensatory measures and related commitments, and the above commitments fail to meet such new 
regulatory regulations of the CSRC, our company and our acting-in-concert parties undertake to issue 
supplementary commitments in accordance with the then latest CSRC regulations. 
3. Our company and our acting-in-concert parties will effectively fulfill this commitment letter. If our 
company violates any of these commitments and causes any losses to the listed company or investors, 
our company and our acting-in-concert parties are willing to legally bear any and all of the 
corresponding compensation liabilities for such losses so caused to the listed company or investors. 
June 10, 2021 
Before the 
major assets 
purchases and 
related-party 
transactions 
are completed 
In progress 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
110 
 
Commitments 
made during asset 
restructuring 
Yunnan State-
owned Equity 
Operation 
Management 
Company 
Commitments 
to maintain 
the 
independence 
of the listed 
company, 
reduce and 
regulate 
related party 
transactions, 
and avoid 
horizontal 
competition 
1.On October 31, 2018, SASAC of Yunnan Province, as a shareholder of the listed company, issued 
the Commitment Letter of SASAC of Yunnan Province on Maintaining the Independence of the Listed 
Company, Commitment Letter of SASAC of Yunnan Province on Reducing and Regulating Related 
Party Transactions, and Commitment Letter of SASAC of Yunnan Province on Avoiding Horizontal 
Competition. On April 7, 2020, our company issued the Commitment Letter of Yunnan State-owned 
Equity Operation Management Company on Its Undertaking of the Relevant Commitments Made in 
the Process of Yunnan Baiyao’s Merger Transaction by SASAC of Yunnan Province (hereinafter 
referred to as the “Commitment Letter on Undertaking”), committing to fully undertake, as of the date 
of completion of this equity transfer (calculated from the date of registration of the underlying equity 
in the name of our company), the responsibilities and obligations specified in the commitment 
documents previously made by SASAC of Yunnan Province and continuously effective at the time of 
this equity transfer as set out in the following list. The list includes the foregoing three commitment 
letters issued by SASAC of Yunnan Province. 
2. As of the date of signing this commitment letter, our company has always strictly fulfilled the 
commitments to maintain the independence of the listed company, reduce and regulate related party 
transactions, and avoid horizontal competition in accordance with the requirements of the 
Commitment Letter on Undertaking, and has not violated any of the commitments made. After the 
completion of this transaction, our company will continue to strictly fulfill the Commitment Letter on 
Undertaking to safeguard the interest of the listed company and any and all of its shareholders. 
June 10, 2021 
Remain 
effective 
In progress 
Commitments 
made during asset 
restructuring 
New Huadu 
and its 
acting-in-
concert parties 
Commitments 
to maintain 
the 
independence 
of the listed 
company, 
reduce and 
regulate 
related party 
transactions, 
and avoid 
horizontal 
competition 
1. As of the date of signing this commitment letter, our company has always strictly fulfilled the 
Commitment Letter on Maintaining the Independence of the Listed Company, Commitment Letter on 
Reducing and Regulating Related Party Transactions, and Commitment Letter on Avoiding Horizontal 
Competition all issued on October 31, 2018. Our company’s acting-in-concert parties have always 
strictly fulfilled the Commitment Letter on Reducing and Regulating Related Party Transactions 
issued on October 31, 2018, and have not violated any of the commitments made. After the completion 
of this transaction, our company and our acting-in-concert parties will continue to strictly fulfill this 
commitment letter to safeguard the interest of the listed company and any and all of its shareholders. 
2. After the completion of this transaction, our company’s acting-in-concert parties will maintain 
independence from the listed company in terms of personnel, assets, business, institutions, and finance 
in accordance with relevant laws, regulations, and normative documents, and will not, by virtue of the 
identity as a shareholder and a related party of the listed company, engage in the acts that affect the 
independence of the listed company’s personnel, assets, business, institutions, and finances, or harm 
any rights and interest of the listed company and other shareholders. Instead, they will effectively 
ensure the independence of the listed company in terms of personnel, assets, business, institutions, 
finance, etc. 
3. As of the date of signing this commitment letter, our company’s acting-in-concert parties and any 
other companies or enterprises under their control have not engaged in any business that constitute a 
horizontal competition with the principal businesses of the listed company and any other companies 
or enterprises under its control. In order to avoid horizontal competition with the listed company and 
safeguard the legitimate rights and interest of the listed company and other shareholders, after the 
completion of this transaction, our company’s acting-in-concert parties and any other companies or 
enterprises under their control will not directly engage in businesses that are the same as, or similar to, 
June 10, 2021 
Remain 
effective 
In progress 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
111 
 
and constitute a competition with, the principal businesses of the listed company. 
4. This commitment letter shall come into effect and be irrevocable as of the date of official signature 
by our company and our acting-in-concert parties. Our company and our acting-in-concert parties 
warrant the effective fulfillment of these commitments, and the listed company has the right to 
supervise their fulfillment of this commitment letter. If our company and our acting-in-concert parties 
fail to effectively fulfill this commitment letter, leading to any actual losses to the listed company, our 
company and our acting-in-concert parties will compensate for any and all of such direct or indirect 
losses so caused to the listed company. 
Commitments 
made during asset 
restructuring 
Listed 
company 
Commitments 
to reduce and 
regulate 
related party 
transactions 
During the period when our company is a related party of Shanghai Pharma, our company and any 
other companies or enterprises under our control will try the best to avoid and reduce related party 
transactions with Shanghai Pharma and its subsidiaries. For inevitable related party transactions or 
those occurring for reasonable reasons, the company undertakes to conduct such transactions on an 
equal and voluntary basis in the principles of fairness, impartiality, and compensation for equal value, 
with the transaction prices to be determined based on the reasonable prices recognized in the market. 
Our company will strictly comply with the provisions of relevant laws, regulations, normative 
documents, and the Articles of Association of Shanghai Pharma, perform the decision-making 
procedures and information disclosure obligations for related party transactions, and warrant not to 
harm any legitimate rights and interest of Shanghai Pharma and any other shareholders through related 
party transactions. This commitment letter shall come into effect and be irrevocable as of the date of 
official signature by our company. Our company warrants the effective fulfillment of these 
commitments, and Shanghai Pharma has the right to supervise the fulfillment of this commitment 
letter. If our company fails to effectively fulfill this commitment letter, leading to any actual losses to 
Shanghai Pharma, our company will compensate for any and all of such direct or indirect losses so 
caused to Shanghai Pharma. 
June 10, 2021 
Remain 
effective 
In progress 
Commitments 
made during asset 
restructuring 
Listed 
company 
Commitments 
regarding 
lock-up shares 
Shanghai Pharma’s shares subscribed by our company through this transaction shall not be transferred 
within 36 months from the end of the issuance of these shares. After the expiration of the 
aforementioned lockup period, the transfer and trading of such shares shall be handled in accordance 
with the then effective laws and regulations, as well as the regulations and rules of the CSRC, SZSE, 
and SHSE. After the completion of this transaction, our company will also arrange a lockup period as 
described above for our any increased stake in Shanghai Pharma after it issues bonus shares or convert 
public reserve funds into share capital. 
May 11, 2021 
Thirty-six 
months from 
the end of the 
issuance of 
new shares by 
Shanghai 
Pharma 
In progress 
Whether the 
commitments are 
fulfilled as 
scheduled 
Yes 
2. Explanation of the Company that the assets or projects have met the original profit forecast and the reasons for that if there is a profit forecast for the 
Company’s assets or projects and the reporting period is still in the profit forecast period 
□Applicable 
    Not applicable 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
112 
 
II. Occupation of the Company’s Capital by the Controlling Shareholder or any of Its 
Related Parties for Non-Operating Purposes 
□Applicable 
 Not applicable 
During the reporting period, there was no occupation of the Company’s capital by the controlling shareholder 
or any of its related parties for non-operating purposes. 
III. Non-compliant Provision of External Guarantees 
□Applicable 
 Not applicable 
There was no non-compliant provision of external guarantees during the reporting period. 
IV. 
Explanation of the Board on the “Modified Audit Report” for the Latest Period  
□Applicable 
 Not applicable 
V. Explanations Given by the Board of Directors, the Supervisory Committee and 
Independent Director (if any) Regarding the Auditor’s “Modified Audit Report” on the 
Financial Statements of the Reporting Period 
□Applicable 
 Not applicable 
VI. Explanation on Changes in Accounting Policies and Accounting Estimates or Rectification 
on Significant Accounting Errors as Compared with the Financial Report for the Previous Year  
Applicable 
 □Not applicable 
There was no change in the accounting policies and accounting estimates or rectification on significant 
accounting errors during the reporting period.  
VII. Explanation on the Change in Consolidation Scope as Compared with the Financial Report 
for the Previous Year  
Applicable 
 □Not applicable 
For details, please refer to Section 10 - IX. Changes in the Consolidation Scope. 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
113 
 
VIII. Appointment and Removal of Accounting Firm 
Currently engaged accounting firm 
Name of domestic accounting firm 
Mazars Certified Public Accountants (SGP)  
Remuneration of the domestic accounting firm (Unit: 
RMB’0,000)  
229.80 
Number of consecutive years of audit services of the 
domestic accounting firm 
8 
Names of certified public accountants of the domestic 
accounting firm 
Yang Manhui, Yang Fan 
Number of consecutive years of audit services of 
certified public accountants of the domestic 
accounting firm 
1 
Whether to change the accounting firm in the current period? 
□Yes 
 No 
Engagement of internal control audit accounting firms, financial advisors or sponsors 
Applicable 
 □Not applicable 
Thanks to its strong comprehensive strength, Mazars Certified Public Accountants (SGP) has ranked first in the 
comprehensive industry ranking of Yunnan Institute of Certified Public Accountants and the bidding ranking of Yunnan 
SASAC for many years, and fully possesses the experience and ability to provide audit services for listed companies. In 
order to ensure the smooth progress of the Company's auditing work, the Company engaged the services of Mazars Certified 
Public Accountants (SGP) for the Company’s auditing for the year 2023 (including internal control audit). 
IX. Delisting after Disclosure of Annual Report 
□Applicable    Not applicable 
X. Bankruptcy and Reorganization 
□Applicable    Not applicable 
There was no bankruptcy or restructuring related events during the reporting period. 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
114 
 
XI. Significant lawsuits and arbitration 
Applicable 
 □Not applicable 
Basic Information of 
Litigation (Arbitration)  
Amount 
Involved 
(RMB’0,00
0)  
Any 
Estimated 
Liability 
Caused or 
Not 
Litigation 
(Arbitration) 
Progress 
Litigation (Arbitration) Trial Results 
and Impacts 
Enforcement of Litigation 
(Arbitration) Judgments 
Disclosure date 
Disclosure Index 
Chuxiong Linxin 
Mushroom Developing 
Co., Ltd. vs Yunnan 
Baiyao Group 
Traditional Chinese 
Medicine Resources Co., 
Ltd, one of the 
Company’s subsidiaries, 
(Contract Dispute)  
4,236.57 
No 
Yunnan 
Provincial 
Higher People’s 
Court has 
disallowed the 
request for a 
retrial by both 
Chuxiong 
Linxin 
Mushroom 
Developing Co., 
Ltd and Yunnan 
Baiyao Group 
Chinese 
Medicine 
Resources Co., 
Ltd. 
If payments of both parties payable to 
each other can be offset against each 
other, in accordance with the content of 
the civil judgments, Chuxiong Linxin 
Mushroom Developing Co., Ltd shall 
also need to pay Yunnan Baiyao Group 
Traditional Chinese Medicine 
Resources Co., Ltd an outstanding 
payment loss of RMB 2,876,484.81, 
together with an interest calculated 
from the offsetting date based on the 
above outstanding payment loss and 
Loan Prime Rate (LPR) published by 
the National Interbank Funding Center. 
Meanwhile, Chuxiong Linxin 
Mushroom Developing Co., Ltd shall 
also need to compensate Yunnan 
Baiyao Group Traditional Chinese 
Medicine Resources Co., Ltd for the 
prepaid litigation fee of RMB 
34,332.00. 
The claims were transmitted by 
means 
of 
communication, 
written reports and other forms 
through the liaison channel of 
the Kunming Intermediate Court 
of the rule of law business 
environment. The enforcement 
for 
debt 
offsetting 
was 
completed on October 24, 2023. 
The enforcement is completed 
and the case is closed. 
March 31, 2023 
Annual Report for 2022 
and Interim Report for 
2023 For details, please 
refer to 
http://www.cninfo.com.cn 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
115 
 
Yunnan Baiyao Group 
Traditional Chinese 
Medicine Resources Co., 
Ltd (one of the 
Company’s subsidiaries) 
vs Chuxiong Linxin 
Mushroom Developing 
Co., Ltd. (Contract 
Dispute)  
4,545.90 
No 
The Supreme 
People’s 
Court’s Court 
has disallowed 
the request for a 
retrial by 
Chuxiong 
Linxin 
Mushroom 
Developing Co., 
Ltd 
Same as above 
The claims were transmitted by 
means of communication, 
written reports and other forms 
through the liaison channel of 
the Kunming Intermediate 
Court of the rule of law 
business environment. The 
enforcement for debt offsetting 
was completed on October 24, 
2023, with RMB 34.8934 
million offset, and RMB 3.686 
million subject to further 
enforcement after discovery of 
property clues in the future. 
March 31, 2023 
Annual Report for 2022 
and Interim Report for 
2023 For details, please 
refer to 
http://www.cninfo.com.cn 
Summary of events not 
meeting the disclosure 
standards for being 
included in significant 
litigation (arbitration)  
90,527.11 
No 
Some cases 
have been filed 
to be tried; 
some are being 
under trials to 
be adjudicated; 
some have been 
adjudicated; 
some have been 
closed. 
Summary of litigation events has no 
significant impact on the Company 
Some judgments have come 
into effect and have been 
enforced or are being enforced 
 
/ 
 
Note: The above contract disputes, such as Chuxiong Linxin Mushroom Developing Co., Ltd. vs Yunnan Baiyao Group Traditional Chinese Medicine Resources Co., Ltd, one of the Company’s 
subsidiaries, (Contract Dispute) and Yunnan Baiyao Group Traditional Chinese Medicine Resources Co., Ltd (one of the Company’s subsidiaries) vs Chuxiong Linxin Mushroom Developing Co., Ltd. 
(Contract Dispute), did not reach the disclosure standards for significant litigation (arbitration). However, to maintain the continuity of information disclosure, they were disclosed separately in the table 
above. 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
116 
 
XII. Punishments and Rectifications 
□Applicable  
 Not applicable 
There was no punishment or rectification involving the Company during the reporting period.  
XIII. Credit Quality of the Company as well as its Controlling Shareholder and De Facto 
Controller 
□Applicable  
 Not applicable 
XIV. Significant Related Party Transactions 
1. Related party transactions related to daily operations 
□Applicable  
 Not applicable 
There were no related party transactions related to daily operations during the reporting period. 
2. Related party transactions arising from acquisition or sale of assets or equity 
□Applicable  
 Not applicable 
There were no related party transactions arising from acquisition or sale of assets or equity during the 
reporting period. 
3. Related party transactions regarding joint investments in third parties 
□Applicable  
 Not applicable 
There were no related party transactions regarding joint investments in third parties during the reporting 
period. 
4. Amounts due to and from related parties 
□Applicable  
 Not applicable 
There were no amounts due to and from related parties during the reporting period. 
5. Transactions with related finance companies 
□Applicable  
 Not applicable 
There were no deposit, loan, credit or other financial business occurring between the Company and its 
related finance companies/related parties. 
6. Transactions with related parties by finance company controlled by the Company 
□Applicable      Not applicable 
There were no deposit, loan, credit or other financial business occurred between any finance companies 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
117 
 
under the control of the Company and related parties. 
7. Other significant related party transactions 
Applicable      □Not applicable 
The Company has made reasonable estimates on various other related party transactions, including 
purchases and sales of goods, related to its daily operations, based on the needs of its daily operations in 
2023. It is expected that the aggregate total amount of daily related party transactions between the 
Company and Shanghai Pharma, Tibet Jiushi Zhihe Marketing Co., Ltd and Yuyue Medical in 2023 will 
be RMB 1,911,000,000, accounting for 4.96% of the Company’s audited net assets of RMB 
38,508,245,600,000 as at the end of 2022, which do not need to be reported to the shareholders’ meeting 
for consideration. 
The matter had been considered and approved at the second session of the Tenth Board of Directors 
of the Company for 2023, details of which were set out in the Announcement on the Estimation of Daily 
Related Party Transactions for 2023 (Announcement No. 2023-11) and the Announcement on 
Resolutions of the Second Session of the Tenth Board of Directors of the Company for 2023 
(Announcement No. 2023-07). 
Enquiries on the online disclosure of interim announcement of significant related party transactions 
Name of interim announcement 
Date of disclosure of interim 
announcement 
Website on which interim announcement is 
disclosed 
Announcement on the Estimation of Daily 
Related Party Transactions for 2023 
March 31, 2023 
http://www.cninfo.com.cn 
Announcement on Resolutions of the Second 
Session of the Tenth Board of Directors 
March 31, 2023 
http://www.cninfo.com.cn 
There were no other significant related party transactions during the reporting period. 
XV. Major Contracts and Their Performance 
1. Entrustment, contracting and leases 
(1) Entrustment 
□Applicable  
 Not applicable 
There were no entrustment events of the Company during the reporting period. 
(2) Contracting 
□Applicable  
 Not applicable 
There were no contracting events of the Company during the reporting period. 
(3) Leases 
□Applicable  
 Not applicable 
There were no leases of the Company during the reporting period. 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
118 
 
2. Major guarantees 
☑Applicable  
 Not applicable 
Unit: RMB’0,000 
 Guarantees provided by the Company and its subsidiaries (excluding the guarantees to subsidiaries)  
Guaranteed 
party 
Disclosure 
date of related 
announcement 
of guarantee 
quota 
Guarantee 
quota 
Actual 
occurrence 
date 
Actual 
guarantee 
amount 
Guarantee 
type 
Collateral 
(if any) 
Counter 
guarantee 
(if any) 
Guarantee 
period 
Fulfilled 
or not 
Guarantee 
for a 
related 
party or 
not 
Yunnan 
Yuncheng 
Hospital 
Management 
Co., Ltd. 
November 24, 
2017 
 
 
150,000 
Joint and 
several 
liability 
guarantee 
 
 
12 years 
No 
No 
Total approved limit for 
guarantees for others during 
the reporting period (A1)  
 
Total amount of 
guarantees for others 
incurred during the 
reporting period (A2) 
 
Total approved limit for 
guarantees for others at the 
end of the reporting period 
(A3)  
150,000 
Total actual balance of 
guarantees for others 
at the end of the 
reporting period (A4) 
150,000 
Total amount of guarantees by the Company (i.e., sum of the above 3 items)  
Total approved limit for 
guarantees at the end of the 
reporting period (A3+B3+C3)  
150,000 
Total actual balance of guarantees at the end of 
the reporting period (A4+B4+C4)  
150,000 
The proportion of actual total guarantee amount (i.e. 
A4+B4+C4) to the Company’s net assets 
3.76% 
Including: 
Balance of guarantees for shareholders, de facto 
controllers and related parties (D)  
0 
Balance of debt guarantees directly or indirectly provided 
to the parties with the gearing ratio exceeding 70% (E)  
0 
Total amount of guarantees exceeding 50% of net assets 
(F)  
0 
Total amount of the above three types of guarantees (D+ 
E+ F)  
0 
Description of the circumstances, if any, under which the 
guarantee liability arose during the reporting period or 
there is evidence of a likelihood of joint and several 
liquidation liability for the outstanding guarantee 
contracts during the reporting period 
None 
Explanation on provision of guarantee to external parties 
in violation of prescribed procedures, if any  
None 
Explanations on the specific situation of guarantees provided by composite methods:  
None. 
3. Cash entrusted for wealth management 
 (1) Entrusted wealth management 
Applicable  
 □Not applicable 
Overview of entrusted wealth management during the reporting period  


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
119 
 
                                                                            Unit: RMB’0,000 
Type 
Source of funding 
Amount 
Undue amount 
Unrecovered overdue 
amount 
Provision for impairment 
on unrecovered overdue 
amount 
Bank financial 
products 
Self-owned capital 
13,194 
10,624 
0 
0 
Total 
13,194 
10,624 
0 
0 
Details of high-risk entrusted wealth management products with a significant amount per single item or of low 
safety and poor liquidity 
□Applicable  
 Not applicable 
Cases under which it is expected that the principal of entrusted financing cannot be recovered, or there may be 
other circumstances that may result in impairment 
□Applicable  
 Not applicable 
 (2) Entrusted loan 
□Applicable  
 Not applicable 
The Company did not have any entrusted loan during the reporting period.  
4. Other Significant Contracts 
□Applicable      Not applicable 
There were no other significant contracts of the Company during the reporting period. 
XVI. Explanations to Other Significant Events 
Applicable 
 
□ Not applicable 
(I) System update 
1. On March 29, 2023, the Company held the second session of the Tenth Board of Director for 2023, 
considering and approving the Proposal on Formulating the Public Welfare Donation Management Measures of 
Yunnan Baiyao, the Proposal on Revising the Implementation Rules of the Nomination Committee of the Board of 
Directors of Yunnan Baiyao, the Proposal on Revising the Implementation Rules of the Remuneration and 
Evaluation Committee of the Board of Directors of Yunnan Baiyao, the Proposal on Revising the Implementation 
Rules of the Audit Committee of the Board of Directors of Yunnan Baiyao, the Proposal on Revising the Measures 
for Management of Securities Investment Risks of Yunnan Baiyao, and the Proposal on Formulating the External 
Investment Management System of Yunnan Baiyao. For details, please refer to the Announcement on Resolutions of 
the Second Session of the Tenth Board of Directors of the Company for 2023 (Announcement No. 2023-07) 
disclosed by the Company on March 31, 2023 at http://www.cninfo.com.cn, the Measures for Management of 
Securities Investment Risks of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd, the Public Welfare Donation Management Measures 
of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd, the External Investment Management System of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd, 
the Implementation Rules of the Remuneration and Evaluation Committee of the Board of Directors of Yunnan 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
120 
 
Baiyao Group Co., Ltd, the Implementation Rules of the Audit Committee of the Board of Directors of Yunnan 
Baiyao Group Co., Ltd, and the Implementation Rules of the Nomination Committee of the Board of Directors of 
Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd.  
2. On August 28, 2023, the Company held the fifth session of the Tenth Board of Director for 2023, considering 
and approving the Proposal on Revision of the Investor Relations Management System, the Proposal on Revision of 
the Measures for the Management of Changes in Shareholdings of Senior Management, the Proposal on 
Formulation of the Management System for Information Disclosure of Debt Financing Instruments in the Inter-
bank Bond Market, the Proposal on Formulation of a Comprehensive Risk Management System, and the Proposal 
on Revision of the Management System for Investment and Wealth Management. For details, please refer to the 
Announcement on Resolutions of the Fifth Session of the Tenth Board of Directors of the Company for 2023 
(Announcement No. 2023-33) disclosed by the Company on August 30, 2023 at http://www.cninfo.com.cn, the 
Investor Relations Management System of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd, the Management System for 
Shareholdings of Directors, Supervisors and Senior Management of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd and Changes 
Therein, the Management System for Information Disclosure of Debt Financing Instruments in the Inter-bank Bond 
Market of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd, the Comprehensive Risk Management System of Yunnan Baiyao Group 
Co., Ltd, and the Management System for Investment and Wealth Management of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd.  
3. On December 27, 2023, the Company held the seventh session of the Tenth Board of Director for 2023, 
considering and approving the Proposal on Revising the Working System of Independent Directors. For details, 
please refer to the Announcement on Resolutions of the Seventh Session of the Tenth Board of Directors of the 
Company for 2023 (Announcement No. 2023-45) disclosed by the Company on December 29, 2023 at 
http://www.cninfo.com.cn, and the Working System of Independent Directors.  
(II) Employee Stock Ownership Plan and Equity Incentive 
1. On May 30, 2023, the Company disclosed the Announcement on Completion of Shareholding Reduction 
under the 2021 Annual Employee Stock Ownership Plan (Announcement No. 2023-22). On May 29, 2023, the 
Company received a notice from the ESOP Management Committee, which stated the completion of a full 
reduction in shareholding in the Company under the 2021 Annual ESOP. During December 13, 2022 to May 26, 
2023, upon the expiration of the lock-up period of this ESOP, a full reduction in shareholding in the Company 
involving 23,379,996 shares of the Company under this ESOP was completed by means of centralized bidding 
and block trading in the secondary market. Such shares accounted for 1.30% of the Company’s current total share 
capital, among which, the transferees of block trading were not related or acting-in-concert parties of shareholders 
holding more than 5% of the Company’s shares. As for this ESOP, its income distribution, liquidation, termination, 
and other related matters would be subsequently completed as per relevant regulations. More details can be found 
at http://www.cninfo.com.cn. 
2. On July 5, 2023, the Company held the fourth session of the Tenth Board of Directors for 2023, considering 
and approving the Proposal on Early Termination of the 2021 Employee Stock Ownership Plan. The lock-up period 
for this ESOP implemented by the Company expired on June 30, 2022. As of May 26, 2023, all of the 23,379,996 
shares of the Company held under this ESOP were reduced, and the assets thereunder are now all cash and bank 
balance. The Board of Directors has considered and agreed to terminate this ESOP in advance. Upon termination 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
121 
 
thereof, the Employee Stock Ownership Plan Management Committee will conduct liquidation with regard to this 
ESOP and make related distribution in accordance with the shares held by the holders. For details, please refer to 
the Announcement on Resolutions of the Fourth Session of the Tenth Board of Directors of the Company for 2023 
(Announcement No. 2023-26) and the Announcement on Early Termination of 2021 Employee Stock Ownership 
Plan (Announcement No. 2023-27) disclosed by the Company on July 7, 2023 at http://www.cninfo.com.cn.  
3. On August 28, 2023, the Proposal on Cancelling the Third Exercisable Period of the Initially Granted Part 
of the 2020 Stock Option Incentive Plan and the Second Exercisable Period of Its Reserved Granted Part had been 
considered and approved at the fifth session of the Tenth Board of Directors for 2023 and the third session of the 
Tenth Supervisory Committee for 2023. As the Company’s 2022 performance indicators failed to fully meet the 
performance assessment requirements set forth in the 2020 Stock Option Incentive Plan of Yunnan Baiyao Group, 
4,837,200 stock options initially granted corresponding to the third exercisable period would not be exercised for it 
was adjusted to 6,772,080 stock options and 840,000 stock options under reserved grant corresponding to the second 
exercisable period after the equity distribution adjustment for 2021 (A total of 1,200,000 stock options under 
reserved grant, for it was adjusted to 1,680,000 stock options after the equity distribution adjustment for 2021. Out 
of these, 840,000 stock options corresponding to the first exercisable period have been cancelled, and the remaining 
840,000 stock options correspond to the second exercisable period). All of these stock options could not be exercised 
and would thus be canceled by the Company (the actual cancellation will be based on the records of the Shenzhen 
Branch of China Securities Depository and Clearing Corporation). 
On September 7, 2023, the Company completed the cancellation of the aforesaid 7,612,080 stock options after 
review and confirmation by the Shenzhen Branch of China Securities Depository and Clearing Corporation. Upon 
completion of the cancellation of all of the above stock options, the Company’s 2020 Stock Option Incentive Plan 
was terminated in its entirety. For details, please refer to the Announcement on Resolutions of the Fifth Session of 
the Tenth Board of Directors of the Company in 2023 (Announcement No. 2023-33), the Announcement on 
Resolutions of the Third Session of the Tenth Supervisory Committee of the Company for 2023 (Announcement No. 
2023-34), the Proposal on Cancelling the Third Exercisable Period of the Initially Granted Part of the 2020 Stock 
Option Incentive Plan and the Second Exercisable Period of Its Reserved Granted Part (Announcement No. 2023-
36) disclosed by the Company on August 30, 2023, and the Announcement on the Completion of Cancellation of 
the Third Exercisable Period of the Initially Granted Part of the 2020 Stock Option Incentive Plan and the Second 
Exercisable Period of Its Reserved Granted Part (Announcement No. 2023-39) disclosed on September 9, 2023 at 
http://www.cninfo.com.cn. 
(III) Changes in Shareholding of Jiangsu Yuyue 
1. On June 21, 2023, the Company disclosed the Informative Announcement on the Circulation of Certain 
Shares Subject to Trading Moratorium (Announcement No. 2023-24). The Company’s shareholder Jiangsu Yuyue 
had applied for release of the trading moratorium on its shares. There would be totally 99,916,513 such shares 
circulating in the markets on June 27, 2023 for this time, accounting for 5.56% of the Company’s total share capital. 
More details can be found at http://www.cninfo.com.cn. 
2. On June 22, 2023, the Company disclosed the Announcement on Pre-disclosure of Shareholding Reduction 
by Shareholders Holding 5% or More Shares (Announcement No. 2023-25). On June 20, 2023, the Company 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
122 
 
received from its shareholder Jiangsu Yuyue the Notification Letter Regarding Proposed Reduction in Shareholding 
in Yunnan Baiyao Group, stating that it planned to reduce no more than 35,937,250 shares of the Company 
(accounting for no more than 2% of the Company’s total share capital) from its 99,916,513 shares in the Company 
(accounting for 5.56% of the Company’s total share capital) via bidding from July 17, 2023 to January 13, 2024. If, 
during the implementation of this shareholding reduction plan, the Company distributes cash dividends, bonus 
shares, converts capital reserves into share capital, or occurs any other ex-rights or ex-dividend events, Jiangsu 
Yuyue would make corresponding adjustments to this shareholding reduction in the number and equity ratio. More 
details can be found at http://www.cninfo.com.cn. 
3. On July 28, 2023, the Company disclosed the Indicative Announcement on Changes in the Equity of 
Shareholders Holding 5% or More of the Shares (Announcement No.: 2023-31). On July 27, 2023, the Company 
received the Short-form Equity Change Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd and the Notification Letter 
Regarding the Reduction of Shareholdings of Shareholders Holding More Than 5% of Shares to Less Than 5% of 
Shares issued by Jiangsu Yuyue, a shareholder, and was informed of the transfer of 10,073,400 shares of the 
Company held by Jiangsu Yuyue between July 17, 2023 and July 26, 2023 via bidding. After this equity change, 
the shareholding of Jiangsu Yuyue decreased from 5.56% to 4.999999%, and it was no longer a shareholder holding 
more than 5% of the Company’s shares. This equity change was a shareholding reduction, did not involve tender 
offer, and did not result in a change of control of the Company. For details, please refer to http://www.cninfo.com.cn. 
4. As of January 13, 2024, the above shareholding reduction plan expired and Jiangsu Yuyue completed this 
shareholding reduction plan. During the period from July 17, 2023 to January 13, 2024, Jiangsu Yuyue cumulatively 
reduced, via centralized bidding transactions, its holdings of 35,936,638 outstanding shares of the Company not 
subject to trading moratorium, accounting for 1.99997% of the total share capital of the Company. The reduction 
was consistent with the previously disclosed reduction plan and the amount of the reduction was within the scope 
of the reduction plan. During the period from August 14, 2023 to September 26, 2023, Jiangsu Yuyue also 
cumulatively reduced, via block trading, its holdings of 35,668,100 outstanding shares of the Company not subject 
to trading moratorium, accounting for 1.98502% of the total share capital of the Company. 
(IV) Changes in Equity Structure of State-owned Equity Operation and Management Company 
On November 4, 2023, the Company disclosed the Announcement on Yunnan State-owned Equity Operation 
and Management Co, Ltd’s Continuing to Introduce Capital Contribution by China Life Asset Management 
Company Limited for Capital Increase (Announcement No. 2023-43). The Company received the Notification 
Letter of Yunnan State-owned Equity Operation and Management Co, Ltd on Introducing Capital Contribution by 
China Life Asset Management Company Limited for Capital Increase issued by State-owned Equity Operation and 
Management Co, Ltd, and was informed that China Life Asset Management Company Limited (“China Life”) had 
increased its capital contribution and expanded its shares in Yunnan State-owned Equity Operation and Management 
Co, Ltd, and the formalities with regard to these relevant industrial and commercial changes had been completed 
recently. China Life increased its capital contribution by RMB 11 billion in cash, with a capital increase ratio of 
17.77%. Yunnan Investment Group held 75.21% of the shares and China Life held 24.79% of the shares before this 
capital increase; after the capital increase, Yunnan Investment Group held 57.44% of the shares and China Life held 
42.56% of the shares. The de facto controller of State-owned Equity Operation and Management Co, Ltd after this 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
123 
 
capital increase was the State-owned Assets Supervision and Administration Commission of the Yunnan Provincial 
People’s Government, which remained unchanged. For details, please refer to http://www.cninfo.com.cn. 
(V) Application for Registration and Issuance of Ultra Short-term Financing Bonds 
The fifth session of the Tenth Board of Directors for 2023 held on August 28, 2023 and the first extraordinary 
general meeting for 2023 held on September 19, 2023 considered and approved the Proposal on Applying for 
Registration and Issuance of Ultra Short-term Financing Bonds, approving the Company to apply to the China 
Association of Interbank Market Dealers (“Dealers Association”) for the registration and issuance of ultra short-
term financing bonds of RMB 3 billion (The amount is subject to the registration notice issued by the Dealers 
Association). For details, please refer to the Announcement on Resolutions of the Seventh Session of the Tenth Board 
of Directors of the Company for 2023 (Announcement No. 2023-33), and the Announcement on Application for 
Registration and Issuance of Ultra Short-term Financing Bonds (Announcement No.2023-37 ) disclosed by the 
Company on August 30, 2023 and the Announcement on Resolutions of the First Extraordinary General Meeting 
for 2023 (Announcement No. 2023-40) disclosed on September 20, 2023 at http://www.cninfo.com.cn. 
On February 26, 2024, the Company received a Notice of Acceptance of Registration (Zhong Shi Xie Zhu 
[2024] SCP63) from the Dealers Association, which stated Dealers Association’s agreement to accept the 
registration of the Company’s ultra-short-term financing bonds and indicated the Company registered an amount of 
RMB 3 billion in the ultra-short-term financing bonds, which bonds will be valid for 2 years from the date of the 
notice, and underwritten by the Industrial and Commercial Bank of China Limited. The Company may issue these 
ultra-short-term financing bonds in tranches during the registered validity period, and upon completion of the 
issuance, the issuance results will be disclosed through the channels recognized by the Dealers Association. For 
details, please refer to the Announcement on Approval on Registration of Issuance of Ultra-short-term Financing 
Bonds (Announcement No. 2024-11) disclosed by the Company on February 28, 2024 at http://www.cninfo.com.cn.  
On March 20, 2024, the issuance of the Company’s First Tranche of Ultra Short-Term Financing Bonds for 
2024 valued RMB 1 billion (Sci-Tech Innovation Notes/Rural Revitalization) was completed and the proceeds were 
received in full. For details, please refer to the Announcement on Results of Issuance of the First Tranche of Ultra-
short-term Financing Bonds (Sci-Tech Innovation Notes/Rural Revitalization) (Announcement No. 2024-14) 
disclosed by the Company on March 21, 2024 at http://www.cninfo.com.cn. 
XVII. Significant Events of the Company’s Subsidiaries 
Applicable    □ Not applicable 
Related events of YNBY International (Formerly Ban Loong Holdings) 
1. Achieving resumption guidelines and resuming trading 
(1) Suspension of trading 
At the request of Ban Loong Holdings, trading of its shares was suspended on Hong Kong Stock Exchange as 
of 9:00 am on June 21, 2022 and would continue to be suspended. Ban Loong Holdings will issue further 
announcements to inform its shareholders and potential investors of any significant developments related to the 
aforementioned event as and when appropriate. 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
124 
 
(2) Resumption guidance 
On July 26, 2022, Ban Loong Holdings received the following resumption guidance from Hong Kong Stock 
Exchange, requiring Ban Loong Holdings to: (1) publish all undisclosed financial results required under the Listing 
Rules and address any audit modifications; (2) demonstrate its compliance with Rule 13.24 of the Listing Rules; (3) 
conduct an appropriate independent forensic investigation, announce the findings and take appropriate remedial 
actions; (4) demonstrate that there is no reasonable regulatory concern about its management integrity and/or the 
integrity of any persons with substantial influence over its management and operations, which may pose a risk to 
investors and damage market confidence; (5) conduct an independent internal control review and demonstrate that 
it has in place adequate internal controls and procedures to meet its obligations under the Listing Rules; and (6) 
announce all material information for its shareholders and investors to appraise its position. 
Hong Kong Stock Exchange also required Ban Loong Holdings to correct the wrongs that led to the 
suspended trading of its shares and fully comply with the Listing Rules to the satisfaction of Hong Kong Stock 
Exchange before it was allowed to resume trading of its securities. Hong Kong Stock Exchange may revise or 
supplement the resumption guidance against any changes of Ban Loong Holdings. 
On October 12, 2023, Ban Loong Holdings disclosed an announcement, stating that it had submitted a 
resumption proposal to Hong Kong Stock Exchange on September 27, 2023 to seek resumption of trading in the 
shares. The resumption proposal set out, among other things, the actions taken and proposed to be taken by Ban 
Loong Holdings in relation to the fulfillment of the resumption guidelines. 
On October 25, 2023, Ban Loong Holdings disclosed an announcement, stating that, as disclosed in its 
announcement dated July 26, 2022, the conditions for resumption of trading include, among other things, the 
requirement for it to (1) conduct an appropriate independent forensic investigation, make public the results of the 
investigation and take appropriate remedial measures; and (2) conduct an independent internal control examination 
to certify that it has put in place appropriate internal controls and procedures to fulfill its obligations under the 
Listing Rules. The announcement set out the key findings of the forensic investigation and internal control 
examination. 
On December 20, 2023, Ban Loong Holdings disclosed an announcement, stating that it was still awaiting a 
response from the Hong Kong Stock Exchange in relation to the resumption proposal, and that it would issue a 
separate announcement in due course in relation to any material developments on the resumption status. 
(3) Achievement of the resumption guidelines and resumption of trading 
On January 30, 2024, and as of the date of announcement, Ban Loong Holdings met the requirements under 
the resumption guidelines. Trading in its shares had been suspended on the Hong Kong Stock Exchange with effect 
from 9:00 a.m. on June 21, 2022 at its own request. As the resumption guidelines have been fully met to the 
satisfaction of the Hong Kong Stock Exchange, Ban Loong Holdings has applied to the Hong Kong Stock Exchange 
for the resumption of trading in the shares with effect from 9:00 a.m. on January 31, 2024.  
2. Framework Agreement of Continuing Connected Transactions and Extraordinary General Meeting 
On December 13, 2022, the Company entered into the Framework Agreement of Continuing Connected 
Transactions (hereinafter referred to as the “Framework Agreement”) with Ban Loong Holdings, stating that the 
Company agreed to purchase from Ban Loong Holdings product registration and promotion services, global supply 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
125 
 
chain integration services, and specialized support services; Ban Loong Holdings agreed to cooperate with the 
Company to sell and distribute to overseas markets certain products produced and branded by the Company, while 
the Company agreed to cooperate with Ban Loong Holdings to sell and distribute to China health products and foods 
purchased, procured, manufactured, and/or branded by Ban Loong Holdings. The Framework Agreement would 
only take effect after adoption of the necessary resolutions for approving the execution of the Framework Agreement 
and the transactions to be promoted thereunder at the Extraordinary General Meeting.  
Ban Loong Holdings convened an Extraordinary General Meeting on May 15, 2023, which adopted the 
ordinary resolutions for approving, confirming, and endorsing the Framework Agreement, as well as the proposed 
annual transaction upper limits set out in the proposed transactions thereunder and circulars related to such 
transactions from the effective date to the third anniversary of the effective date. The Extraordinary General Meeting 
also authorized any one or more directors of Ban Loong Holdings to act on behalf of Ban Loong Holdings to sign 
all relevant documents and agreements, and to do all relevant actions and matters, if they deem it necessary, 
expedient or appropriate in their discretion to implement (or make effective) the Framework Agreement and all 
matters in connection therewith. 
3. Extension of maturity date of convertible bonds 
On December 5, 2022, the Company and Ban Loong Holdings entered into the Supplemental Agreement to the 
Convertible Bond Subscription Agreement, which extended the maturity date of the Convertible Bonds from 
October 31, 2022 to October 30, 2024 (the “Extension”), with all the other terms and conditions agreed in the 
previous transaction documents remaining unchanged. Meanwhile, based on the Trust Contract, the Company, as 
the principal, has issued instructions to Shanghai Trust, the trustee, requesting it to extend the term of the convertible 
bonds held by it to the date of September 30, 2023 in accordance with the Trust Contract. After such point of time, 
the Company may take other appropriate means to continue to hold the said convertible bonds for the fulfillment of 
the Supplemental Agreement to the Convertible Bond Subscription Agreement. On December 29, 2022, the 
Company again issued a Waiver Letter (II) to Ban Loong Holdings, granting it a waiver period of four months after 
the original expiration date. At the same time, the Company, as principal of the trust, also sent relevant instructions 
to the trustee to accommodate the exemption period arrangement. Apart from that, all the other terms and conditions 
of the waiver letter remain unchanged. In order to support the arrangement of the aforesaid Waiver Letter (II), the 
Company entered into the Letter of Consent to Extend the Final Closing Date of the Supplemental Agreement to the 
Convertible Bond Subscription Agreement with Ban Loong Holdings on the same day. The parties agreed to change, 
by this written consent letter, the definition of “Final Closing Date” in Section 1 of the Supplemental Agreement to 
the Convertible Bond Subscription Agreement, which would be changed to February 28, 2023. On January 12, 2023, 
because the relevant regulatory authorities in Hong Kong did not make any further inquiries regarding the contents 
of the circular of Ban Loong Holdings, Ban Loong Holdings issued a circular and the notice of an extraordinary 
general meeting on the same day. On February 1, 2023, Ban Loong Holdings held an extraordinary general meeting, 
which considered and approved all necessary proposals relating to the extension of the maturity date of the 
convertible bonds. As at the disclosure date of this announcement, Ban Loong Holdings has obtained all necessary 
consents and approvals for the maturity extension of the convertible bonds, and the Supplemental Agreement to the 
Subscription Agreement for the Convertible Bonds entered into between the Company and Ban Loong Holdings has 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
126 
 
come into effect, extending the maturity date of the convertible bonds from October 31, 2022 to October 30, 2024. 
4. Change of company name and securities abbreviation  
On October 11, 2023, Ban Loong Holdings disclosed an announcement, stating that the Board of Directors of 
Ban Loong Holdings was pleased to announce that further to the approval of the proposed change of name of the 
company by shareholders by way of poll at the extraordinary general meeting held on September 5, 2023, the 
Certificate of Registration of Change of Name of the Company and the Second Name Certificate were issued by the 
Registrar of Companies in Bermuda on September 18, 2023 respectively, certifying that the first name of the 
company was changed from “Ban Loong Holdings Limited” to “YNBY International Limited” and that “云白国际
有限公司” was adopted as the second Chinese name of the company. On October 5, 2023, the Registrar of 
Companies of Hong Kong issued a Certificate of Registration of Change of Name of a Registered non-Hong Kong 
Company confirming the registration in Hong Kong of the new English and Chinese names of the company, “YNBY 
International Limited” and “云白国际有限公司” respectively under Part 16 of the Companies Ordinance (Chapter 
622 of Laws of Hong Kong). 
With effect from 9:00 a.m. on October 16, 2023, the English stock short name for trading in the shares of the 
company on the Hong Kong Stock Exchange was changed from “BAN LOONG HOLD” to “YNBY INTL” and the 
Chinese stock short name was changed from “万隆控股集团” to “云白国际.” The Company’s stock code on the 
Hong Kong Stock Exchange will remain unchanged at “0030.” 
5. Announcement of 2023 Results 
On April 28, 2023, Ban Loong Holdings disclosed an announcement stating that HLB Hodgson Impey Cheng 
Limited (“HLB”) has resigned as the auditor of Ban Loong Holdings with effect from April 25, 2023. The Board, 
with the recommendation of the Audit Committee, resolved to appoint Zhonghui Anda CPA Limited (“Zhonghui 
Anda”) as the auditor of the Company with effect from 28 April 2023 to fill the casual vacancy following the 
resignation of HLB as auditor of the Company, and to hold office until the conclusion of the next annual general 
meeting of the Company.  
On January 15, 2024, YNBY International published the 2021 Annual Report, the 2022 Interim Report, the 
2022 Annual Report and the 2023 Interim Report. The 2021 Annual Report (from April 1, 2020 to March 31, 2021) 
and the 2022 Annual Report (from April 1, 2021 to March 31, 2022) were audited by Zhonghui Anda, and the type 
of audit comment in the audit report issued was “Disclaimer of Opinion.” Matters that resulted in the audit comment 
of “Disclaimer of Opinion” were businesses that occurred prior to the tender offer of the Company in January 2022, 
for which the Company had made appropriate treatment at the point of acquisition. In addition, after the acquisition, 
the Company actively took over YNBY International in an orderly manner in accordance with the requirements of 
listed companies. Thanks to the efforts of all parties of the Company, the requirements under the Resumption 
Guidelines were fulfilled on January 30, 2024, and the Resumption Guidelines were fully complied with to the 
satisfaction of the HKEX. The trading in YNBY International was resumed on January 31, 2024 with effect from 
9:00 a.m. onwards. 
On March 22, 2024, YNBY International disclosed its final results for the nine months ended December 31, 
2023. Zhonghui Anda, the independent auditor of YNBY International, issued the independent auditor’s report. In 
the opinion of Zhonghui Anda, except for the possible effects of the matters described in the Basis for Qualified 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
127 
 
Opinion section of this report, the consolidated financial statements give a true and fair view of the consolidated 
financial position of YNBY International as at December 31, 2023, and of its consolidated financial performance 
and its consolidated cash flows for the nine months then ended in accordance with Hong Kong Financial Reporting 
Standards issued by the Hong Kong Institute of Certified Public Accountants, and have been properly prepared in 
accordance with the disclosure requirements of the Companies Ordinance of Hong Kong. Qualified Opinion: (1) 
Revenues and cost of sales reversed during the year ended December 31, 2023; (2) Trade and other payable; and (3) 
Insufficient accounting records of Wan Long Shenzhen. 
 
 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
128 
 
Section VII  
Changes in Shareholdings and Particulars about Shareholders 
I. Changes in Shareholdings 
1. Changes in shareholdings 
Unit: Share 
 
Before this change 
Increase/decrease (+, -) 
After this change 
Quantity 
Proportion 
New shares 
Bonus shares 
Capital reserve 
converted into share 
capital 
Others 
Subtotal 
Quantity 
Proportion 
I. Shares subject to trading 
moratorium 
112,267,871 
6.25% 
0 
0 
0 
-100,700,513 
-100,700,513 
11,567,358 
0.64% 
1. State-owned shares 
0 
0.00% 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0.00% 
2. Shares held by state-owned 
legal persons 
0 
0.00% 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0.00% 
3. Shares held by 
other domestic shareholders 
112,267,871 
6.25% 
0 
0 
0 
-100,700,513 
-100,700,513 
11,567,358 
0.64% 
Of which: shares held by 
domestic legal persons 
99,916,513 
5.56% 
0 
0 
0 
-99,916,513 
-99,916,513 
0 
0.00% 
Shares held by domestic 
natural persons 
12,351,358 
0.69% 
0 
0 
0 
-784,000 
-783,998 
11,567,358 
0.64% 
4. Foreign-invested shares 
0 
0.00% 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0.00% 
Of which: shares held by 
overseas legal persons 
0 
0.00% 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0.00% 
Shares held by overseas 
natural persons 
0 
0.00% 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0.00% 
II. Shares not subject to trading 
moratorium 
1,684,594,678 
93.75% 
0 
0 
0 
100,700,513 
100,700,513 
1,785,295,191 
99.36% 
1. RMB-denominated ordinary 
share 
1,684,594,678 
93.75% 
0 
0 
0 
100,700,513 
100,700,513 
1,785,295,191 
99.36% 
2. Domestic-listed foreign-
invested shares 
0 
0.00% 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0.00% 
3. Overseas-listed foreign-
invested shares 
0 
0.00% 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0.00% 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
129 
 
4. Others 
0 
0.00% 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0.00% 
III. Total number of shares 
1,796,862,549 
100.00% 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1,796,862,549 
100.00% 
Reasons for changes in shareholdings 
□ Applicable 
☑ Not applicable 
Approval of changes in shareholdings 
□ Applicable 
☑ Not applicable  
Transfers for changes in shareholdings 
□ Applicable 
☑ Not applicable  
The impact of changes in shareholdings on financial indicators such as basic and diluted earnings per share, net assets per share attributable to the Company’s ordinary shareholders for the latest year 
and period 
□ Applicable 
☑ Not applicable 
Other disclosures deemed necessary by the Company or required by securities regulators 
□ Applicable 
☑ Not applicable 
2. Changes in shares subject to trading moratorium 
☑ Applicable 
□ Not applicable 
Unit: Share 
Name of 
shareholder 
Number of shares subject 
to trading moratorium at 
the beginning of the 
reporting period 
Increase in shares 
subject to trading 
moratorium during 
the reporting period 
Number of shares 
released from trading 
moratorium during 
the reporting period 
Number of shares 
subject to trading 
moratorium at the end 
of the reporting 
period 
Reason for moratorium 
Date of shares released from 
trading moratorium 
Jiangsu Yuyue 
Science & 
Technology 
Development Co., 
Ltd. 
99,916,513 
0 
99,916,513 
0 
Shares subject to trading 
moratorium after private 
placement 
The committed lock-up period 
for the stock unlocking is until 
June 27, 2023. After the 
expiration date, the unlocking 
process will be Implemented in 
accordance with regulatory 
requirements 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
130 
 
Chen Fashu 
9,395,621 
0 
0 
9,395,621 Locked-up shares held by 
senior management 
Implemented in accordance with 
regulatory requirements 
Chen Yanhui 
133,009 
0 
0 
133,009 Locked-up shares held by 
senior management 
Implemented in accordance with 
regulatory requirements 
Dong Ming 
9,960 
0 
0 
9,960 Locked-up shares held by 
senior management 
Implemented in accordance with 
regulatory requirements 
Qin Wanmin 
378,000 
0 
0 
378,000 Locked-up shares held by 
senior management 
Implemented in accordance with 
regulatory requirements 
Yang Yong 
75,768 
0 
0 
75,768 Locked-up shares held by 
senior management 
Implemented in accordance with 
regulatory requirements 
Li Jin 
42,000 
0 
0 
42,000 Locked-up shares held by 
senior management 
Implemented in accordance with 
regulatory requirements 
Zhu Zhaoyun 
42,000 
0 
0 
42,000 Locked-up shares held by 
senior management 
Implemented in accordance with 
regulatory requirements 
Wang Minghui 
756,000 
0 
0 
756,000 Locked-up shares held by 
senior management 
Implemented in accordance with 
regulatory requirements 
Yin Pinyao 
252,000 
0 
0 
252,000 Locked-up shares held by 
senior management 
Implemented in accordance with 
regulatory requirements 
Yu Juan 
105,000 
0 
0 
105,000 Locked-up shares held by 
senior management 
Implemented in accordance with 
regulatory requirements 
Wang Jin 
378,000 
0 
0 
378,000 Locked-up shares held by 
senior management 
Implemented in accordance with 
regulatory requirements 
Yang Changhong 
504,000 
0 
504,000 
0 Locked-up shares held by 
senior management 
May 5, 2023 
Wu Wei 
280,000 
0 
280,000 
0 Locked-up shares held by 
senior management 
May 5, 2023 
Total 
112,267,869 
0 
100,700,513 
11,567,358 -- 
-- 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
131 
 
II. Issuance and Listing of Securities  
1. Issuance of securities (preferred shares excluded) during the reporting period 
□ Applicable  
 ☑ Not applicable 
2. Changes in the Company’s total number of shares, structure of shareholders and structure of assets and 
liabilities 
□ Applicable  
☑ Not applicable 
3. Existing staff shares 
□ Applicable  
☑ Not applicable 
III. Particulars about shareholders and de facto controller 
1. Number of shareholders of the Company and their shareholdings 
 
 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
132 
 
Unit: Share 
Total number of 
ordinary 
shareholders at the 
end of the 
reporting period 
199,821 
The total number of 
ordinary shareholders at 
the end of the preceding 
month prior to the 
disclosure date of the 
annual report 
197,414 
Total number of 
preferred shareholders 
with resumed voting 
rights at the end of the 
reporting period (if 
any) (see Note 8) 
0 
The total number of preferred 
shareholders with resumed 
voting rights at the end of the 
preceding month prior to the 
disclosure date of the annual 
report (if any) (see Note 8) 
 
0 
Shareholdings of shareholders holding more than 5% of the shares or the top 10 shareholders (excluding share lending via securities financing)  
Name of 
shareholder 
Nature of 
shareholder 
Shareholding ratio 
Number of 
shares held at 
the end of the 
reporting period 
Change 
during the 
reporting 
period 
Number of shares 
subject to trading 
moratorium 
Number of 
shares not 
subject to 
trading 
moratorium 
Pledged, marked or frozen 
Status 
Quantity 
Yunnan State-
owned Equity 
Operation 
Management Co., 
Ltd. 
State-owned legal 
person 
25.02% 
449,624,311 
0 
0 
449,624,311 
Pledged 
190,743,840 
New Huadu 
Industrial Group 
Co., Ltd. 
Domestic non-
state-owned legal 
person 
24.25% 
435,742,244 
0 
0 
435,742,244 
Pledged 
290,514,000 
Yunnan Hehe 
(Group) Co., Ltd. 
State-owned legal 
person 
8.14% 
146,185,851 
0 
0 
146,185,851 
Not applicable 
0 
Hong Kong 
Securities Clearing 
Company Limited 
Overseas legal 
person 
3.72% 
66,861,065 
-12,825,164 
0 
66,861,065 
Not applicable 
0 
China Securities 
Finance Corp. 
 Domestic non-
state-owned legal 
person 
2.08% 
37,373,108 
0 
0 
37,373,108 
Not applicable 
0 
Jiangsu Yuyue 
Science & 
Technology 
Development Co., 
Ltd. 
Domestic non-
state-owned 
legal person 
1.58% 
28,311,775 
-71,604,738 
0 
28,311,775 
Pledged 
7,587,825 
Central Huijin 
Investment Ltd. 
State-owned legal 
person 
0.92% 
16,617,440 
0 
0 
16,617,440 
Not applicable 
0 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
133 
 
UBS Asset 
Management 
(Singapore) Ltd. 
-UBS Lux 
Investment SICAV 
Overseas legal 
person 
0.91% 
16,268,628 
-2,403,500 
0 
16,268,628 
Not applicable 
0 
Chen Fashu 
Domestic natural 
person 
0.70% 
12,527,495 
0 
9,395,621 
3,131,874 
Not applicable 
0 
National Social 
Security Fund 110 
Others 
0.66% 
11,796,858 
769,700 
0 
11,796,858 
Not applicable 
0 
Strategic investors or general legal persons who 
become the top 10 shareholders due to rights issue (if 
any) 
Not applicable 
Related or acting-in-concert parties among the 
shareholders above 
Chen Fashu is the de facto controller of New Huadu Industrial Group Co., Ltd. It is unclear whether there are any related relationships 
among other shareholders or whether there is any concerted action as defined by the Administrative Measures for Information Disclosure of 
Changes in Shareholdings of Shareholders of Listed Companies. 
Above shareholders involved in entrusting/being 
entrusted with voting rights and giving up voting 
rights 
Not applicable 
Special account for share repurchases (if any) among 
the top 10 shareholders 
As of the end of the reporting period, Yunnan Baiyao Group’s holdings in the special securities account for stock repurchase amounted to 
12,599,946 shares, representing a 0.70% ownership stake. 
Shareholdings of the top 10 shareholders not subject to trading moratorium 
Name of shareholder 
Number of shares not subject to trading moratorium held at the end of the 
reporting period 
Type of shares 
Type 
Quantity 
Yunnan State-owned Equity Operation Management 
Co., Ltd. 
449,624,311 
RMB-denominated 
ordinary share 
449,624,311 
New Huadu Industrial Group Co., Ltd. 
435,742,244 
RMB-denominated 
ordinary share 
435,742,244 
Yunnan Hehe (Group) Co., Ltd. 
146,185,851 
RMB-denominated 
ordinary share 
146,185,851 
Hong Kong Securities Clearing Company Limited 
66,861,065 
RMB-denominated 
ordinary share 
66,861,065 
China Securities Finance Corp. 
37,373,108 
RMB-denominated 
ordinary share 
37,373,108 
Jiangsu Yuyue Science & Technology Development 
Co., Ltd. 
28,311,775 
RMB-denominated 
ordinary share 
28,311,775 
Central Huijin Investment Ltd. 
16,617,440 
RMB-denominated 
ordinary share 
16,617,440 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
134 
 
UBS Asset Management (Singapore) Ltd. - UBS Lux 
Investment SICAV 
16,268,628 
RMB-denominated 
ordinary share 
16,268,628 
National Social Security Fund 110 
11,796,858 
RMB-denominated 
ordinary share 
11,796,858 
China Construction Bank Corporation 
－EFund CSI300 Health Care Index ETF 
11,299,766 
RMB-denominated 
ordinary share 
11,299,766 
Related or acting-in-concert parties among the top 10 
circulating shareholders not subject to trading 
moratorium, and between the top 10 circulating 
shareholders not subject to trading moratorium and the 
top 10 shareholders 
It is unclear whether there are any related relationships among the above-mentioned shareholders or whether there is any concerted action 
as defined by the Administrative Measures for Information Disclosure of Changes in Shareholdings of Shareholders of Listed Companies. 
Top 10 ordinary shareholders 
involved in securities margin trading (if any) 
Not applicable 
 
 
 
 
 
Participation of the top 10 shareholders in share lending via securities financing 
□ Applicable 
☑ Not applicable 
Changes in the top 10 shareholders compared to the previous period 
□ Applicable 
☑ Not applicable 
Whether the top 10 ordinary shareholders and the top 10 ordinary shareholders not subject to trading moratorium of the Company conducted any agreed repurchase transactions during the reporting 
period 
□ Yes  
☑ No 
The top 10 ordinary shareholders and the top 10 ordinary shareholders not subject to trading moratorium of the Company did not conduct any agreed repurchase transactions during the reporting period. 
 
 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
135 
 
2. Particulars about the Company’s controlling shareholders  
Nature of controlling shareholder: No controlling entity 
Type of controlling shareholder: Does not exist 
Description of no controlling shareholders of the Company 
On July 3, 2019, the Company purchased 668,430,196 new shares from Baiyao Holdings, its controlling 
shareholder, and issued these shares in the public market, of which 321,160,222 shares were issued to the 
SASAC of Yunnan Province, 275,901,036 shares to New Huadu, and 71,368,938 shares to Jiangsu Yuyue. 
Meanwhile, the shares held by Baiyao Holdings in the listed company were cancelled. After this issuance, the 
SASAC of Yunnan Province, New Huadu, and its acting-in-concert parties both hold 25.14% of the Company’s 
shares, resulting in no shareholders having control over the Company actually or via shareholdings and the 
Company becoming an enterprise with no de facto controllers and controlling shareholders. 
Changes in controlling shareholders during the reporting period 
□ Applicable 
☑ Not applicable 
There was no change in the controlling shareholders of the Company during the reporting period.  
3. The Company’s de facto controllers and their respective acting-in-concert parties  
Nature of de facto controllers: No de facto controllers 
Type of de facto controllers: Does not exist. 
Description of no de facto controllers of the Company. 
On July 3, 2019, the Company purchased 668,430,196 new shares from Baiyao Holdings, its controlling 
shareholder, and issued these shares in the public market, of which 321,160,222 shares were issued to the 
SASAC of Yunnan Province, 275,901,036 shares to New Huadu, and 71,368,938 shares to Jiangsu Yuyue. 
Meanwhile, the shares held by Baiyao Holdings in the listed company were cancelled. After this issuance, the 
SASAC of Yunnan Province, New Huadu, and its acting-in-concert parties both hold 25.14% of the Company’s 
shares, resulting in no shareholders having control over the Company actually or via shareholdings and the 
Company becoming an enterprise with no de facto controllers and controlling shareholders. 
Whether the Company has any shareholders at the ultimate control level with a shareholding of more than 10% 
□Yes  
☑No 
□Shareholders at the ultimate control level with a shareholding of more than 5%  ☑ Shareholders at the ultimate 
control level with a shareholding of less than 5% 
The Company has no de facto controllers. 
Change of de facto controllers during the reporting period 
□ Applicable 
☑ Not applicable 
There was no change in the de facto controllers of the Company during the reporting period. 
Diagram of property rights and control relationship between the Company and the de facto controller 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
136 
 
 
The de facto controllers of the Company control over the Company via trust or other asset management methods 
□ Applicable 
☑ Not applicable 
4. The cumulative number of pledged shares held by the controlling shareholder or the largest shareholder 
of the Company and their acting-in-concert parties accounts for up to 80% of the total number of shares held 
by them in the Company 
□ Applicable 
☑ Not applicable 
5. Other legal-person shareholders holding more than 10% of the shares 
☑ Applicable 
□ Not applicable 
Name of corporate 
shareholder 
Legal 
representative/
Head of the 
organization 
Date of 
establishment 
Registered capital 
Main business operations or 
management activities 
Yunnan State-owned 
Equity Operation 
Management Co., 
Ltd. 
Wang 
Hongxin 
June 21, 2019 
RMB 20,977,469,085.95 
Holding and managing state-owned 
equity; Equity (including listed 
company equity) investment, 
operation, and transfer; Fundraising; 
Research and consulting services on 
the structural layout of state-owned 
capital and industrial development 
(Business activities that require 
approval according to the law may be 
conducted only after obtaining 
approval from the relevant 
departments.) 
New Huadu 
Industrial Group 
Co., Ltd. 
Chen Fashu 
May 4, 1996 
RMB 139,800,000.00 
Wholesale and retail of pre-packaged 
and bulk food products; Investment, 
management, and consulting services 
in the retail industry, interior and 
exterior decoration, hotel industry, 
mining industry, hydropower 
engineering, road and bridge 
engineering projects, real estate 
industry, and industrial sector 
(Business activities that require 
approval according to the law may be 
conducted only after obtaining 
approval from the relevant 
departments.)  


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
137 
 
6. Restricted reduction of shares held by controlling shareholders, de facto controllers, restructuring parties, 
and other committed entities 
□ Applicable 
☑ Not applicable 
IV. Detailed implementation of share repurchase during the reporting period 
Implementation of share repurchase 
□ Applicable 
☑ Not applicable 
Implementation of reduction in repurchased shares via centralized bidding 
□ Applicable 
☑ Not applicable 
 
 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
138 
 
Section VIII 
Preference Shares 
□ Applicable 
☑ Not applicable 
There were no preference shares in the Company during the reporting period. 
 
 
 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
139 
 
Section IX Bonds 
□ Applicable 
☑ Not applicable 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
140 
 
Section X 
Financial Statements 
I. Audit Report 
Body Text of Audit Report 
ZHS Zi (2024) No. 1600081 
To All shareholders of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd, 
I. Audit Opinions 
We have audited the financial statements of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd (“Yunnan Baiyao”), which 
comprise the consolidated and balance sheets of the Company as of December 31, 2023, as well as the consolidated 
and income statements of the Company, the consolidated and cash flow statements of the Company, the consolidated 
and statements of changes in shareholders’ equity of the Company for 2023 and notes to the financial statements. 
In our opinion, the attached financial statements have been prepared in accordance with the provisions of the 
Accounting Standards for Business Enterprises in all major aspects, and present fairly the consolidated financial 
position of Yunnan Baiyao as of December 31, 2023, and the results of its operations and cash flows in 2023. 
II. Basis for the Audit Opinion 
We conduct our audit in accordance with the PRC Standards on Auditing for Certified Public Accountants. 
Our responsibilities under these standards are further described in the section on “the Certified Public Accountants’ 
Responsibilities for the Audit of the Financial Statements” of our audit report. We are independent of Yunnan 
Baiyao in accordance with the PRC Code of Ethics for Certified Public Accountants and have fulfilled our other 
ethical responsibilities. We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide 
a basis for our audit opinion. 
III. Key Audit Matters 
Key audit matters are those, in our professional judgment, of most significance in our audit of the financial 
statements of the current period. The treatment of these matters is based on an audit of the financial statements as a 
whole and audit opinions therefrom, and we do not express an opinion on these matters separately. We have 
identified the following matters as the key audit matters stated in our audit report. 
Type of Audit Opinion 
Unqualified opinion 
Signature Date of Audit Report  
March 28, 2024 
Name of Audit Body 
Mazars Certified Public Accountants (SGP)  
Document No. of Audit Report  
ZHS Zi (2024) No. 1600081 
Name of Certified Public Accountant 
Yang Manhui, Yang Fan 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
141 
 
(I) Revenue recognition 
Key Audit Matters 
How to treat this matter in the audit? 
Please refer to Note VI.48 in the financial 
statements.  
Yunnan 
Baiyao’s 
annual 
operating 
income in 2023 was RMB 39.111 billion, 
of which the main business income was 
RMB 39.062 billion, accounting for 
99.87% of the total operating income. 
Due to the amount of revenue from the 
main business being significant and a key 
performance indicator, and thus there was 
an inherent risk that the Management 
tends to manipulate the timing of revenue 
recognition to meet specific objectives or 
expectations, 
we 
identified 
revenue 
recognition as a key audit matter.  
Our audit procedures for revenue recognition from the principal businesses mainly 
include: 
(1) To understand key internal controls relevant to revenue recognition, evaluate the 
effectiveness of their design and implementation, and test the operational effectiveness 
of relevant internal controls; 
(2) To examine the Company’s major sales contracts, identify key contract terms and 
performance obligations related to revenue recognition, and evaluate whether the 
Company’s revenue recognition policies comply with the requirements of the 
Accounting Standards for Business Enterprises and are consistently applied; 
(3) To obtain the sales list of the Company for the current year, and analyze procedures 
for operating income, including analyzing the annual and monthly income of major 
products, changes in major customers and sales prices, changes in the gross profit margin 
of major products, and judging the rationality of changes in revenue and gross profit 
margin of the current year; 
(4) To sample and inspect supporting documents such as annual sales agreements, sales 
contracts, delivery orders, invoices, customer receipt orders, and corresponding 
accounting records to verify whether the recognized amount of revenue is correct; 
(5) To conduct confirmation procedure for sales volume, accounts receivable, or contract 
liabilities of major customers, understand the background of important customers, and 
pay attention to whether there are related party transactions; 
(6) To select a sample for income transactions recorded before and after the balance 
sheet date, check shipping invoices and other supporting documents, and check 
subsequent settlements and returns to evaluate whether revenue is recorded in the 
appropriate accounting period. 
(II) Provision for bad debts of accounts receivable 
Key Audit Matter 
How to deal with this matter in the audit? 
Please refer to Note VI.4 in the financial 
statements. 
As of December 31, 2023, Yunnan Baiyao 
had a balance of accounts receivable of 
RMB 10.8 billion, and a balance of bad 
debt reserve of RMB 834 million, all of 
which were high book value over RMB 
9.966 billion. Due to the high book value of 
accounts receivable, the provision for bad 
debts of accounts receivable involves 
significant 
accounting 
estimates 
and 
judgments, and the recoverability of 
accounts receivable had a significant impact 
on the financial statements, we identified 
the provision for bad debts of accounts 
receivable as a key audit matter. 
Our audit procedures for the provision for bad debts of accounts receivable mainly 
include: 
(1) To understand, evaluate, and test the effectiveness of the design and operation of 
the Company’s internal control key control points related to accounts receivable 
management; 
(2) To analyze and confirm the rationality of accounting estimation of bad debt 
provision of accounts receivable, including the basis for determining the combination 
of accounts receivable and expecting credit loss rate, and judge of impairment test of 
accounts receivable assessed individually; 
(3) To analyze and calculate the ratio between the bad debt provision amount and the 
accounts receivable balance on the balance sheet date of the Company, compare the 
provision for bad debts in the previous period with the actual amount incurred, and 
analyze whether the bad debt provision of the accounts receivable is sufficient; 
(4) To conduct confirmation procedures for accounts receivable, and affirm the 
authenticity and accuracy of accounts receivable on the balance sheet date through 
post-period inspection and other procedures. 
IV. Other Information 
The management of Yunnan Baiyao is responsible for the other information, which includes the information 
covered in the annual report, but does not include the financial statements and our audit report. 
Our audit opinion on the financial statements does not cover the other information and we do not express any 
form of verification conclusion thereon. 
Given our audit of financial statements, our responsibility is to review other information, and in such process, 
to judge whether other information is significantly inconsistent with the financial statements or what we learned in 
the audit process, or that information seems to be significantly misstated. 
Where we identify that there is a material misstatement of other information, based on the work we have performed, 
we will report that fact, but have nothing to report in this regard. 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
142 
 
V. The Management and the Governance’s Responsibilities for the Financial Statements 
The management of Yunnan Baiyao is responsible for the preparation of financial statements according to 
Accounting Standards for Business Enterprises in a fair view, and for designing, implementing, and maintaining 
necessary internal control to be absent from material misstatement in the financial statements, whether due to fraud 
or error. 
In preparing the financial statements, the management is responsible for assessing Yunnan Baiyao’s ability to 
continue as a going concern, disclosing matters related to going concern (as applicable), and applying the going-
concern assumption, unless the management intends to liquidate Yunnan Baiyao or cease operations or has no 
realistic alternative but to do so. 
The governance team is responsible for overseeing the financial reporting of Yunnan Baiyao. 
VI. Responsibilities of Certified Public Accountants for the Audit of Financial Statements 
Our purpose is to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements as a whole are free from 
material misstatement due to fraud or error, and to issue an audit report that includes an audit opinion. Our 
reasonable assurance is of high level, but is not a guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with auditing 
standards will always detect a material misstatement. Misstatements can result from fraud or error and are generally 
considered material if, individually or in the aggregate, they could reasonably be expected to influence the economic 
decisions of users made based on these financial statements. 
We exercise professional judgment and maintain professional skepticism in performing the audit in accordance 
with auditing standards. At the same time, we also conduct the following work: 
(I) To identify and assess the risks of material misstatement of the financial statements due to fraud or error, 
design and implement audit procedures to address these risks, and obtain sufficient and appropriate audit evidence 
as the basis for expressing audit opinions. The risk of failing to detect a material misstatement due to fraud is higher 
than the risk of failing to detect a material misstatement due to an error, as fraud may involve collusion, forgery, 
intentional omissions, misrepresentation, or overriding internal controls. 
(II) To understand the internal control related to audit to design appropriate audit procedures. 
(III) To evaluate the appropriateness of accounting policies adopted and the reasonableness of accounting 
estimates and related disclosures made by the management. 
(IV) A conclusion is made on the appropriateness of the going-concern assumption adopted by the 
Management. At the same time, based on the audit evidence obtained, a conclusion is reached on whether there is 
material uncertainty as to the matters or circumstances that may give rise to significant doubt about Yunnan Baiyao’s 
ability to continue as a going concern. Where we conclude that a material uncertainty exists, auditing standards 
require us to draw the attention of statement users to the related disclosures therein; where the disclosures are 
inadequate, no unqualified opinion shall be issued. Our conclusion is based on the information available as of the 
date of the audit report. However, future events or circumstances may cause Yunnan Baiyao to be unable to continue 
as a going concern. 
(V) To evaluate the overall presentation, structure, and content of the financial statements and whether the 
financial statements present fairly the underlying transactions and events. 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
143 
 
(VI) To obtain sufficient and appropriate audit evidence on the financial information of entities or business 
activities in Yunnan Baiyao to express opinions on the financial statements. We are responsible for the direction, 
supervision, and execution of the Group audits. We take full responsibility for the audit opinion. 
We communicate with the governance team on matters such as planned audit scope, timing, and significant 
audit findings, including communicating internal control deficiencies of concern identified in our audit. 
We also provide a statement to the governance team that we have complied with the ethical requirements 
related to independence, and communicate with the governance team all relationships and other matters that may 
reasonably be perceived to affect our independence, as well as related precautions (if applicable). 
We determine the matters that are most significant to the audit of the current financial statements in the matters 
communicated to the governance team and therefore such matters constitute key audit matters. We disclose these 
matters in our audit report except where public disclosure of the matters is prohibited by law or regulation, or in 
rare instances, we determine that a matter shall not be disclosed in the audit report if it is reasonably expected that 
the negative consequences of disclosure of the matter in the report will outweigh the benefits to the public interest. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mazars Certified Public Accountants (SGP) 
Chinese Certified Public Accountants: 
 
(Project Partner): 
 
Yang Manhui 
 
Chinese Certified Public Accountants: 
 
Yang Fan 
Wuhan, China 
March 28, 2024 
 
 
        
 
 
 
                                                             
 
 
 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
144 
 
II. Financial Statement  
 
The units in the Notes to the Financial Statements are presented in RMB. 
1. Consolidated balance sheet  
Prepared by Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
December 31, 2023 
Unit: RMB 
Item 
December 31, 2023 
January 1, 2023 
Current assets: 
 
 
Cash and bank balance 
14,218,343,076.67 
13,056,113,712.47 
Provision of settlement fund 
 
 
Placements with banks and other 
financial institutions 
 
 
Financial assets held for trading 
149,366,687.56 
2,415,722,075.60 
Derivative financial assets 
 
 
Notes receivable 
227,542,572.56 
789,465,084.93 
Accounts receivable 
9,966,170,447.21 
9,089,822,151.93 
Accounts receivable financing 
1,590,749,810.74 
834,668,231.58 
Prepayment 
312,298,727.01 
542,948,440.85 
Premium receivable 
 
 
Reinsurance premium receivable 
 
 
Reserves for reinsurance contract 
receivable 
 
 
Other receivables 
104,050,709.53 
118,948,994.06 
Including: Interest receivable 
 
 
Dividends receivable 
4,531,100.00 
 
Financial assets held under resale 
agreements 
 
 
Inventory 
6,442,194,823.67 
7,993,207,044.26 
Contractual assets 
 
 
Held-for-sales assets 
 
 
Non-current assets due within one year 
442,772,777.78 
361,774,444.44 
Other current assets 
2,862,076,217.20 
474,340,107.76 
Total current assets 
36,315,565,849.93 
35,677,010,287.88 
Non-current assets: 
 
 
Loans and advances to customers 
 
 
Debt investments 
 
 
Other debt investment 
 
 
Long-term receivables 
 
 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
145 
 
Long-term equity investments 
11,536,660,992.93 
11,318,749,947.10 
Investment in other equity instruments 
71,745,000.00 
71,745,000.00 
Other non-current financial assets 
324,674,379.63 
380,786,134.24 
Investment properties 
44,104,145.97 
55,823,776.49 
Fixed assets 
2,662,900,014.03 
2,723,302,365.65 
Construction in progress 
529,708,553.58 
193,993,194.93 
Productive biological assets 
988,424.85 
1,160,324.85 
Oil and gas assets 
 
 
Right-of-use assets 
258,319,485.58 
389,975,390.73 
Intangible assets 
583,372,000.59 
590,985,824.30 
Development expenses 
14,452,474.57 
6,024,448.12 
Goodwill 
104,121,771.67 
129,882,094.89 
Long-term deferred expenses 
105,335,550.31 
103,039,892.76 
Deferred income tax assets 
690,869,209.12 
713,246,779.66 
Other non-current assets 
541,475,331.17 
965,218,407.14 
Total non-current assets 
17,468,727,334.00 
17,643,933,580.86 
Total assets 
53,784,293,183.93 
53,320,943,868.74 
Current liabilities: 
 
 
Short-term loans 
1,747,303,700.34 
1,850,867,886.59 
Borrowings from the central bank 
 
 
Placements from banks and other 
financial institutions 
 
 
Financial liabilities held for trading 
 
 
Derivative financial liabilities 
 
 
Notes payable 
1,850,863,313.78 
1,991,907,836.96 
Accounts payable 
4,359,632,642.20 
4,639,261,396.45 
Receipts in advance 
486,612.12 
1,569,799.63 
Contractual liabilities 
1,739,865,228.75 
2,578,264,621.13 
Financial assets sold under repurchase 
agreements 
 
 
Deposits from customers and 
interbank 
 
 
Customer brokerage deposits 
 
 
Acting underwriting of securities 
 
 
Payroll payable 
1,067,190,665.08 
468,450,348.52 
Taxes and duties payable 
339,670,850.02 
509,286,922.32 
Other payables 
1,025,085,879.54 
1,043,693,209.78 
Including: Interest payable 
 
 
Dividends payable 
86,490,742.04 
89,413,484.03 
Fees and commissions payable 
 
 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
146 
 
Reinsurance amounts payable 
 
 
Held-for-sales liabilities 
 
 
Non-current liabilities due within one 
year 
74,736,102.58 
93,870,902.64 
Other current liabilities 
532,943,904.40 
381,185,773.19 
Total current liabilities 
12,737,778,898.81 
13,558,358,697.21 
Non-current liabilities: 
 
 
Reserves for insurance contract 
 
 
Long-term loans 
2,100,000.00 
2,100,000.00 
Bonds payable 
 
 
Including: Preferred shares 
 
 
Perpetual bonds 
 
 
Lease liabilities 
172,347,309.72 
285,783,728.73 
Long-term payables 
631,735,908.04 
646,074,143.55 
Long-term payroll payable 
4,090,687.99 
4,280,453.08 
Estimated liabilities 
 
 
Deferred income 
238,811,111.04 
178,621,813.00 
Deferred income tax liabilities 
74,772,071.70 
98,079,237.09 
Other non-current liabilities 
17,296,814.41 
20,648,534.29 
Total non-current liabilities 
1,141,153,902.90 
1,235,587,909.74 
Total liabilities 
13,878,932,801.71 
14,793,946,606.95 
Owners’ equity 
 
 
Share capital 
1,796,862,549.00 
1,796,862,549.00 
Other equity instruments 
 
 
Including: Preferred shares  
 
 
Perpetual bonds 
 
 
Capital reserves 
18,246,619,742.09 
18,231,423,838.72 
Less: Treasury stock 
707,428,892.15 
707,428,892.15 
Other comprehensive income 
-89,538,172.13 
-68,087,650.95 
Special reserves 
 
 
Surplus reserves 
2,530,458,968.58 
2,530,458,968.58 
Provision for general risk 
 
 
Undistributed profit 
18,102,147,836.12 
16,720,444,918.66 
Total owners’ equity attributable to 
parent company 
39,879,122,031.51 
38,503,673,731.86 
Minority interests 
26,238,350.71 
23,323,529.93 
Total owners’ equity 
39,905,360,382.22 
38,526,997,261.79 
Total liabilities and owners’ equity 
53,784,293,183.93 
53,320,943,868.74 
Legal representative: Dong Ming         Accounting officer: Ma Jia         Head of accounting center: Xu Jing                


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
147 
 
2. Balance sheet of parent company  
Unit: RMB 
Item 
December 31, 2023 
January 1, 2023 
Current assets: 
 
 
Cash and bank balance 
11,558,478,370.89 
10,750,790,137.56 
Financial assets held for trading 
72,221,202.90 
2,271,661,364.13 
Derivative financial assets  
 
 
Notes receivable 
6,112,294.09 
15,053,289.26 
Accounts receivable 
1,330,908,560.96 
977,848,724.80 
Accounts receivable financing 
602,881,796.61 
764,707,862.56 
Prepayment 
1,600,931,041.18 
2,653,025,880.52 
Other receivables 
4,127,088,902.76 
3,123,928,450.54 
Including: Interest receivable 
 
 
Dividends receivable 
4,531,100.00 
 
Inventory 
1,462,389,548.82 
1,714,985,144.48 
Contractual assets 
 
 
Held-for-sales assets 
 
 
Non-current assets due within one year 
442,772,777.78 
161,580,000.00 
Other current assets 
3,156,374,029.15 
860,182,734.75 
Total current assets 
24,360,158,525.14 
23,293,763,588.60 
Non-current assets: 
 
 
Debt investments 
 
 
Other debt investments 
 
 
Long-term receivables 
 
 
Long-term equity investments 
13,882,263,332.22 
13,555,259,244.01 
Investment in other equity instruments 
 
 
Other non-current financial assets 
324,174,379.63 
382,286,134.24 
Investment properties 
319,279,203.56 
329,163,194.06 
Fixed assets 
1,406,905,437.93 
1,466,536,097.93 
Construction in progress 
127,864,253.80 
42,777,046.60 
Productive biological assets 
 
 
Oil and gas assets 
 
 
Right-of-use assets 
259,635,687.65 
278,370,935.35 
Intangible assets 
283,913,499.08 
279,813,388.40 
Development expenses 
14,452,474.57 
6,024,448.12 
Goodwill 
 
 
Long-term deferred expenses 
19,333,368.56 
26,383,681.39 
Deferred income tax assets 
374,888,819.41 
393,672,386.71 
Other non-current assets 
467,069,694.11 
878,933,974.44 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
148 
 
Total non-current assets 
17,479,780,150.52 
17,639,220,531.25 
Total assets 
41,839,938,675.66 
40,932,984,119.85 
Current liabilities: 
 
 
Short-term loans 
19,002,863.01 
 
Financial liabilities held for trading 
 
 
Derivative financial liabilities 
 
 
Notes payable 
 
 
Accounts payable 
3,247,231,002.57 
3,490,312,525.91 
Receipts in advance 
368,860.80 
78,896.18 
Contractual liabilities 
1,316,384,668.74 
1,854,572,406.22 
Payroll payable 
742,388,264.48 
260,587,798.86 
Taxes and duties payable 
53,940,771.05 
136,524,520.02 
Other payables 
9,513,887,394.94 
6,874,487,463.94 
Including: Interest payable 
 
 
Dividends payable 
86,490,742.04 
86,490,742.04 
Held-for-sales liabilities 
 
 
Non-current liabilities due within one 
year 
17,766,112.27 
19,355,990.16 
Other current liabilities 
86,664,716.45 
168,111,106.82 
Total current liabilities 
14,997,634,654.31 
12,804,030,708.11 
Non-current liabilities: 
 
 
Long-term loans 
1,100,000.00 
1,100,000.00 
Bonds payable 
 
 
Including: Preferred shares 
 
 
Perpetual bonds 
 
 
Lease liabilities 
247,778,172.74 
262,346,944.44 
Long-term payables 
631,735,908.04 
646,074,143.55 
Long-term payroll payable 
 
 
Estimated liabilities 
 
 
Deferred income 
147,405,764.87 
90,960,005.58 
Deferred income tax liabilities 
48,751,418.36 
58,991,118.22 
Other non-current liabilities 
1,931,554.36 
1,931,554.36 
Total non-current liabilities 
1,078,702,818.37 
1,061,403,766.15 
Total liabilities 
16,076,337,472.68 
13,865,434,474.26 
Owners’ equity: 
 
 
Share capital 
1,796,862,549.00 
1,796,862,549.00 
Other equity instruments 
 
 
Including: Preferred shares 
 
 
Perpetual bonds 
 
 
Capital reserves 
18,449,011,067.03 
18,430,166,434.80 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
149 
 
Less: Treasury stock 
707,428,892.15 
707,428,892.15 
Other comprehensive income 
-54,646,721.46 
-32,221,472.36 
Special reserves 
 
 
Surplus reserves 
2,529,297,618.08 
2,529,297,618.08 
Undisturbed profits 
3,750,505,582.48 
5,050,873,408.22 
Total owners’ equity 
25,763,601,202.98 
27,067,549,645.59 
Total liabilities and owners’ equity 
41,839,938,675.66 
40,932,984,119.85 
3. Consolidated income statement 
Unit: RMB 
Item 
2023 
2022 
I. Total operating revenue 
39,111,292,156.00 
36,488,372,649.73 
Including: Operating revenue 
39,111,292,156.00 
36,488,372,649.73 
Interest income 
 
 
Premiums earned 
 
 
Fee and commission income 
 
 
II. Total operating cost 
35,082,749,923.97 
32,087,168,220.45 
Including: Operating cost 
28,744,517,640.29 
26,883,485,305.46 
Interest expenses 
 
 
Fee and commission expenses 
 
 
Surrender value 
 
 
Net payments for insurance claims 
 
 
Net provision for insurance liability 
 
 
Bond insurance expenses 
 
 
Reinsurance expenses 
 
 
Taxes and surcharges 
210,801,478.72 
210,489,442.16 
Selling expenses 
4,992,157,591.11 
4,165,563,900.91 
Administrative expenses 
1,058,503,523.90 
833,784,263.46 
R&D expenses 
336,013,434.83 
336,723,690.26 
Financial expenses 
-259,243,744.88 
-342,878,381.80 
Including: Interest expenses 
49,601,252.93 
67,849,588.22 
Interest income 
315,758,812.17 
374,310,143.23 
Plus: other income 
83,315,147.32 
104,727,718.20 
Investment income (loss is indicated with “-”)  
779,010,728.82 
868,198,390.16 
Including: Income from investment in associates and 
joint ventures 
628,531,524.35 
732,233,328.71 
Investment income from derecognition of 
financial assets at amortized cost 
 
 
Exchange gains (loss is indicated with “-”)  
 
 
Net exposure hedging income (loss is indicated with “-”)  
 
 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
150 
 
Income from change in fair value (loss is indicated with “-”)  
123,566,330.46 
-619,902,948.31 
Credit impairment losses (loss is indicated with “-”)  
-136,455,204.36 
-724,554,552.72 
Asset impairment losses (loss is indicated with “-”)  
-58,127,562.23 
-664,338,618.92 
Gains from asset disposal (loss is indicated with “-”)  
10,654,438.38 
5,944,768.41 
III. Operating profit (loss is indicated with “-”)  
4,830,506,110.42 
3,371,279,186.10 
Plus: Non-operating revenue 
12,234,049.26 
13,589,178.75 
Less: Non-operating expenses 
24,728,403.02 
7,865,941.15 
IV. Total profit (total loss is indicated with “-”)  
4,818,011,756.66 
3,377,002,423.70 
Less: Income tax expenses 
695,450,660.17 
536,592,729.51 
V. Net profit (net loss is indicated with “-”)  
4,122,561,096.49 
2,840,409,694.19 
(I) Classification by operation continuity 
 
 
1. Net profit from continuing operations (net loss is indicated 
with “-”)  
4,122,561,096.49 
2,840,409,694.19 
2. Net profit from discontinued operations (net loss is indicated 
with “-”)  
 
 
(II) Classification by ownership 
 
 
1. Net profits attributable to the shareholders of the parent 
company (net loss to be listed with “-”)  
4,093,782,074.02 
3,001,125,887.45 
2. Minority interests (net loss to be listed with “-”)  
28,779,022.47 
-160,716,193.26 
VI. Other comprehensive income, net of tax 
-21,847,821.78 
-81,412,436.29 
Other comprehensive income attributable to owners of parent 
company, net of tax 
-21,450,521.18 
-70,601,453.60 
(I) Other comprehensive income that cannot be reclassified into 
profits or losses 
-8,280,710.37 
8,731,257.88 
1. Changes arising from re-measurement of the defined 
benefit plan 
 
 
2. Other comprehensive income that cannot be reclassified 
into profits or losses under the equity method 
-8,280,710.37 
8,731,257.88 
3. Changes in fair value of other equity instrument 
investments 
 
 
4. Changes in fair value of the enterprise’s credit risk 
 
 
5. Others 
 
 
(II) Other comprehensive income that will be reclassified into 
profits or losses 
-13,169,810.81 
-79,332,711.48 
1. Other comprehensive income that can be reclassified into 
profits or losses under the equity method 
-14,144,538.73 
-42,553,962.75 
2. Changes in fair value of other debt investments 
 
 
3. Amount of the financial asset reclassified into other 
comprehensive income 
 
 
4. Provision for credit impairment of other debt investments 
 
 
5. Cash flow hedging reserves 
 
 
6. Exchange differences from translation of statements 
denominated in foreign currencies 
974,727.92 
-34,536,280.30 
7. Others 
 
-2,242,468.43 
Other comprehensive income attributable to minority interests, net 
of tax 
-397,300.60 
-10,810,982.69 
VII. Total comprehensive income 
4,100,713,274.71 
2,758,997,257.90 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
151 
 
Total comprehensive income attributable to owners of parent 
company 
4,072,331,552.84 
2,930,524,433.85 
Total comprehensive income attributable to minority interests 
28,381,721.87 
-171,527,175.95 
VIII. Earnings per share 
 
 
(I) Basic earnings per share 
2.29 
1.9 
(II) Diluted earnings per share 
2.29 
1.9 
Net profit realized by the combined party in business combination under common control before the business combination in the 
current period was RMB 0.00, and net profit realized by the combined party in the previous period was RMB 0. 
Legal representative: Dong Ming         Accounting officer: Ma Jia         Head of accounting center: Xu Jing   
4. Income statement of parent company 
Unit: RMB 
Item 
2023 
2022 
I. Operating revenue 
6,881,456,920.60 
6,440,461,426.23 
Less: Operating cost 
3,165,134,772.87 
2,980,435,577.07 
Taxes and surcharges 
83,265,593.34 
83,793,052.47 
Selling expenses 
2,294,245,758.98 
1,986,803,504.78 
Administrative expenses 
660,823,121.05 
420,434,297.52 
R&D expenses 
250,038,194.42 
259,720,011.08 
Financial expenses 
-288,843,660.25 
-351,061,240.29 
Including: Interest expenses 
2,525,713.85 
3,114,486.90 
Interest income 
289,024,747.89 
345,551,878.59 
Plus: Other income 
27,816,279.64 
48,895,921.37 
Investment income (loss is indicated with “-”)  
741,892,987.96 
1,495,121,958.34 
Including: Income from investment in associates and 
joint ventures 
628,517,050.64 
732,711,091.10 
Derecognized financial assets measured 
by amortized cost (loss is indicated with “-”)  
 
 
Net exposure hedging income (loss is indicated with 
“-”)  
 
 
Income from changes in fair value (loss is indicated 
with “-”)  
107,345,538.18 
-593,004,615.91 
Credit impairment losses (loss is indicated with “-”)  
-2,956,484.71 
-2,152,245.84 
Asset impairment losses (loss is indicated with “-”)  
-26,559,432.53 
-71,317,107.54 
Gains from asset disposal (loss is indicated with “-”)  
-157,621.90 
2,985,699.84 
II. Operating profit (loss is indicated with “-”)  
1,564,174,406.83 
1,940,865,833.86 
Plus: Non-operating revenue 
5,136,425.36 
1,165,403.30 
Less: Non-operating expenses 
11,785,458.74 
4,689,343.77 
III. Total profit (total loss is indicated with “-”)  
1,557,525,373.45 
1,937,341,893.39 
Less: Income tax expenses 
145,814,042.63 
44,007,170.98 
IV. Net profit (net loss is indicated with “-”)  
1,411,711,330.82 
1,893,334,722.41 
(I) Net profit from continuing operations (net loss is 
1,411,711,330.82 
1,893,334,722.41 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
152 
 
indicated with “-”)  
(II) Net profit from discontinued operations (net loss is 
indicated with “-”)  
 
 
V. Other comprehensive income, net of tax 
-22,425,249.10 
-33,822,704.87 
(I) Other comprehensive income that cannot be 
reclassified into profits or losses 
-8,280,710.37 
8,731,257.88 
1. Changes arising from re-measurement of the defined 
benefit plan 
 
 
2. Other comprehensive income that cannot be 
reclassified into profits or losses under the equity method 
-8,280,710.37 
8,731,257.88 
3. Changes in fair value of other equity instrument 
investments 
 
 
4. Changes in fair value of the enterprise’s credit risk 
 
 
5. Others 
 
 
(II) Other comprehensive income that will be reclassified 
into profits or losses 
-14,144,538.73 
-42,553,962.75 
1. Other comprehensive income that can be reclassified 
into profits or losses under the equity method 
-14,144,538.73 
-42,553,962.75 
2. Changes in fair value of other debt investments 
 
 
3. Amount of the financial asset reclassified into other 
comprehensive income 
 
 
4. Provision for credit impairment of other debt 
investments 
 
 
5. Cash flow hedging reserves 
 
 
6. Exchange differences from translation of statements 
denominated in foreign currencies 
 
 
7. Others 
 
 
VI. Total comprehensive income 
1,389,286,081.72 
1,859,512,017.54 
VII. Earnings per share 
 
 
(I) Basic earnings per share 
 
 
(II) Diluted earnings per share 
 
 
5. Consolidated cash flow statement 
Unit: RMB 
Item 
2023 
2022 
I. Cash flows from operating activities: 
 
 
Cash received from sales of goods or rendering of services 
40,638,627,018.49 
38,216,566,841.97 
Net increase in customer deposits and placements from 
financial institutions 
 
 
Net increase in borrowings from central bank 
 
 
Net increase in placements from other financial institutions 
 
 
Cash received from premiums of original insurance contracts 
 
 
Net cash received from reinsurance business 
 
 
Net increase in deposits of the insured and investment 
 
 
Cash received from interest, fees and commissions 
 
 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
153 
 
Net increase in placements from banks and other financial 
institutions 
 
 
Net increase in repurchase business funds 
 
 
Net cash received from acting trading of securities 
 
 
Receipts from tax refunds 
4,858,426.21 
159,371,374.98 
Other cash receipts related to operating activities 
689,121,507.54 
741,693,854.55 
Subtotal of cash inflows from operating activities 
41,332,606,952.24 
39,117,632,071.50 
Cash paid for goods purchased and services received 
29,797,492,545.65 
28,680,616,058.63 
Net increase in loans and advances to customers 
 
 
Net increase in deposits with central bank and other financial 
institutions 
 
 
Cash paid for claim settlements on original insurance contract 
 
 
Net increase in placements to banks and other financial 
institutions 
 
 
Cash paid for interest, fees and commissions 
 
 
Cash paid for policy dividends 
 
 
Cash paid to and on behalf of employees 
2,585,937,678.63 
2,281,828,435.31 
Payments of all types of taxes 
2,465,312,635.54 
2,262,131,942.27 
Other cash paid relating to operating activities 
2,981,121,744.40 
2,683,645,602.72 
Subtotal of cash outflows from operating activities 
37,829,864,604.22 
35,908,222,038.93 
Net cash flows from operating activities 
3,502,742,348.02 
3,209,410,032.57 
II. Cash flows from investment activities: 
 
 
Cash received from disposal of investments 
2,558,487,934.50 
5,080,545,532.47 
Cash received from returns on investments 
436,150,493.91 
567,196,644.37 
Net cash received from disposal of fixed assets, intangible 
assets and other long-term assets 
282,170.75 
4,079,069.83 
Net cash received from disposal of subsidiaries and other 
business units 
 
20,403,838.21 
Other cash received relating to investment activities 
1,978,176,523.10 
1,170,771,170.00 
Subtotal of cash inflows from investment activities 
4,973,097,122.26 
6,842,996,254.88 
Cash paid for acquisition of fixed assets, intangible assets and 
other long-term assets 
575,507,137.90 
446,732,820.54 
Cash paid for acquisition of investments 
73,700,000.00 
11,654,869,186.44 
Net increase in pledged loans 
 
 
Net cash paid for acquisition of subsidiaries and other business 
units 
 
569,283,888.24 
Other cash paid relating to investment activities 
3,805,309,321.72 
488,193,160.70 
Subtotal of cash outflows from investment activities 
4,454,516,459.62 
13,159,079,055.92 
Net cash flows from investment activities 
518,580,662.64 
-6,316,082,801.04 
III. Cash flows from financing activities: 
 
 
Cash received from absorption of investments 
2,670,000.00 
144,736,386.38 
Including: Cash received from subsidiaries’ absorbing 
minority shareholder investment 
2,670,000.00 
86,453,260.82 
Cash received from borrowings 
1,376,188,273.49 
2,303,433,120.57 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
154 
 
Other cash received relating to financing activities 
 
 
Subtotal of cash inflows from financing activities 
1,378,858,273.49 
2,448,169,506.95 
Cash payments for settlement of debts 
1,424,233,267.77 
2,238,287,969.20 
Cash payments for distribution of dividends and profits or 
repayment of interest 
2,767,483,369.05 
2,121,590,675.38 
Including: Dividends and profits paid to minority shareholders 
by subsidiaries 
19,857,165.96 
7,179,781.75 
Other cash payments relating to financing activities 
105,183,876.26 
821,594,594.84 
Subtotal of cash outflows from financing activities 
4,296,900,513.08 
5,181,473,239.42 
Net cash flow from financing activities 
-2,918,042,239.59 
-2,733,303,732.47 
IV. Effect of foreign exchange rate changes on cash and cash 
equivalents 
2,324,684.95 
16,271,671.09 
V. Net increase in cash and cash equivalents 
1,105,605,456.02 
-5,823,704,829.85 
Plus: Opening balance of cash and cash equivalents 
13,046,160,012.47 
18,869,864,842.32 
VI. Closing balance of cash and cash equivalents 
14,151,765,468.49 
13,046,160,012.47 
6. Cash flow statement of parent company 
Unit: RMB 
Item 
2023 
2022 
I. Cash flows from operating activities: 
 
 
Cash received from sales of goods or rendering of services 
5,929,733,284.63 
5,971,394,259.14 
Receipts from tax refunds 
 
102,588.12 
Other cash receipts related to operating activities 
5,099,663,267.49 
7,591,371,481.08 
Subtotal of cash inflows from operating activities 
11,029,396,552.12 
13,562,868,328.34 
Cash paid for goods purchased and services received 
1,876,454,451.95 
2,371,484,892.90 
Cash paid to and on behalf of employees 
1,191,675,173.28 
1,193,892,284.72 
Payments of all types of taxes 
858,867,113.63 
910,654,949.88 
Other cash paid relating to operating activities 
4,152,898,161.48 
3,983,548,611.15 
Subtotal of cash outflows from operating activities 
8,079,894,900.34 
8,459,580,738.65 
Net cash flows from operating activities 
2,949,501,651.78 
5,103,287,589.69 
II. Cash flows from investment activities: 
 
 
Cash received from disposal of investments 
2,427,269,469.67 
3,765,525,425.37 
Cash received from returns on investments 
424,094,233.80 
551,710,773.52 
Net cash received from disposal of fixed assets, intangible assets 
and other long-term assets 
 
1,863,158.34 
Net cash received from disposal of subsidiaries and other business 
units 
 
40,000,000.00 
Other cash received relating to investment activities 
1,772,731,569.97 
 
Subtotal of cash inflows from investment activities 
4,624,095,273.44 
4,359,099,357.23 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
155 
 
Cash paid for acquisition of fixed assets, intangible assets and 
other long-term assets 
174,741,908.64 
171,724,018.14 
Cash paid for acquisition of investments 
108,100,000.00 
11,028,424,186.44 
Net cash paid for acquisition of subsidiaries and other business 
units 
 
 
Other cash paid relating to investment activities 
3,804,472,300.00 
450,000,000.00 
Subtotal of cash outflows from investment activities 
4,087,314,208.64 
11,650,148,204.58 
Net cash flows from investment activities 
536,781,064.80 
-7,291,048,847.35 
III. Cash flows from financing activities: 
 
 
Cash received from absorption of investments 
 
58,283,125.56 
Cash received from borrowings 
19,000,000.00 
 
Other cash received relating to financing activities 
 
 
Subtotal of cash inflows from financing activities 
19,000,000.00 
58,283,125.56 
Cash payments for settlement of debts 
 
 
Cash payments for distribution of dividends and profits or 
repayment of interest 
2,712,079,156.56 
2,052,825,115.20 
Other cash payments relating to financing activities 
2,220,005.75 
709,957,733.50 
Subtotal of cash outflows from financing activities 
2,714,299,162.31 
2,762,782,848.70 
Net cash flow from financing activities 
-2,695,299,162.31 
-2,704,499,723.14 
IV. Effect of foreign exchange rate changes on cash and cash 
equivalents 
-473,889.11 
113,384.75 
V. Net increase in cash and cash equivalents 
790,509,665.16 
-4,892,147,596.05 
Plus: Opening balance of cash and cash equivalents 
10,750,790,137.56 
15,642,937,733.61 
VI. Closing balance of cash and cash equivalents 
11,541,299,802.72 
10,750,790,137.56 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
156 
 
7. Consolidated statement of changes in owners’ equity 
Amount for the current period 
Unit: RMB 
Item 
2023 
Owner’s equity attributable to parent company 
Minority 
interests 
Total owners’ 
equity 
Share capital 
Other equity instruments 
Capital reserves 
Less: Treasury 
stock 
Other 
comprehensive 
income 
Special 
reserves 
Surplus reserves 
Provision 
for 
general 
risk 
Undisturbed 
profits 
Others 
Subtotal 
Preferred 
shares 
Perpetual 
bonds 
Others 
I. Closing balance of 
the previous year 
1,796,862,549.00 
 
 
 
18,231,423,838.72 
707,428,892.15 
-68,087,650.95 
 
2,530,458,968.58 
 
16,720,444,918.66 
 
38,503,673,731.86 
23,323,529.93 
38,526,997,261.79 
Plus: Changes in 
accounting policies 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Correction of 
errors in the prior 
period 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Others 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
II. Opening balance of 
the current period 
1,796,862,549.00 
 
 
 
18,231,423,838.72 
707,428,892.15 
-68,087,650.95 
 
2,530,458,968.58 
 
16,720,444,918.66 
 
38,503,673,731.86 
23,323,529.93 
38,526,997,261.79 
III. Increase/decrease 
for the period (decrease 
is indicated with “-”)  
 
 
 
 
15,195,903.37 
 
-21,450,521.18 
 
 
 
1,381,702,917.46 
 
1,375,448,299.65 
2,914,820.78 
1,378,363,120.43 
(I) Total 
comprehensive 
income 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-21,450,521.18 
 
 
 
4,093,782,074.02 
 
4,072,331,552.84 
28,381,721.87 
4,100,713,274.71 
(II) Contribution and 
withdrawal of capital 
by owners 
 
 
 
 
-3,648,728.86 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-3,648,728.86 
-8,532,477.14 
-12,181,206.00 
1．Ordinary shares 
invested by owners 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-2,230,000.00 
-2,230,000.00 
2．Capital invested by 
holders of other equity 
instruments 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3．Amount of share 
payment credited to 
owners’ equity 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
157 
 
4．Others 
 
 
 
 
-3,648,728.86 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-3,648,728.86 
-6,302,477.14 
-9,951,206.00 
(III) Profit distribution 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-2,712,079,156.56 
 
-2,712,079,156.56 
-16,934,423.95 
-2,729,013,580.51 
1．Withdrawal of 
surplus reserves 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2．Withdrawal of 
general risk provision 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3．Distribution to 
owners (or 
shareholders)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-2,712,079,156.56 
 
-2,712,079,156.56 
-16,934,423.95 
-2,729,013,580.51 
4．Others 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(IV) Internal carry-
over of owner’s equity 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1．Transfer of capital 
reserves to capital (or 
share capital)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2．Transfer of surplus 
reserves to capital (or 
share capital)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3．Covering loss with 
surplus reserves 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4．Change of defined 
benefit plan carried 
forward to retained 
earnings 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5．Other 
comprehensive 
income carried 
forward to retained 
earnings 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6．Others 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(V) Special reserves 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1．Provision for the 
period 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2．Utilization for the 
period 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(VI) Others 
 
 
 
 
18,844,632.23 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
18,844,632.23 
 
18,844,632.23 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
158 
 
IV. Closing balance 
for the period 
1,796,862,549.00 
 
 
 
18,246,619,742.09 
707,428,892.15 
-89,538,172.13 
 
2,530,458,968.58 
 
18,102,147,836.12 
 
39,879,122,031.51 
26,238,350.71 
39,905,360,382.22 
 
Amount for the previous year 
Unit: RMB 
Item 
2022 
Owner’s equity attributable to parent company 
Minority 
interests 
Total owners’ 
equity 
Share capital 
Other equity instruments 
Capital reserves 
Less: Treasury 
stock 
Other 
comprehensi
ve income 
Special 
reserves 
Surplus 
reserves 
Provision 
for 
general 
risk 
Undisturbed  
profits 
Others 
Subtotal 
Preferred 
shares 
Perpetual 
bonds 
Others 
I. Closing balance 
of the previous 
year 
1,282,715,242.00 
 
 
 
18,126,393,630.22 
 
2,513,802.65 
 
2,530,458,968.58 
 
16,285,350,424.41 
 
38,227,432,067.86 
207,710,297.10 
38,435,142,364.96 
Plus: Changes 
in accounting 
policies 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Correctio
n of errors in the 
prior period 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Others 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
II. Opening balance 
of the current 
period 
1,282,715,242.00 
 
 
 
18,126,393,630.22 
 
2,513,802.65 
 
2,530,458,968.58 
 
16,285,350,424.41 
 
38,227,432,067.86 
207,710,297.10 
38,435,142,364.96 
III. 
Increase/decrease 
for the period 
(decrease is 
indicated with “-”)  
514,147,307.00 
 
 
 
105,030,208.50 
707,428,892.15 
-70,601,453.60 
 
 
 
435,094,494.25 
 
276,241,664.00 
-184,386,767.17 
91,854,896.83 
(I) Total 
comprehensive 
income 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-70,601,453.60 
 
 
 
3,001,125,887.45 
 
2,930,524,433.85 
-171,527,175.95 
2,758,997,257.90 
(II) Contribution 
and withdrawal of 
capital by owners 
514,147,307.00 
 
 
 
131,299,489.88 
707,428,892.15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-61,982,095.27 
17,527,623.88 
-44,454,471.39 
1. Ordinary shares 
invested by owners 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
17,527,623.88 
17,527,623.88 
2. Capital invested 
by holders of other 
equity instruments 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3. Amount of share 
514,147,307.00 
 
 
 
54,468,696.05 
707,428,892.15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-138,812,889.10 
 
-138,812,889.10 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
159 
 
payment credited to 
owners’ equity 
4. Others 
 
 
 
 
76,830,793.83 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
76,830,793.83 
 
76,830,793.83 
(III) Profit 
distribution 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-2,566,031,393.20 
 
-2,566,031,393.20 
-8,896,212.33 
-2,574,927,605.53 
1. Withdrawal of 
surplus reserves 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2. Withdrawal of 
general risk 
provision 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3. Distribution to 
owners (or 
shareholders)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-2,566,031,393.20 
 
-2,566,031,393.20 
-8,896,212.33 
-2,574,927,605.53 
4. Others 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(IV) Internal carry-
over of owner’s 
equity 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1. Transfer of 
capital reserves to 
capital (or share 
capital)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2. Transfer of 
surplus reserves to 
capital (or share 
capital)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3. Covering loss 
with surplus 
reserves 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4. Change of 
defined benefit plan 
carried forward to 
retained earnings 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5. Other 
comprehensive 
income carried 
forward to retained 
earnings 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6. Others 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(V) Special 
reserves 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1. Provision for the 
period 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2. Utilization for 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
160 
 
the period 
VI) Others 
 
 
 
 
-26,269,281.38 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-26,269,281.38 
-21,491,002.77 
-47,760,284.15 
IV. Closing 
balance for the 
period 
1,796,862,549.00 
 
 
 
18,231,423,838.72 
707,428,892.15 
-68,087,650.95 
 
2,530,458,968.58 
 
16,720,444,918.66 
 
38,503,673,731.86 
23,323,529.93 
38,526,997,261.79 
8. Statement of changes in owners’ equity of parent company 
Amount for the current period 
Unit: RMB 
Item 
2023 
Share capital 
Other equity instruments 
Capital reserves 
Less: Treasury 
stock 
Other 
comprehensive 
income 
Special 
reserves 
Surplus reserves 
Undisturbed profits 
Others 
Total owners’ equity 
Preferred 
shares 
Perpetual 
bonds 
Others 
I. Closing balance of 
the previous year 
1,796,862,549.00 
 
 
 
18,430,166,434.80 
707,428,892.15 
-32,221,472.36 
 
2,529,297,618.08 
5,050,873,408.22 
 
27,067,549,645.59 
Plus: Changes in 
accounting policies 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Correction 
of errors in the prior 
period 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Others 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
II. Opening balance 
of the current period 
1,796,862,549.00 
 
 
 
18,430,166,434.80 
707,428,892.15 
-32,221,472.36 
 
2,529,297,618.08 
5,050,873,408.22 
 
27,067,549,645.59 
III. Increase/decrease 
for the period 
(decrease is indicated 
with “-”)  
 
 
 
 
18,844,632.23 
 
-22,425,249.10 
 
 
-1,300,367,825.74 
 
-1,303,948,442.61 
(I) Total 
comprehensive 
income 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-22,425,249.10 
 
 
1,411,711,330.82 
 
1,389,286,081.72 
(II) Contribution and 
withdrawal of capital 
by owners 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1. Ordinary shares 
invested by owners 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
161 
 
2. Capital invested by 
holders of other 
equity instruments 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3. Amount of share 
payment credited to 
owners’ equity 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4. Others 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(III) Profit 
distribution 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-2,712,079,156.56 
 
-2,712,079,156.56 
1. Withdrawal of 
surplus reserves 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2. Distribution to 
owners (or 
shareholders)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-2,712,079,156.56 
 
-2,712,079,156.56 
3. Others 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(IV) Internal carry-
over of owner’s 
equity 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1. Transfer of capital 
reserves to capital (or 
share capital)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2. Transfer of surplus 
reserves to capital (or 
share capital)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3. Covering loss with 
surplus reserves 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4. Change of defined 
benefit plan carried 
forward to retained 
earnings 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5. Other 
comprehensive 
income carried 
forward to retained 
earnings 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6. Others 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(V) Special reserves 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1. Provision for the 
period 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
162 
 
Amount for the previous year 
Unit: RMB 
2. Utilization for the 
period 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(VI) Others 
 
 
 
 
18,844,632.23 
 
 
 
 
 
 
18,844,632.23 
IV. Closing balance 
for the period 
1,796,862,549.00 
 
 
 
18,449,011,067.03 
707,428,892.15 
-54,646,721.46 
 
2,529,297,618.08 
3,750,505,582.48 
 
25,763,601,202.98 
Item 
2022 
Share capital 
Other equity instruments 
Capital reserves 
Less: Treasury 
stock 
Other 
comprehensive 
income 
Special 
reserves 
Surplus reserves 
Undisturbed profits 
Others 
Total owners’ equity 
Preferred 
shares 
Perpetual 
bonds 
Others 
I. Closing balance of 
the previous year 
1,282,715,242.00 
 
 
 
18,401,967,020.13 
 
1,601,232.51 
 
2,529,297,618.08 
5,723,570,079.01 
 
27,939,151,191.73 
Plus: Changes in 
accounting policies 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Correction 
of errors in the prior 
period 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Others 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
II. Opening balance 
of the current period 
1,282,715,242.00 
 
 
 
18,401,967,020.13 
 
1,601,232.51 
 
2,529,297,618.08 
5,723,570,079.01 
 
27,939,151,191.73 
III. Increase/decrease 
for the period 
(decrease is indicated 
with “-”)  
514,147,307.00 
 
 
 
28,199,414.67 
707,428,892.15 
-33,822,704.87 
 
 
-672,696,670.79 
 
-871,601,546.14 
(I) Total 
comprehensive 
income 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-33,822,704.87 
 
 
1,893,334,722.41 
 
1,859,512,017.54 
(II) Contribution and 
withdrawal of capital 
by owners 
514,147,307.00 
 
 
 
54,468,696.05 
707,428,892.15 
 
 
 
 
 
-138,812,889.10 
1. Ordinary shares 
invested by owners 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2. Capital invested by 
holders of other 
equity instruments 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3. Amount of share 
payment credited to 
514,147,307.00 
 
 
 
54,468,696.05 
707,428,892.15 
 
 
 
 
 
-138,812,889.10 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
163 
 
 
owners’ equity 
4. Others 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(III) Profit 
distribution 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-2,566,031,393.20 
 
-2,566,031,393.20 
1. Withdrawal of 
surplus reserves 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2. Distribution to 
owners (or 
shareholders)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-2,566,031,393.20 
 
-2,566,031,393.20 
3. Others 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(IV) Internal carry-
over of owner’s 
equity 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1. Transfer of capital 
reserves to capital (or 
share capital)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2. Transfer of surplus 
reserves to capital (or 
share capital)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3. Covering loss with 
surplus reserves 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4. Change of defined 
benefit plan carried 
forward to retained 
earnings 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5. Other 
comprehensive 
income carried 
forward to retained 
earnings 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6. Others 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(V) Special reserves 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1. Provision for the 
period 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2. Utilization for the 
period 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(VI) Others 
 
 
 
 
-26,269,281.38 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-26,269,281.38 
IV. Closing balance 
for the period 
1,796,862,549.00 
 
 
 
18,430,166,434.80 
707,428,892.15 
-32,221,472.36 
 
2,529,297,618.08 
5,050,873,408.22 
 
27,067,549,645.59 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
164 
 
III. Basic Information of the Company 
1. Place of registration, form of organization and address of headquarters of the Company 
The registered address of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd is No.3686 Yunnan Baiyao Street, Chenggong 
District, Kunming, Yunnan Province. The Company is established as a joint-stock limited company with its head 
office located at No.3686 Yunnan Baiyao Street, Chenggong District, Kunming, Yunnan Province. 
2. History of the Company 
The Company was formerly known as Yunnan Baiyao Factory, which was established in June 1971. On May 
3, 1993, Yunnan Provincial System Reform Committee approved the establishment of Yunnan Baiyao Industrial 
Co., Ltd in the Document Yun Ti Gai [1993] No.48. The Company’s sponsors were Yunnan Baiyao Factory, 
Yunnan Fudian Trust and Investment Company and Lianjiang International Trade Co., Ltd. On June 18, 1993, 
the Economic System Reform Commission and the Planning Commission of Yunnan Province jointly issued the 
Document Yun Ti Gai [1993] No.74 to approve the Company’s public offering of RMB 20 million of individual 
shares (in the par value of the shares). On June 24, 1993, the Administration of State-owned Assets of Yunnan 
Province issued the Document Yun Guo Zi Zi (1993) No.37 to confirm the appraisal results of Yunnan Baiyao 
Factory and decided to set up RMB 40 million of national capital stock, amounting to 40 million shares. Yunnan 
Baiyao Industrial Co., Ltd was approved by CSRC under the Document Zheng Jian Fa Shen Zi (1993) No.55 to 
issue 20 million RMB-denominated ordinary shares to the public. Yunnan Baiyao issued 20 million shares to the 
public in November 1993, of which 18 million shares were issued to the public individuals and 2 million shares 
to the Company’s internal employees. 
On November 30, 1993, the Company was registered as a joint-stock limited company with the 
Administration for Industry and Commerce of Yunnan Province, and on December 15, 1993, the public shares 
issued by the Company were listed on the Shenzhen Stock Exchange, with a total share capital of 80 million 
shares and a stock code of “000538.” 
In accordance with the resolutions passed at the third Extraordinary General Meeting of the fifth Board of 
Directors of the Company in 2008 on August 11, 2008, and at the first Extraordinary General Meeting of the 
Company in 2008 on August 27, 2008, and the approval by the CSRC on the Document (2008) No.1411 Reply on 
Approving the Private Issuance of Shares of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd, the Company issued 50,000,000 new 
shares to Ping An Life Insurance Company of China Limited in a private offering, raising funds of RMB 
1,393,500,000.00 (including issuance expenses), all of which were subscribed in cash. The share capital of the 
Company increased from 484,051,138 shares to 534,051,138 shares after the implementation of the above 
private offerings. 
In accordance with the 2009 Annual Equity Distribution Plan approved at the General Meeting of the Company 
in May 2010, 3 shares were issued to all shareholders from the capital reserve as a bonus for every 10 shares held. 
The Company’s share capital amounted to 534,051,138 shares prior to the distribution, and the total share capital 
increased to 694,266,479 shares after the distribution. 
The 2013 Annual General Meeting was held on May 8, 2014, and in accordance with the resolution of the 
meeting and the amended articles of association, the shareholders of the Company increased the registered capital 
by RMB 347,133,239.00. The newly registered capital would be increased by the distribution of 5 bonus shares for 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
165 
 
every 10 shares to all shareholders based on the Company’s existing total share capital of 694,266,479 shares. After 
the change, the share capital of the Company increased from 694,266,479 shares to 1,041,399,718 shares. 
The Company underwent a merger and overall listing with Baiyao Holdings by issuing shares to three 
shareholders of Baiyao Holdings: SASAC of Yunnan Province, New Huadu and Jiangsu Yuyue. This merger and 
overall listing were successfully completed on June 1, 2019, with the Company as the existing entity. As a result, 
the Company acquired all the assets, liabilities, businesses, contracts, and other rights and obligations of Baiyao 
Holdings. Following the completion of the transaction, the 432,426,597 shares of the listed company previously 
held by Baiyao Holdings were canceled. The merger and overall listing brought in a newly registered capital of 
RMB 236,003,599.00, and the Company’s total share capital amounted to RMB 1,277,403,317.00 after this change. 
A total of 236,003,599 newly issued shares subject to trading moratorium were issued, with a listing date of July 3, 
2019, and the shares were listed on the Shenzhen Stock Exchange. Upon completion of this transaction, SASAC of 
Yunnan Province and New Huadu with its acting-in-concert parties, were equally the largest shareholder of the 
Company, and neither of them obtained control over the Company. 
On May 22, 2020, SASAC of Yunnan Province transferred its 321,160,222 shares of the Company to Yunnan 
State-owned Equity Operation Management Company at nil consideration. Upon completion of this transfer, 
Yunnan State-owned Equity Operation Management Company and New Huadu with its acting-in-concert parties, 
were equally the largest shareholder of the Company, and there was no change in the Company’s situation of not 
having a de facto controller or controlling shareholder. 
On December 8, 2021, SASAC of Yunnan Province transferred 100% of its shares of Yunnan State-owned 
Equity Operation Management Company into Yunnan Investment Group. After the equity transfer, Yunnan 
Investment Group held 321,160,222 shares of the Company through the Yunnan State-owned Equity Operation 
Management Company, accounting for 25.04% of the total share capital of the Company. Yunnan State-owned 
Equity Operation Management Company and New Huadu with its acting-in-concert parties, were equally the largest 
shareholder of the Company, and there was no change in the Company’s situation of not having a de facto controller 
or controlling shareholder. 
On April 20, 2022, the Company’s 2021 Annual Equity Distribution Plan had been considered and approved 
at the Company’s 2021 Annual General Meeting, and the details of 2021 Annual Equity Distribution Plan were as 
follows: Based on the total share capital on the equity registration date when the distribution plan was implemented 
in the future, a cash dividend of RMB 16.00 (including tax) for every 10 shares and 4.00 bonus shares (including 
tax) for every 10 shares would be distributed to all shareholders, and there would be no conversion of share capital 
from the capital reserve. On April 21, 2020, the fourth session of the Ninth Board of Directors of the Company for 
2020 and the third session of the Ninth Supervisory Committee of the Company for 2020 respectively considered 
and approved the Proposal on Granting Stock Options (Initially Granted Part) to Incentive Participants of the 2020 
Equity Incentive Plan. As of December 31, 2022, the Company had completed distributing dividends of 
513,206,278 shares and stock exercises of 941,029 shares, increasing its share capital to 1,796,862,549 shares. 
3. Business nature and principal businesses of the Company 
The business nature and operating activities of the Company and its subsidiaries (collectively referred to as 
the “Group”) mainly include: R&D, manufacturing, and sales of chemical APIs, chemical preparations, Chinese 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
166 
 
patent medicines, TCM materials, biological products, medical devices, healthcare food, food, beverages, special 
labor protection products, non-household textile products, daily chemical products, cosmetics, outdoor products; 
Sales of rubber pastes, plasters, disinfectant products, electronic and digital products; Information technology, 
science and technology and economic and technological consulting services; Import and export of goods; Property 
operation and management (carrying out business activities with qualification certificates), wholesale and retail of 
drugs, logistics and distribution, etc (For items that require approval according to law, business activities of these 
projects can only be carried out after approval by relevant departments). 
4. These financial statements were approved for reporting by a resolution of the Board of Directors of the 
Company dated March 28, 2024. 
As of December 31, 2023, there were 107 subsidiaries and structured entities included in the scope of the 
Group’s consolidated financial statements. For details, please refer to Note IX “Interest in Other Entities.” The 
Group had 21 new entities included in its consolidated financial statements compared to the end of the previous 
year, while 11 entities were excluded. For details, please refer to Note VIII “Changes in Consolidation Scope.” 
IV. Basis for Preparation of Financial Statements 
1. Basis for preparation 
The financial statements of the Group are prepared on the basis of going concern assumptions, based on actual 
transactions and events that occur and in accordance with the Accounting Standards for Business Enterprises - Basic 
Standards issued by the Ministry of Finance (issued by Decree No. 33 of the Ministry of Finance, revised by Decree 
No. 76 of the Ministry of Finance), 41 specific accounting standards, Guidelines for the Application of Accounting 
Standards for Business Enterprises, interpretations of Accounting Standards for Business Enterprises and other 
relevant provisions promulgated and revised on and after February 15, 2006 (collectively “Accounting Standards 
for Business Enterprises” or “ASBEs”), as well the disclosure provisions  of the Rules No.15 for Governing the 
Disclosure of Information by Companies Issuing Public Securities - General Provisions for Financial Reporting 
(Revised in 2014) issued by CSRC. 
In accordance with the relevant provisions of the Accounting Standards for Business Enterprises, the Group’s 
accounting is based on the accrual basis. Except for certain financial instruments, these financial statements are 
prepared at historical cost. In case of asset impairment, provision for impairment would be made according to the 
relevant regulations. 
2. Going concern basis 
The Company and the Group evaluated their abilities to continue as a going concern for the 12 months from 
the end of the reporting period and there are no material matters affecting their abilities to continue as a going 
concern. 
V．Significant Accounting Policies and Accounting Estimates 
Notes on specific accounting policies and accounting estimates: 
Based on the actual production and operation characteristics and in accordance with the provisions of relevant 
accounting standards for enterprises, the Group has formulated a number of specific accounting policies and 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
167 
 
accounting estimates for transactions and matters such as revenue recognition and R&D expenses. For details, see 
the descriptions under Section 37 “Revenue” under this Note V. For the descriptions of significant accounting 
judgments and estimates made by the management, please refer to Section 43 “Significant Accounting Judgments 
and Accounting Estimates” under this Note V. 
1. Statement of compliance with the ASBEs 
The financial statements prepared by the Company are in compliance with the requirements of the Accounting 
Standards for Business Enterprises (ASBEs), and have reflected truly and completely such relevant information as 
the financial positions of the Company and the Group as of December 31, 2023 as well as the business results and 
cash flows of the Company and the Group for 2023. In addition, all significant aspects of the financial statements 
of the Company and the Group also comply with the disclosure requirements about the financial statements and 
their notes in the Rules No.15 for Governing the Disclosure of Information by Companies Issuing Public Securities 
- General Provisions for Financial Reporting as amended by the CSRC in 2023. 
2. Accounting period 
The Group’s accounting periods are divided into annual and interim periods. An interim period refers to a 
reporting period less than a full accounting year. The accounting year of the Group is the calendar year that starts 
from January 1 and ends on December 31. 
3. Operating cycle 
The normal operating cycle refers to the period from purchasing the assets for processing to realizing the cash 
or cash equivalents. The operating cycle of the Group consists of 12 months which is the standard of the 
classification for the liquidity of the assets and liabilities. 
4. Reporting currency 
RMB is the currency used in the major economic environment where the Company and its domestic 
subsidiaries operate. The reporting currency of the Company and its domestic subsidiaries is RMB. The Company’s 
foreign subsidiaries select HKD as their reporting currencies based on the currency of the primary economic 
environment in which they operate. The currency used by the Group in preparing the financial statements is RMB. 
5. Determination method and selection basis of materiality standards 
Applicable  
□Not applicable 
Item 
Materiality standards 
Significant accounts receivable, bad debt provisions to be 
recovered or reversed 
The single provision amount accounts for more than 10% of the 
total amount of bad debt provision for various types of receivables 
and the amount is greater than RMB 5 million. 
Actual write-off of significant receivables  
The value of a single item is greater than RMB 5 million 
Significant construction in progress 
Projects with budgets exceeding RMB 50 million or deemed to be 
of significance. 
Significant advance receipts 
The amount of a single advance receipt with an age of more than 1 
year is greater than RMB 5 million 
Significant contract liabilities 
A single contractual liability with an age of more than 1 year 
accounts for more than 10% of the total contractual liabilities and 
the amount is greater than RMB 100 million 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
168 
 
 
6. Accounting treatment for business combination under common control and not under common control 
A business combination refers to the transaction or matter in which one reporting subject formed due to the 
combination of two or above separate entities. A business combination can be classified as the combination under 
common control and not under common control. 
(1) Business combination under common control 
A business combination under common control is a business combination in which all of the combining entities 
are ultimately controlled by the same party or parties both before and after the combination, and that control is not 
transitory. For a business combination under common control, the party that obtains the control of the other parties 
on the combination date is the acquirer, and other parties involving in the business combination are the acquirees. 
The combination date is the date on which the acquirer effectively obtains the control of the acquirees. 
Assets and liabilities that are obtained by the acquirer in a business combination shall be measured at their 
book value at the combination date as recorded by the acquirees. The difference between the book value of the net 
assets obtained and the book value of the consideration paid by the acquirer for the combination (or the aggregate 
par value of the issued shares) shall be adjusted to share premium under capital reserve (or capital premium). If the 
share premium under capital reserve (or capital premium) is not sufficient to absorb the difference, any excess shall 
be adjusted against retained earnings. 
Expenses that are directly attributable to the business combination by the acquirer are charged to the current 
profits and losses in which they are incurred. 
(2) Business combination not under common control 
Significant accounts payable aged over one year or overdue 
The amount of a single account payable is greater than RMB 5 
million 
Significant other payables aged over one year or overdue 
The amount of a single item is greater than RMB 5 million 
Significant dividends payable outstanding for over one year 
The amount of a single item is greater than RMB 100 million 
Receipts and payments of significant cash related to investment 
activities 
The amount of a single item is greater than RMB 100 million 
Significant offshore operating entity  
The net assets of the economic entity exceed RMB 100 million 
Significant structured entity 
The net assets of the structured entity exceed RMB 2 million 
Significant non-wholly-owned subsidiaries 
The net assets of the subsidiary exceed RMB 100 million 
Significant capitalized R&D projects 
The year-end balance of a single project exceeds RMB 50 million 
Significant outsourced project under research 
The amount of a single project accounts for more than 20% of the 
total R&D investment  
Significant investment activities 
A single investment activity accounts for more than 10% of the 
total cash inflow or outflow related to the investment activities and 
the amount is greater than RMB 1 billion 
Significant joint ventures or associates 
The book value of long-term equity investment in a single investee 
account for more than 5% of the Group’s net assets and the amount 
is greater than RMB 1 billion, or the investment profit and loss 
under the long-term equity investment equity method accounts for 
more than 10% of the Group’s consolidated net profit 
Significant subsidiaries 
The net assets of the subsidiary account for more than 10% of the 
Group’s net assets, or the net profits of subsidiary account for more 
than 10% of the Group’s consolidated profits, and the subsidiaries 
with significant strategic position 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
169 
 
A business combination not under common control is a business combination in which all of the combining 
entities are not ultimately controlled by the same party or parties both before and after the combination. For a 
business combination not under common control, the party that obtains the control of the other parties on the 
acquisition date is the acquirer; other parties involving in the business combination are the acquirees. The acquisition 
date is the date on which the acquirer effectively obtains control of the acquirees. 
For a business combination not under common control, the cost of business combination is the fair value of 
assets paid, liabilities incurred or undertaken, and equity securities issued by the acquirer for obtaining the control 
of the acquirees at the acquisition date. Expenses that are attributable to the business combination such as audit fees, 
legal services fees, consultancy fees and other administration expenses incurred by the Company as acquirer are 
expensed in the current profits and losses in which they are incurred. Transaction fees of equity securities or debt 
securities issued by the acquirer as consideration for a business combination are included in the initially recognized 
amount of equity securities or debt securities. Contingent consideration involved is recorded as the combination cost 
at its fair value on the acquisition date. Should any new or further evidence in relation to the circumstances existing 
on the acquisition date arise within 12 months after the acquisition date, making it necessary to adjust the contingent 
consideration, the goodwill arising from the business combination shall be adjusted accordingly. The cost of 
combination incurred and identifiable net assets obtained by the acquirer in a business combination are measured at 
fair value on the acquisition date. Where the cost of the combination exceeds the acquirer’s interest in the fair value 
of the acquiree’s identifiable net assets on the acquisition date, the difference is recognized as goodwill; Where the 
cost of combination is lower than the acquirer’s interest in the fair value of the acquiree’s identifiable net assets on 
the acquisition date, the difference is recognized in current profits and losses after a review of measurement for the 
fair value of identifiable assets, liabilities and contingent liabilities of the acquiree and the combination cost. 
In relation to the deductible temporary difference acquired from the acquiree, which was not recognized as 
deferred tax assets due to non-fulfillment of the recognition criteria at the date of the acquisition, if new or further 
information that is obtained within 12 months after the acquisition date indicates that related conditions at the 
acquisition date already existed, and that the realization of the economic benefits brought by the deductible 
temporary difference of the acquiree on the acquisition date can be expected, the relevant deferred tax assets shall 
be recognized and goodwill shall be deducted accordingly. When the amount of goodwill is less than the deferred 
tax assets that shall be recognized, the difference shall be recognized in the current profits and losses. Except for the 
above circumstances, deferred tax assets in relation to business combination are recognized in the current profits 
and losses. 
For a business combination involving entities not under common control that is achieved in stages, the 
Company shall determine whether the business combination shall be treated as “a bundle of transactions” in 
accordance with the determination standards as contained in the Circular on the Publishment of Interpretation No.5 
on Accounting Standards for Business Enterprises Issued by the Ministry of Finance (Finance and Taxation [2012] 
No. 19) and Section 51 of Accounting Standards for Business Enterprises No.33 - Consolidated Financial 
Statements (See Item (2) of Section 6 “Preparation of the consolidated financial statements” under this Note V). 
Where the business combination is treated as “a bundle of transactions,” the business combination shall be accounted 
for in accordance with the previous paragraphs and Section 22 “Long-term equity investments” of this Note V; 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
170 
 
where the business combination does not fall within “a bundle of transactions,” the business combination in the 
Company’s and the consolidated financial statements shall be accounted for as follows: 
In the Company’s financial statements, the initial cost of the investment shall be the sum of the book value of 
equity investment held in the acquiree prior to the acquisition date and the amount of additional investment made to 
the acquiree at the acquisition date. Other comprehensive income relating to the equity interest held in the acquiree 
prior to the acquisition date shall be, upon disposal of the investment, accounted for in accordance with the same 
basis as that the acquiree adopts in directly disposing of relevant assets or liabilities. 
In the consolidated financial statements, the equity interest held in the acquiree prior to the acquisition date is 
re-measured according to its fair value at the acquisition date; the difference between the fair value and the book 
value is recognized as investment income for the current period. Other comprehensive income relating to the equity 
interest held in the acquiree prior to the acquisition date shall be accounted for in accordance with the same basis as 
that the acquiree adopts in directly disposing of relevant assets or liabilities. 
7. Judgement criteria of control and preparation of consolidated financial statements 
(1) Criteria for the recognition of scope of consolidated financial statements 
The scope of consolidation shall be determined based on the concept of control. Control means that the Group 
has power over the investee, enjoys variable returns through its participation in the investee’s related activities, and 
has the ability to use its power over the investee to influence the amount of its returns. The consolidated financial 
statements comprise the financial statements of the Company and all of its subsidiaries, which are defined as those 
entities controlled by the Group. 
Once any change in the facts and circumstances arises which leads to a change in the elements involved in the 
definition of control, the Group will conduct an assessment. 
(2) Preparation of consolidated financial statements 
Subsidiaries are consolidated from the date on which the Group obtains their net assets and actual control over 
their operating decisions, and are deconsolidated from the date when such control ceases. For subsidiaries being 
disposed of, the business results and cash flows prior to the date of disposal are duly included in the consolidated 
income statement and consolidated cash flow statement; for subsidiaries disposed of during the period, the opening 
balances of the consolidated balance sheet would not be restated. For subsidiaries acquired from a business 
combination not under common control, their operating results and cash flows subsequent to the acquisition date 
are included in the consolidated income statement and consolidated cash flow statement, and the opening balances 
and comparative figures in the consolidated financial statements would not be restated. For subsidiaries acquired 
from a business combination under common control and acquirees from a merger by absorption, their operating 
results and cash flows from the date of commencement of the period in which the combination occurred to the date 
of combination are included in the consolidated income statement and consolidated cash flow statement, and the 
comparative figures in the consolidated financial statements would be restated. 
In preparing the consolidated financial statements, where the accounting policies or the accounting periods are 
inconsistent between the Company and subsidiaries, the financial statements of subsidiaries are adjusted in 
accordance with the accounting policies and accounting period of the Company. For subsidiaries acquired from a 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
171 
 
business combination involving enterprises not under common control, the financial statements of the subsidiaries 
are adjusted based on the fair value of the identifiable net assets at the acquisition date. 
All significant intra-group balances, transactions and unrealized profits are offset in preparing the consolidated 
financial statements. 
The portion of a subsidiary’s equity and the portion of a subsidiary’s net profits and losses for the period not 
attributable to the Company are recognized as minority interests and profits and losses attributable to minority 
interests respectively, which are presented under shareholders’ equity and net profit separately, in the consolidated 
financial statement. A subsidiary’s net current profits and losses attributable to minority interests is recognized as 
“share of profits and losses of minority interests” under net profit in the consolidated income statement. When the 
amount of a subsidiary’s loss attributable to the minority shareholders exceeds the minority shareholders’ share of 
the opening balance of shareholders’ equity of the subsidiary, the excess is deducted from the minority interests. 
In event of loss of control over a former subsidiary due to disposal of certain equity investments or other reasons, 
any retained equity is re-measured at its fair value on the date when the control is lost. The surplus of the aggregate 
considerations received upon disposal of equity plus the fair value of any retained equity less the share of net assets 
in the former subsidiary calculated cumulatively from the acquisition date based on the original shareholding 
percentage is included in the investment income for the period when the control is lost. Other comprehensive income 
related to the equity investment in the former subsidiary shall be accounted for on the same basis at the time of loss 
of control as the subsidiary directly disposed of the related asset or liability. Then, the remaining equity shall be 
measured subsequently in accordance with the Accounting Standards for Business Enterprises No. 2 - Long-term 
Equity Investments or Accounting Standards for Business Enterprises No. 22 - The Recognition and Measurement 
of Financial Instruments and other regulations. For details, please see Section 22 “Long-term equity investments” 
or Section 11 “Financial instruments” under this Note V. 
For disposal of the Group’s equity investments in a subsidiary in phases through multiple transactions until 
loss of control, it is determined based on whether such transactions should be regarded as a bundle of transactions. 
If the terms, conditions and economic effects of all transactions are conducted for the purpose of disposing of the 
equity investments in a subsidiary and meet the following one or more criteria, it is usually shown that such multiple 
transactions are deemed as a bundle of transactions for accounting treatment: ① These transactions were entered 
into at the same time or upon the consideration of the effects therebetween; ② These transactions can only generate 
one complete business result when conducted all together; ③ The occurrence of one transaction depends on the 
occurrence of at least one other transaction; and ④ One transaction alone is not economical, but is economical 
when considered with other transactions. When the transactions do not constitute a bundle of transactions, each 
transaction thereof shall be accounted in accordance with principles applicable to the “disposal of part of long-term 
equity investments in a subsidiary that does not result in the loss of control” (please see Item (2) ④ of Section 22 
“Long-term equity investments” under this Note V for details) and “loss of control over a former subsidiary due to 
disposal of certain equity investments or other reasons” (please see the preceding paragraph for details). If such 
transactions fall under a bundle of transactions, those transactions are accounted for as one deal under which the 
subsidiary is disposed of and control is lost. However, before the control over the subsidiary is lost, the surplus 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
172 
 
between consideration received for each disposal and the value of corresponding share of net assets in the subsidiary 
entitled by the investment underlying the disposal shall be recognized as other comprehensive income in the 
consolidated financial statements, and, when control is lost, converted into investment income or loss for the period 
in which control is lost. 
8. Classification of joint venture arrangements and accounting treatment method for joint operations 
Joint venture arrangement means an arrangement under the common control of two or more parties. The Group 
classifies the joint venture arrangement into joint operations and joint ventures based on the rights and obligations 
it enjoys and assumes in the joint venture arrangement. Joint operation means a joint venture arrangement in which 
the Group owns the assets and assumes the liabilities associated with the arrangement. Joint venture means a joint 
venture arrangement in which the Group only has rights to the net assets of the arrangement. 
The Group’s investments in joint ventures are accounted for using the equity method and are treated in 
accordance with the accounting policies described in Item (2) ② “Long-term equity investments accounted for 
using the equity method” in Section 22 “Long-term equity investments” under this Note V. 
For the joint operations, the Group, as a joint venture party, recognizes the assets and liabilities separately held 
by the Group, as well as the assets and liabilities jointly held by the Group in accordance with the Group’s share; 
recognizes the income arising from the disposal of the Group’s share of joint operation output; recognizes the income 
from the sale of outputs from joint operations based on the Group’s share; and recognizes the expenses incurred by 
the Group alone and the expenses incurred based on the Group’s share in the joint operation. 
When the Group, as a joint venture party, invests in or sells assets to the joint venture (which do not constitute 
a business, the same below), or purchases assets from the joint operation, the Group recognizes only those portions 
of the profits and losses arising from the transaction that are attributable to other participants in the joint operation, 
prior to the sale of such assets to a third party. In the event that such assets incur asset impairment losses in 
accordance with the provisions of Accounting Standard for Enterprises No. 8 - Asset Impairment, the Group will 
fully recognize such losses if the assets are invested or sold by the Group to the joint operation; In the case of assets 
purchased by the Group from the joint operation, the Group will recognize such losses on the basis of its share of 
commitment. 
9. Determination standards for cash and cash equivalents 
Cash and cash equivalents of the Group include the cash on hand, deposits that can be used for payment at any 
time, the investments that are held for a short period of time (generally maturing within three months from the date 
of purchase) which are highly liquid, easily convertible to known amounts of cash, and having minimal risk of 
changes in value. 
10. Foreign currency business and foreign currency statement translation 
The method for determining the conversion exchange rate in foreign currency transactions 
Upon initial recognition, the foreign currency transactions of the Group are converted into the amount of 
reporting currency according to the spot exchange rate of the trading day (usually referring to the median price of 
the foreign exchange rate of the day published by the People’s Bank of China, the same below). 
(1) Translation of foreign currency monetary items and foreign currency non-monetary items 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
173 
 
On the balance sheet date, if the foreign currency monetary items are translated at the spot rate of the balance 
sheet date, the resulting exchange difference, except for ① Exchange  differences  arising  from  special loans 
in foreign currencies related to the acquisition and construction of assets eligible for capitalization, which shall be 
treated in accordance with the principle of capitalization of borrowing costs; ② Exchange differences of hedging 
instruments used to operate effective hedging of net investment abroad (this difference is included in other 
comprehensive income and is not recognized as current profits and losses until the net investment is disposed of) 
and ③ foreign currency monetary items classified as measured at fair value through other comprehensive income, 
shall be recorded into current profits and losses, provided that exchange differences resulting from changes in other 
book balances other than amortized costs (including impairment) shall be recorded in other comprehensive income. 
The non-monetary foreign currency items measured at historical cost shall be measured at the amount of 
reporting currency that is translated into based on the spot rate on the transaction date. For non-monetary foreign 
currency items measured at fair value, the exchange rate prevailing at the date when the fair value is determined is 
used for translation, and the difference between the translated amount of the reporting currency and the original 
amount of the reporting currency shall be treated as the change in fair value (including change of exchange rate) and 
recorded in current profits and losses or recognized as other comprehensive income. 
(2) Translation of foreign currency financial statement 
Foreign currency financial statements of overseas operations are translated into RMB statements in the 
following ways: The items of assets and liabilities in the balance sheet were translated at the spot exchange rate on 
the balance sheet date. The shareholders’ equity items are translated at the spot rate at the time of occurrence except 
for the “undistributed profit” items. The income and expense items in the income statement are converted using the 
average exchange rate of the current period on the date of occurrence of the transaction. The undistributed profit at 
the beginning of the year is the undistributed profit at the end of the year after the conversion of the previous year; 
The undistributed profit at the end of the period is calculated and shown on the basis of each item of profit 
distribution after translation; The difference between the total amount of asset items and liability items and 
shareholders’ equity items after translation is treated as the difference in the translation of foreign currency 
statements and recognized as other comprehensive income. Upon disposal of an overseas operation and loss of 
control, the conversion difference of the foreign currency statement related to the overseas operation, as shown 
under the shareholders’ equity item in the balance sheet, shall be transferred to the profits and losses of the disposal 
of the current period in full or in proportion to the disposal of the overseas operation. 
Foreign currency cash flow and cash flow of overseas subsidiaries shall be translated at the spot exchange rate 
in the period when the cash flow is generated. The effect of exchange rate changes on cash is presented separately 
in the cash flow statement as an adjustment item. 
The figures for the beginning of the year and the actual figures for the previous year are presented in accordance 
with the amounts of the financial statements of the previous year after translation. 
Upon the disposal of all the owners’ equity of the Group’s overseas operations or the loss of control over 
overseas operations due to the disposal of part of the equity investment or other reasons, the translation difference 
of the foreign currency statement related to the owners’ equity of the overseas operations attributable to the parent 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
174 
 
company, as shown under the shareholders’ equity item in the balance sheet, shall be fully transferred to the profits 
and losses of the disposal period. 
When part of the equity investment is disposed of or the proportion of overseas operating interest is reduced 
for other reasons but the control of overseas operations is not lost, the difference in the translation of foreign currency 
statements related to the disposal part of the overseas operation will be attributed to the minority shareholders’ 
equity and will not be transferred to the current profits and losses. Upon disposal of part of the equity of the overseas 
operation as an associate or joint venture, the translation difference of the foreign currency statement related to the 
overseas operation shall be transferred to the profits and losses of the disposal period in proportion to the disposal 
of the overseas operation. 
If there are foreign currency monetary items that substantially constitute net investments in overseas operations, 
the exchange difference resulting from changes in exchange rates shall be recognized as other comprehensive 
income in the consolidated financial statements as “translation difference in foreign currency statements;” Upon 
disposal of the overseas operations, it shall be included in the profits and losses of the disposal period. 
11. Financial instruments 
When the Group becomes a party to a financial instrument contract, it shall recognize a financial asset or 
financial liability. 
(1) Classification, recognition and measurement of financial assets 
The Group has classified the financial assets as financial assets at amortized cost; financial assets at fair value 
through other comprehensive income and financial assets at fair value through profits and losses based on the 
business model for managing financial assets and the contractual cash flow characteristics of the financial assets. 
Financial assets are measured at fair value on initial recognition. For financial assets at fair value through 
profits and losses, the related transaction costs are recognized directly in profits and losses; and for other categories 
of financial assets, the related transaction costs are recognized in initial recognition amounts. For the accounts 
receivable or notes receivable arising from the sale of products or the provision of services that do not contain or 
take into account a significant financing component, the amount of consideration to which the Group is expected to 
be entitled shall be taken as the initial recognition amount. 
① Financial assets at amortized cost 
The Group’s business model of managing financial assets at amortized cost is aimed at the collection of 
contractual cash flows, and the contractual cash flow characteristics of such financial assets are consistent with the 
basic borrowing arrangement, that is, the cash flows generated on a specific date are only payments of principal and 
interest based on the outstanding principal amount. For such financial assets, the effective interest rate method is 
used for subsequent measurement at amortized cost, and any profits or losses arising from amortization or 
impairment is included in the current profits and losses. 
② Financial assets at fair value through other comprehensive income 
The Group’s business model of managing such financial assets is aimed at the collection and disposal of 
contractual cash flows, and the contractual cash flow characteristics of such financial assets are consistent with the 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
175 
 
basic borrowing arrangement. The Group measures such financial assets at fair value and their changes are 
recognized in other comprehensive income, but impairment losses or gains, exchange profits and losses and interest 
income calculated under the effective interest rate method are recognized in current profits and losses. 
In addition, the Group has designated certain non-trading equity instrument investments as financial assets at 
fair value through other comprehensive income. The Group recognizes the relevant dividend income of such 
financial assets in current profits and losses and the fair value changes in other comprehensive income. Upon the 
derecognition of the financial assets, the accumulated profits and losses previously recognized in other 
comprehensive income are transferred from other comprehensive income to retained earnings and are not recognized 
in the current profits and losses. 
③ Financial assets at fair value through profits and losses 
The Group’s financial assets other than those at amortized cost and those at fair value through other 
comprehensive income as described above are classified as financial assets at fair value through profits and losses. 
In addition, at the time of initial recognition, in order to eliminate or significantly reduce accounting misalignments, 
the Group designated certain financial assets as financial assets at fair value through profits and losses. Such 
financial assets are subsequently measured at fair value, with changes in fair value recognized in  the current profits 
and losses. 
(2) Classification, recognition and measurement of financial liabilities 
Financial liabilities are classified as financial liabilities at fair value through profits and losses and other 
financial liabilities at the time of initial recognition. For financial liabilities at fair value through profits and losses, 
the related transaction costs are recognized directly in profits or losses, and for other financial liabilities, the related 
transaction costs are recognized in their initial recognition amounts. 
① Financial liabilities at fair value through profits and losses 
The financial liabilities at fair value through profits and losses include financial liabilities held for trading 
(including derivatives that are financial liabilities) and those designated as financial liabilities at fair value through 
profits and losses at the initial recognition. 
Financial liabilities held for trading (including derivatives that are financial liabilities) are subsequently 
measured at fair value, with changes in fair value recognized in current profits and losses, except for those related 
to hedge accounting. 
For those designated as financial liabilities at fair value through profits and losses, the change in fair value of 
such liabilities caused by changes in the Group’s own credit risk is included in other comprehensive income, and 
the cumulative change in its fair value caused by changes in its own credit risk included in other comprehensive 
income is transferred to retained earnings when such liabilities are derecognized. Other changes in fair value are 
included in current profits and losses. If the treatment of the effect of the change in the credit risk of the financial 
liabilities in the manner described above would cause or widen the accounting mismatch in profits and losses, the 
Group would recognize the full profits or losses of the financial liabilities (including the amount affected by the 
change in the credit risk of the enterprise) in the current profits and losses. 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
176 
 
② Other financial liabilities 
Financial liabilities other than those resulting from the transfer of financial assets that does not meet the 
conditions for derecognition or continues to be involved in the transfer of financial assets, and other financial 
liabilities excluding financial guarantee contracts are classified as financial liabilities at amortized cost, which are 
subsequently measured at amortized cost, and the profits and losses resulting from the derecognition or amortization 
are included in current profits and losses. 
(3) Recognition basis and measurement method for transfer of financial assets 
A financial asset is derecognized if it meets any of the following conditions: ① The contractual right to receive 
the cash flow of the financial asset is terminated; ② The financial asset has been transferred, and substantially all 
the risks and returns of ownership of the financial asset have been transferred to the transferee; ③ The financial 
asset has been transferred, substantially all the risks and returns of ownership of the financial asset have neither been 
transferred nor retained, but the control over the financial asset has been relinquished. 
If neither substantially all the risks and returns of ownership of a financial asset are transferred nor retained, 
and the control over the financial asset is not relinquished, the underlying financial asset shall be recognized to the 
extent of its continuing involvement in the transferred financial asset, and the related liability shall be recognized 
accordingly. The extent of continued involvement in the transferred financial asset is the level of risk to which the 
enterprise is exposed as a result of changes in the value of that financial asset. 
If the overall transfer of financial assets meets the conditions for derecognition, the difference between the 
book value of the transferred financial assets and the consideration received as a result of the transfer and the 
cumulative change in the fair value originally included in other comprehensive income is included in the current 
profits and losses. 
If the partial transfer of financial assets meets the conditions for derecognition, the book value of the transferred 
financial assets shall be apportioned between the portion derecognized and the portion not for derecognition 
according to their relative fair value. The difference between the sum of the consideration received as a result of the 
transfer and the cumulative changes in fair value originally included in other comprehensive income that should be 
apportioned to the portion derecognized and the above-mentioned book value apportioned are recognized in current 
profits and losses. 
If the Group sells the financial assets by recourse or makes endorsement transfer of the financial assets it holds, 
it is necessary to determine whether virtually all risks and returns in the ownership of the financial asset have been 
transferred. If the Group has transferred substantially all the risks and returns related to the ownership of a financial 
asset to the transferee, the Group shall derecognize the financial asset. If substantially all the risks and returns related 
to the ownership of a financial asset are retained, the financial assets shall not be derecognized. If substantially all 
the risks and returns related to the ownership of the financial asset are neither transferred nor retained, whether the 
enterprise retains control of the asset shall be determined and accounting treatment shall be made in accordance with 
the principles described in the preceding paragraphs. 
(4) Derecognition of financial liabilities 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
177 
 
A financial liability (or a portion thereof) is derecognized when the present obligation is discharged. If an 
agreement is entered into between the Group (the borrower) and the lender to replace the original financial liability 
by assuming a new financial liability, and the contractual terms of the new financial liability are materially different 
from those of the original financial liability, the original financial liability is derecognized and the new financial 
liability is recognized at the same time. If the Group materially modifies the contractual terms of the original 
financial liability (or part thereof), it shall derecognize the original financial liability and recognize a new financial 
liability in accordance with the modified terms. 
If a financial liability is derecognized in whole or in part, the difference between the book value of the 
derecognized portion and the consideration paid (including non-cash assets transferred or liabilities assumed) is 
recognized in current profits and losses. 
(5) Offsetting of financial assets and financial liabilities 
When the Group has the legal rights to offset the financial assets and financial liabilities whose amounts have 
been recognized, the legal rights are currently exercisable, and the Group plans to settle with net amount or realize 
the financial asset and repay the financial liability simultaneously, the financial assets and financial liabilities can 
be presented in the balance sheet with the net amount after they are mutually offset. Apart from this, financial assets 
and financial liabilities shall be presented separately in the balance sheet and not be offset against each other. 
(6) Methods for determining the fair value of financial assets and financial liabilities 
Fair value is the price that a market participant would receive to sell an asset or pay to transfer a liability in an 
orderly transaction occurring on the measurement date. Regarding the financial instruments for which there is an 
active market, the Group uses quoted prices in an active market to determine their fair values. A quoted price in an 
active market is a price that is readily available on a regular basis from an exchange, broker, trade association, 
pricing service agency, etc., and represents the price of a market transaction that actually takes place in a fair trade. 
If there is no active market for the financial instrument, the Group uses valuation techniques to determine its fair 
value. The valuation techniques include reference to prices used in recent market transactions by the parties who are 
familiar with the situation and willing to deal, reference to the current fair value of other substantially identical 
financial instruments, the discounted cash flow method, and option pricing models. In the valuation, the Group will 
adopt the valuation techniques applicable in the current situation and supported by sufficiently available data and 
other information, select the input values that are consistent with the characteristics of the asset or liability 
considered by market participants in the transaction of the relevant asset or liability, and give priority to the relevant 
observable input values when possible. The non-observable input values will be used only when the relevant 
observable input values are unavailable or not practicable to obtain. 
(7) Equity instruments 
Equity instruments are contracts that demonstrate ownership of the remaining interest in the Group’s assets 
after deducting all liabilities. The Group’s issuance (including refinancing), repurchase, sale or cancellation of equity 
instruments is treated as changes in equity, and the transaction expenses related to equity transactions are deducted 
from equity. The Group does not recognize the changes in fair value of equity instruments. 
Dividends (including “interest” on instruments classified as equity instruments) distributed during the existence 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
178 
 
of the Group’s equity instruments are treated as profit distributions. 
(8) Impairment of financial assets 
The financial assets for which the Group needs to recognize impairment losses are financial assets at amortized 
cost, debt instruments at fair value through other comprehensive income, lease receivables, which mainly include 
notes receivable, accounts receivable, receivables financing, other receivables, debt investments, other debt 
investments, long-term receivables, etc. In addition, for contractual assets and certain financial guarantee contracts, 
impairment provisions are made and credit impairment losses are recognized in accordance with the accounting 
policies described in this section. 
① Recognition of provision for impairment losses 
On the basis of expected credit losses, the Group makes an impairment provision and recognizes credit 
impairment losses for each of the above items in accordance with its applicable expected credit losses measurement 
method (general method or simplified method). 
Credit losses represent the difference between all contractual cash flows receivable under the contract and all 
cash flows expected to be received by the Group, discounted at the original effective interest rate, i.e., the present 
value of all cash shortfalls. Financial assets purchased or originated by the Group that are credit impaired shall be 
discounted at the credit-adjusted effective interest rate of the financial assets. 
The general method of measurement of expected credit losses means that the Group assesses at each balance 
sheet date whether the credit risk of financial assets (including contractual assets and other applicable items, the 
same below) has increased significantly since the initial recognition. If the credit risk has increased significantly 
since the initial recognition, the Group measures the loss provision at an amount equivalent to the expected credit 
losses over the entire duration; If credit risk does not increase significantly since the initial recognition, the Group 
measures the loss provision at an amount equivalent to expected credit losses over the next 12 months. The Group 
will consider all the reasonable and evidence-based information, including forward-looking information, when 
assessing expected credit losses. 
For financial instruments with low credit risk on the balance sheet date, the Group assumes that their credit risk 
has not increased significantly since initial recognition, and measures the provision for losses based on expected 
credit losses over the next 12 months. 
② Criteria for determining whether credit risk has increased significantly since the initial recognition 
If the probability of default of a financial asset during the estimated duration determined on the balance sheet 
date is significantly higher than the probability of default during the estimated duration determined at the time of 
initial recognition, it indicates that the credit risk of the financial asset has significantly increased. Except in 
exceptional circumstances, the Group uses the change in default risk occurring over the next 12 months as a 
reasonable estimate of the change in default risk occurring over the duration to determine whether credit risk has 
increased significantly since the initial recognition. 
③ The portfolio-based approach to assessing expected credit risk 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
179 
 
The Group assesses credit risk individually for financial assets with significantly different credit risks, such as 
receivables that are in dispute with other parties or involved in litigation or arbitration; or where there are clear 
indications that the debtor is likely to be unable to meet its repayment obligations. 
Apart from financial assets that are individually assessed for credit risk, the Group classifies financial assets 
into different groups based on common risk characteristics and assesses credit risk on a portfolio basis. 
④ Accounting treatment of impairment of financial assets 
At the end of the period, the Group will calculate the estimated credit losses of various financial assets, and if 
the estimated credit losses are greater than the book value of its current impairment provision, the difference is 
recognized as an impairment loss; If it is less than the book value of the current impairment provision, the difference 
is recognized as an impairment gain. 
⑤ Determination of credit losses of various financial assets 
a. Notes receivable 
The Group measures the loss provision for notes receivable at the amount equivalent to expected credit losses 
in the entire duration. Based on the credit risk characteristics of notes receivable, they are divided into different 
portfolios: 
b. Accounts receivable and contractual assets 
For the accounts receivable and contractual assets that do not have a significant financing component, the 
Group measures the loss provision at the amount equivalent to expected credit losses in the entire duration. 
For the accounts receivable, contractual assets and lease receivables that have a significant financing 
component, the Group chooses to always measure the loss provision at an amount equivalent to expected credit 
losses over the duration. 
Apart from the accounts receivable for single assessment of credit risk, they are divided into different portfolios 
based on their credit risk characteristics: 
Item 
Basis for determining the portfolio 
Related party within the consolidation scope This portfolio represents amounts receivable of the Company 
within the scope of consolidation. 
Account age portfolio 
The portfolio takes the age of receivables as the credit risk 
characteristics. 
Method for calculating aging years based on credit risk characteristics portfolio: The Group calculates the 
aging years of accounts receivable based on the principle of First Occurrence, First Recovery. 
Item 
Basis for determining the portfolio 
Banker’s acceptance bill 
Banks with less credit risk in relation to acceptors 
Commercial acceptance bill 
Divided according to the acceptor’s credit risk 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
180 
 
Recognition criteria for provision of bad debts of a single account receivable: The Group conducts separate 
impairment tests on accounts receivable with significantly different credit risk characteristics, such as significantly 
deteriorating credit status of the debtor, low possibility of future repayment, and credit impairment that has occurred. 
c. Accounts receivable financing 
Notes and accounts receivable measured at fair value through other comprehensive income are presented as 
accounts receivable financing if their maturities are within one year (including one year) from the initial recognition 
date. The Group measures the loss provision at the amount equivalent to expected credit losses in the entire duration. 
Apart from the accounts receivable financing for single assessment of credit risk, they are divided into different 
portfolios based on their credit risk characteristics: 
Item 
Basis for determining the portfolio 
Related party within the consolidation 
scope 
This portfolio represents amounts receivable of the Company within the 
scope of consolidation. 
Account age portfolio 
The portfolio takes the age of receivables as the credit risk 
characteristics. 
Method for calculating aging years based on credit risk characteristics portfolio: The Group calculates the 
aging years of accounts receivable based on the principle of First Occurrence, First Recovery. 
Recognition criteria for provision of bad debts of a single account receivable: The Group conducts separate 
impairment tests on accounts receivable with significantly different credit risk characteristics, such as significantly 
deteriorating credit status of the debtor, low possibility of future repayment, and credit impairment that has occurred. 
d. Other receivables 
Based on whether the credit risk of other receivables has increased significantly since initial recognition, the 
Group measures the loss provision at the amount equivalent to expected credit losses in the next 12 months or the 
entire duration. Apart from the other receivable for single assessment of credit risk, they are divided into different 
portfolios based on their credit risk characteristics: 
Item 
Basis for determining the portfolio 
Related party within the consolidation 
scope 
This portfolio represents amounts receivable of the Company within 
the scope of consolidation. 
Account age portfolio 
The portfolio takes the age of receivables as the credit risk 
characteristics. 
Method for calculating aging years based on credit risk characteristics portfolio: The Group calculates the 
aging years of accounts receivable based on the principle of First Occurrence, First Recovery. 
Recognition criteria for provision of bad debts of a single account receivable: The Group conducts separate 
impairment tests on accounts receivable with significantly different credit risk characteristics, such as significantly 
deteriorating credit status of the debtor, low possibility of future repayment, and credit impairment that has occurred. 
12. Notes receivable 
Please refer to “11. Financial instruments.” 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
181 
 
13. Accounts receivable 
Please refer to “11. Financial instruments.” 
14. Accounts receivable financing 
Notes and accounts receivable at fair value through other comprehensive income are presented as accounts 
receivable financing if their maturities are within one year (including one year) from the initial recognition date. 
The Notes and accounts receivable with the maturity of more than 1 year since the initial recognition date are 
presented as other debt investments. For the relevant accounting policies, please refer to “11. Financial instruments” 
under this Note. 
15. Other receivables 
For the method of determining expected credit losses on other receivables and the accounting treatment, please 
refer to “11. Financial instruments.” 
16. Inventories 
(1) Categories of inventories 
Inventories mainly include raw materials, packaging and low-value consumable goods, products in process, 
goods in stock, consumable biological assets, development costs, development products, etc. 
(2) Pricing of inventories 
Inventories are initially measured at actual cost. The cost of inventories includes procurement cost, processing 
cost and other costs. Inventories are measured by the weighted average method upon delivery. 
(3) Determination of net realizable value of inventories and method of making provision for 
inventory impairment 
The net realizable value of inventories refers to the estimated selling price deducted by estimated costs until 
they are made into finished goods, estimated selling expense and relevant taxes in daily activities. The determination 
of the net realizable value of inventories is based on conclusive evidence obtained, taking into account the purpose 
for which the inventories are held and the effect of events after the balance sheet date. 
Inventories are measured at the lower of cost or net realizable value at the balance sheet date, and provision 
for their impairment shall be made when the net realizable value is below the cost of inventories. Provision for 
inventory impairment is made on the basis of the difference whereby the cost of one single inventory item exceeds 
its net realizable value. For inventories with large quantities and low unit prices, provision for inventory impairment 
shall be made according to inventory categories. Inventories that are related to product series produced and sold in 
the same region and have the same or similar end use or purpose, and are difficult to be documented separately from 
other items that shall be combined for making provision for inventory impairment. 
After provision for inventory impairment is made, if the factors that once resulted in the impairment disappear, 
leading to the net realizable value of inventories higher than their book value, the provision of inventory impairment 
shall be reversed to the extent of provision previously made, and the reversed amount shall be recognized in current 
profits and losses. 
(4) The inventory system shall be the perpetual inventory system. 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
182 
 
(5) Amortization of low-value consumables and packaging materials 
The low-value consumables and packaging materials are amortized using a one-off amortization method. 
17. Long-term equity investments 
Long-term equity investments in this section refers to any equity investment by which the Group has control, 
common control or significant influence over the investee. Long-term equity investments by which the Group does 
not have control, common control or significant influence over the investee are accounted for as financial assets at 
fair value through profits or losses. If they are non-trading, the Group may elect to designate them as financial assets 
at fair value through other comprehensive income at the time of initial recognition. For the accounting policies, 
please refer to “11. Financial instruments” under Note V. 
Common control is the Group’s contractually agreed sharing of control over an arrangement, and the activities 
under which must be decided by unanimous agreement from parties who share the control. Significant influence is 
the power of the Group to participate in the decision-making for financial and operating policies of an investee, but 
not to control or common control the formulation of such policies together with other parties. 
(1) Determination of investment cost 
For long-term equity investments acquired relating to business combination under common control, the initial 
investment cost is determined on the date of consolidation according to the percentage of shareholders/owners’ 
equity from the combined party as a part of the book value of total shareholders/owners’ equity set forth in the 
consolidated financial statements of the ultimate controlling party. The difference between the said initial 
investment cost and the sum of cash being paid, non-cash assets being transferred and book value of liabilities being 
assumed shall be adjusted against the capital reserve; or, in case of insufficient capital reserve to cover the difference, 
against the retained earnings accordingly. In case that the consideration of the business combination is satisfied by 
issuing equity securities, the initial investment cost of the long-term equity investments is determined on the date 
of consolidation according to the percentage of shareholders’ equity from the combined party as a part of the book 
value of total shareholders’ equity set forth in the consolidated financial statements of the ultimate controlling party. 
With the sum of par values of shares being issued as the share capital, the difference between the said initial 
investment cost and the sum of par values of shares being issued shall be adjusted against the capital reserve; or, in 
case of insufficient capital reserve to cover the difference, against the retained earnings accordingly. Where a 
business combination under common control is achieved by acquiring the equity of a combined party under common 
control in phases through multiple transactions, following policies shall apply depending on whether those 
transactions are “a bundle of transactions”: if so, the Company shall account for all transactions together as the one 
deal to obtain the control; if not, the initial investment cost of the long-term equity investments shall be determined 
on the date of consolidation according to the percentage of shareholders/owners’ equity from the combined party as 
a part of the book value of total shareholders’ equity set forth in the consolidated financial statements of the ultimate 
controlling party, while the difference between the initial investment cost and the sum of book value of long-term 
equity investments before the consolidation and that of consideration newly paid to acquire additional equities on 
the date of consolidation shall be adjusted against the capital reserve, or, in case of insufficient capital reserve to 
cover the difference, against retained earnings accordingly. Accounting treatment is currently not required for other 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
183 
 
comprehensive income that has been recognized due to the adoption of equity method in accounting or the 
classification as financial assets at fair value through other comprehensive income in respect of equity investments 
held before the date of consolidation. 
For the long-term equity investments acquired relating to business combination not under common control, the 
initial investment cost is the cost of combination on the date of acquisition which equals to the aggregate fair value 
of assets transferred, liabilities incurred or assumed and equity securities issued by the acquirer. Where a business 
combination not under common control is achieved by acquiring the equity of a combined party under common 
control in phases through multiple transactions, following policies shall apply depending on whether those 
transactions are “a bundle of transactions”: if so, the Group shall account for all transactions together as the one 
deal to obtain the control; if not, the initial investment cost of the long-term equity investments that is re-accounted 
for using the cost method shall be the sum of book value of long-term equity investments previously held by the 
acquirer in the acquiree and new investment cost. Accounting treatment is currently not required for other 
comprehensive income in respect of equity investments that have been accounted for using the equity method. 
The intermediary expenses on items such as audit, legal service and valuation advisory for business 
combination and other related administrative expenses incurred by the combining party or acquirer are recognized 
in current profits and losses upon their occurrence. 
Long-term equity investments other than those formed by business combination is initially measured at cost 
which varies depending on the different ways of acquiring the long-term equity investments and is determined by 
considering the amount of actual cash paid by the Group, the fair value of the equity securities issued by the Group, 
the conventional value stipulated in the investment contract or agreement, the fair value or original book value of 
the assets surrendered in the non-Cash and bank balance swap transaction, the fair value of the long-term equity 
investments itself, and etc. The expenses, taxes and other necessary expenses directly related to the acquisition of 
the long-term equity investments are also included in the investment cost. 
For additional long-term equity investments that entitles the Company with significant influence or common control 
but not control over the investee, its cost of investment is the sum of fair value of equity investments that have been 
held plus new cost of investment pursuant to the Accounting Standards for Business Enterprises No. 22 - 
Recognition and Measurement of Financial Instrument. 
(2) Subsequent measurement and recognition method of profits and losses 
A long-term equity investment with common control (excluding that constituting a joint venture) over or 
significant influence on the investee is accounted for by using the equity method, and a long-term equity investment 
with control over the investee is accounted for in the Company’s financial statements by using the cost method. 
① Long-term equity investment accounted for with cost method 
When a long-term equity investment is accounted for with cost method, its price is measured at initial 
investment cost, and when the long-term equity investment is added or disposed, its cost is adjusted accordingly. 
The cash dividend or profit declared by the investee, except for the cash dividend or profit declared but not yet 
granted that is included in the price or consideration actually paid upon the acquisition of the investment, shall be 
recognized as investment income for the period. 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
184 
 
② Long-term equity investment accounted for with equity method 
When a long-term equity investment is accounted for with equity method and its initial investment cost is 
higher than the proportion of fair value of the investee’s identifiable net assets attributable to the investor because 
of the investment, its initial cost shall not be adjusted; if lower, the difference shall be recognized in the current 
profits and losses, and its cost shall be adjusted accordingly. 
When a long-term equity investment is accounted for with equity method, the investment income and other 
comprehensive income arising therefrom are recognized in accordance with the proportion of net profits and losses 
and other comprehensive income of the investee attributable to the investor, and the book value of long-term equity 
investments is adjusted accordingly; if any profit or cash dividend is declared by the investee, the book value of 
long-term equity investments shall be reduced according to the part of profit or dividends attributable to the investor; 
if there is any other changes in shareholders’ equity other than net profits and losses, other comprehensive income 
and profit distribution, such change shall be adjusted against the book value of long-term equity investments and 
recognized in the capital reserve. The Group recognizes its share of the investee’s net profits and losses based on 
fair value of the investee’s identifiable assets at the time of acquisition, after making appropriate adjustments to net 
profits thereto. In case of any inconsistency between the accounting policies and accounting periods adopted by the 
investee and by the Group, the financial statements of the investee shall be adjusted in accordance with the 
accounting policies and accounting periods of the Group, and the gain on investment and other comprehensive 
income shall be recognized accordingly. In respect of the transactions between the Group and its associates and joint 
ventures in which the assets invested or disposed of are not part of the business, the share of unrealized profits and 
losses arising from inter-group transactions shall be offset by the portion attributable to the Group, and the profits 
and losses on investment shall be recognized accordingly. However, any unrealized loss arising from inter-group 
transactions between the Group and an investee is not offset to the extent that the loss is impairment loss of the 
assets transferred. Where the Group invests to its joint ventures or associates an asset forming part of a business, 
giving rise to the acquisition of a long-term equity investment by the investor without obtaining control, the initial 
investment cost of the additional long-term equity investments shall be recognized at fair value of the business 
invested. The difference between initial investment cost and book value of the business invested will be fully 
included in current profits and losses. Where the Group disposes of an asset forming part of a business to its 
associates or joint ventures, the difference between the consideration received and the book value of the business 
shall be fully included in current profits and losses. Where the Group acquires from its associates or joint ventures 
an asset forming part of a business, the profits or losses related to the transaction shall be accounted for and 
recognized in accordance with the Accounting Standards for Business Enterprises No. 20 - Business Combination. 
The Group’s share of net loss of the investee shall be recognized to the extent that the book value of the long-
term equity investment and any long-term equity that substantially forms part of the investor’s net investment in the 
investee are written down to zero. If the Group has to assume additional obligations to the loss of the investee, the 
estimated liabilities shall be recognized for the estimated obligation assumed and charged to investment loss for the 
period. Where the investee makes profits in subsequent periods, the Group shall re-recognize its share of the profits 
after setting off against the share of unrecognized losses. 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
185 
 
③ Acquisition of minority interests 
When preparing the consolidated financial statements, the Company adjusts the capital reserve and, if the 
capital reserve is insufficient, adjusts the retained earnings based on the difference between the additional long-term 
equity investments arising on acquisition of minority interests and the Company’s share in the net assets of the 
subsidiary accrued from the acquisition date (or consolidation date) in proportion to the additional shareholdings. 
④ Disposal of long-term equity investments 
In the consolidated financial statements, if the parent company disposes part of the long-term equity investment 
in the subsidiary without losing its control, the difference between the disposal price and the Company’s share in 
the net assets of the subsidiary attributable to the disposal of the long-term equity investment is recognized in the 
shareholders’ equity; if the parent company disposes part of the long-term equity investment in the subsidiary 
resulting in the loss of its control over the subsidiary, the accounting treatment shall be in accordance with the 
policies as set out in Item (2) of Section 6 “Accounting treatment for business combination under common control 
and not under common control” under this Note V. 
In other cases, upon the disposal of a long-term equity investment, the difference between the book value of 
the investment and the price received is recognized in the current profits and losses. 
For a long-term equity investment that is accounted for using the equity method where the remaining equity 
after disposal continues to be accounted for using the equity method, the portion of other comprehensive income 
previously included in shareholder’s equity shall be treated in accordance with the same basis as the investee directly 
disposes of relevant asset or liability on pro rata basis at the time of disposal. The owners’ equity recognized for the 
change in owners’ equity of the investee other than net profits and losses, other comprehensive income and profit 
distribution, shall be transferred to current profits and losses on pro rata basis. 
For a long-term equity investment accounted for using the cost method where the remaining equity after 
disposal continues to be accounted for using cost method, other comprehensive income recognized using the equity 
method or in accordance with the standard for recognition and measurement of financial instruments prior to the 
acquisition of control over the investee shall be treated in accordance with the same basis as the investee directly 
disposes of relevant asset or liability, and transferred to current profits and losses on pro rata basis. The change in 
owners’ equity recognized in net assets of the investee by using the equity method other than net profits and losses, 
other comprehensive income and profit distribution shall be transferred to current profits and losses on pro rata basis. 
In preparing separate financial statements, if control is lost over the investee upon partial disposal of equity 
investment, the remaining equity with common control or an ability to impose a significant influence over the 
investee after disposal shall be accounted for using the equity method, and shall be adjusted as if it has been 
accounted for using the equity method since it was acquired. The remaining equity without common control or an 
ability to impose a significant influence over the investee after disposal shall be accounted for based on the standard 
for recognition and measurement of financial instruments, and the difference between its fair value and book value 
on the date of loss of control shall be included in current profits and losses. In respect of other comprehensive income 
recognized using the equity method or in accordance with the standard for recognition and measurement of financial 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
186 
 
instruments prior to the acquisition of control over the investee, it shall be accounted for in accordance with the 
same basis as the investee directly disposes of relevant asset or liability when the control is lost. The change in 
owners’ equity recognized in net assets of the investee by using the equity method other than net profits and losses, 
other comprehensive income and profit distribution shall be transferred to current profits and losses at the time when 
the control over investee is lost. Where the remaining equity after disposal is accounted for using the equity method, 
other comprehensive income and other owners’ equity shall be carried forward on pro rata basis. Where the 
remaining equity after disposal is accounted for in accordance with the standard for recognition and measurement 
of financial instruments, other comprehensive income and other owners’ equity shall be fully carried forward. 
If the common control or significant influence of the Group over the investee is lost upon partial disposal of 
equity investment, the remaining equity after disposal shall be accounted for in accordance with the standard for 
recognition and measurement of financial instruments. The difference between its fair value and book value on the 
date of loss of common control or significant influence shall be included in current profits and losses. For other 
comprehensive income recognized previously for the equity investment using equity method, it shall be accounted 
for in accordance with the same basis as the investee directly disposes of relevant asset or liability at the time when 
the equity method is ceased to be used. The owners’ equity recognized arising from the change in owners’ equity of 
the investee other than net profits and losses, other comprehensive income and profit distribution shall be transferred 
to current profits and losses at the time when the equity method is ceased to be used. 
Where the Group disposes of its equity investment in a subsidiary in a series of transactions until the control is 
lost, and such transactions form “a bundle of transactions,” each transaction shall be accounted for as a disposal of 
equity investment of the subsidiary resulting in a loss of control. The difference between the consideration for each 
transaction and the book value of the long-term equity investment attributable to the equity interests disposed prior 
to loss of control shall be initially recognized as other comprehensive income, and upon loss of control, transferred 
to current profits and losses when the loss of control takes place. 
18. Investment properties 
Investment properties are real estate held for rental income or capital appreciation, or both, including land use 
rights that have been leased, land use rights that are held and intended to be transferred after appreciation, and 
buildings that have been leased. In addition, vacant buildings held by the Group for operating leases are reported as 
investment properties if the Board of Directors (or similar organization) makes a written resolution that they will be 
used for operating leases and the intention to hold them will not change in the near future. 
Investment properties shall be initially measured at cost. The subsequent expenses related to investment 
properties shall be recognized as cost of the investment properties only if it is probable that economic benefits 
associated with the assets will flow to the Group and the cost of the assets can be measured reliably. Other 
subsequent expenses shall be recognized in the current profits and losses when incurred. 
The Group uses the cost model for subsequent measurement of investment properties and depreciates or 
amortizes them according to the policies consistent with that for buildings or land use rights. 
For the method of impairment test and provision for impairment loss of investment properties, please refer to 
Section 25 “Impairment of long-term assets” under Note V. 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
187 
 
When the purpose of an investment property changes to self-use, from the date of the change, the investment 
property shall be reclassified as a fixed asset or intangible asset. When the purpose of a self-use property changes 
to earning rental income or capital appreciation, from the date of the change, the fixed asset or intangible asset shall 
be reclassified as an investment property. Upon reclassification, for investment properties measured using the cost 
model, the carrying value before reclassification is recognized as the carrying value after reclassification. For 
investment properties measured using the fair value model, the fair value on the date of reclassification is recognized 
as the carrying value after reclassification. 
An investment property is derecognized upon disposal or when it is permanently withdrawn from use and no future 
economic benefits are expected from its disposal. The net proceeds from sale, transfer, retirement or damage of an 
investment property after its book value and related taxes and expenses are recognized in the current profits and losses. 
19. Fixed assets 
(1) Recognition criteria 
Fixed assets refer to the tangible assets held by the Company for producing goods, rendering services, renting 
or operation and administration purposes with useful life of over one accounting year. The fixed assets are 
recognized only when the economic interests related thereto are likely to flow into the Group and its cost can be 
measured reliably. The fixed assets are initially measured at cost with consideration of the impact of estimated 
disposal costs. 
(2) Depreciation method 
Category 
Depreciation method 
Depreciation life 
(year) 
Rate of residual 
value (%) 
Annual depreciation 
rate (%) 
Building for 
production 
Straight-line method 
39 
5 
2.44 
Machine and 
equipment for 
production 
Straight-line method 
10 
5 
9.5 
Transportation 
equipment 
Straight-line method 
10 
5 
9.5 
Electronic device 
and management 
tools 
Straight-line method 
5 
5 
19 
Machine and 
equipment for non-
production purpose 
Straight-line method 
10 
5 
9.5 
Building for non-
production purpose 
Straight-line method 
45 
5 
2.11 
Others 
Straight-line method 
5 
5 
19 
The depreciation of fixed assets is calculated using the straight-line method over their estimated useful lives, 
starting from the month following the attainment of the intended usable state. The estimated useful lives, expected 
residual values, and annual depreciation rates for various types of fixed assets are as follows: 
The expected residual value refers to the anticipated condition of the fixed asset at the end of its estimated 
useful life. It represents the estimated amount that the Group would receive from the disposal of the asset, net of 
any expected disposal costs incurred. 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
188 
 
(3) Impairment test method and provision for impairment of fixed assets 
The impairment testing method and provision for impairment of fixed assets can be found in Item 25 of Note 
V “Impairment of Long-term Assets.” 
(4) Other Information 
Subsequent expenditures related to fixed assets that are expected to generate economic benefits and can be 
reliably measured are capitalized as part of the fixed asset's cost, and the carrying value of the replaced portion is 
derecognized. Other subsequent expenditures are recognized in the current period's income statement upon 
occurrence. 
When a fixed asset is classified as held for disposal or is expected to no longer generate economic benefits 
through use or disposal, it is derecognized. Proceeds from the sale, transfer, scrapping, or destruction of fixed assets, 
net of their carrying value and related taxes, are recognized in the current period’s income statement. 
The Group reviews the useful lives, estimated residual values, and depreciation methods of fixed assets at least 
annually. Changes in these estimates are treated as changes in accounting estimates. 
20. Construction in progress 
The cost of construction in progress is measured according to the actual expense for the construction in progress, 
including all the necessary expenses incurred in the process of construction, borrowing costs to be capitalized before 
the project is ready for its intended use and other related costs.  
The construction in progress is transferred to fixed assets after it is ready for its intended use. 
For the method of impairment test and provision for impairment loss of construction in progress, please refer 
to Section 30 “Impairment of long-term assets” under Note V. 
21. Borrowing costs 
Borrowing costs include interest on borrowings, amortization of discounts or premiums, ancillary costs, and 
exchange differences arising from foreign currency borrowings. Where the borrowing costs can be directly 
attributable to the acquisition and construction or production activities of assets eligible for capitalization, it shall 
be capitalized on the basis that the expense for the asset has already been incurred, the borrowing costs have been 
incurred and the acquisition and construction or production activities necessary to prepare the asset for its intended 
use or for sale have already commenced; after the acquired or produced asset eligible for capitalization is available 
for its intended use or for sale, the capitalization shall be stopped. Other borrowing costs shall be recognized as 
expenses at the time when they are incurred. 
The actual interest cost incurred in the period of specific-purpose borrowing net of any interest income from 
the borrowed funds not used and deposited in bank or any investment income from the temporary investment of 
those funds shall be capitalized; the amount of interest of general-purpose borrowings to be capitalized is determined 
by multiplying the weighted average of the amounts of cumulative expenses on the asset over and above the amounts 
of specific-purpose borrowings by the capitalization rate of the corresponding general-purpose borrowings. 
Capitalization rate is calculated and determined based on the weighted average rate of general-purpose borrowings. 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
189 
 
During the capitalization period, exchange differences related to specific-purpose borrowings denominated in 
foreign currencies are fully capitalized; exchange differences related to general-purpose borrowings denominated 
in foreign currencies are recognized in the current profits and losses. 
Assets eligible for capitalization refer to the fixed assets, investment properties, inventories and other assets 
that require a substantially long period of time of acquisition and construction or production activities for intended 
use or for sale. 
Where the acquisition and construction or production activities of an asset eligible for capitalization is 
interrupted abnormally and the interruption period lasts for more than 3 months, the capitalization of the borrowing 
costs shall be suspended until the acquisition and construction or production of the asset is resumed. 
22. Biological assets 
(1) Consumptive biological assets 
Consumptive biological assets are the biological assets held for sale or harvested for agricultural products in 
the future, including growing field crops, vegetables, timber stands and livestock stored for sale. Consumptive 
biological assets shall be initially measured at cost. The cost of a consumptive biological asset that is cultivated, 
constructed, propagated or farmed by the Company is the necessary expense incurred before the asset is 
harvested/closed/sold/sold or placed in storage that is directly attributable to the asset, including borrowing costs 
that are eligible for capitalization. Subsequent expenses such as management and feeding costs incurred after 
harvesting/closing/storage of consumptive biological assets are included in current profits and losses. 
Consumptive biological assets are carried forward at book value using the weighted average method when 
harvested or sold. 
On the balance sheet date, consumptive biological assets are measured at the lower of cost or net realizable 
value, and the provision for impairment of consumptive biological assets shall be calculated and recognized based 
on the methods consistent with those for the recognition of the provision for inventory impairment. Where the 
impairment factors disappear, the amount written down shall be restored and reversed from the original provision 
for depreciation, with the amount reversed recognized in the current profits and losses. 
(2) Productive biological assets 
Productive biological assets refer to the biological assets held for the purpose of producing agricultural products, 
providing services or leasing, including economic forests, firewood forests, production animals and draft animals. 
Productive biological assets shall be initially measured at cost. The cost of a self-created or propagated productive 
biological asset is the necessary expense incurred before the asset achieves the intended purpose of production and 
operation that can be directly attributable to the asset, including borrowing costs that meet the capitalization conditions. 
The Group reviews the useful life and estimated net residual value of a productive biological asset and the 
depreciation method applied at least at each year-end. Any change shall be accounted for as a change in accounting 
estimate. 
The difference between the disposal proceeds from the sale, liquidation, death or destruction of productive 
biological assets less their book value and related taxes and charges is included in the current profits and losses. 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
190 
 
The Group determines whether a productive biological asset has any signs of impairment on each balance sheet 
date. If the asset shows signs of impairment, the recoverable amount is estimated. The recoverable amount is 
estimated on a single asset basis. If it is difficult to estimate the recoverable amount of a single asset, the recoverable 
amount of the asset group to which the asset belongs shall be determined. If the recoverable amount of an asset is 
lower than its book value, the provision for asset impairment shall be made according to the difference and recorded 
in the current profits and losses. 
Once the above asset impairment loss is recognized, it shall not be reversed in subsequent accounting periods. 
If a productive biological asset changes its use and becomes a consumptive biological asset, the cost of the 
change of use is determined at the book value at the time of the change of use. If the productive biological asset 
changes its use and becomes a public welfare biological asset, whether there is any impairment is determined in 
accordance with the provisions of Accounting Standard for Business Enterprises No. 8 - Asset Impairment. When 
an impairment occurs, an impairment provision shall be first made and then determined on the basis of the book 
value after such provision is made. 
23. Oil and gas assets 
Not applicable 
24. Intangible assets 
(1) Useful life and its basis for determination, estimate, amortization method or review procedure 
An intangible asset is an identifiable non-monetary asset without physical substance owned or controlled by 
the Group. 
An intangible asset shall be initially measured at cost. The expenses incurred on an intangible asset shall be 
recognized as cost of the intangible asset only if it is probable that economic benefits associated with the asset will 
flow to the Group and the cost of the asset can be measured reliably. Other expenses shall be recognized in the 
current profits and losses when incurred. 
Land use right acquired shall normally be recognized as an intangible asset. For self-constructed buildings (e.g. 
plants), the expenses on the land use right and cost of the buildings shall be separately accounted for as an intangible 
asset and fixed asset. For buildings and structures purchased, the purchase consideration shall be allocated among 
the land use right and the buildings on a reasonable basis. In case there is difficulty in making a reasonable allocation, 
the consideration shall be recognized in full as a fixed asset. 
An intangible asset with a definite useful life is amortized on average and by stages using the straight-line 
method by deducting the estimated net residual value and accrued provision for impairment loss from the original 
value over the estimated useful life from the time when it is available for use. An intangible asset with an indefinite 
useful life is not amortized. 
During the end of the period, the Company shall check the useful life and the amortization method of intangible 
assets with limited useful life and carry out accounting estimate change in case that a change happens. In addition, 
the Company shall check the useful life of intangible assets with indefinite useful life. If there are evidences showing 
that the intangible assets can bring economic benefit for the Company within the foreseeable period, the Company 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
191 
 
shall estimate the useful life and carry out amortization according to the amortization policy for intangible assets 
with finite useful life. 
The Group’s intangible assets include land use rights, software, franchise rights, patent technology, non-patent 
technology, and trademarks. The amortization periods and conditions for the main intangible assets are as follows: 
① Land use rights are amortized over the remaining useful life specified in the land use right certificate, with 
an average annual amortization period of 30-50 years. When the purchase price of land and buildings cannot 
be reasonably allocated between land use rights and buildings, the entire amount is treated as fixed assets. 
② Software, patent technology, and non-patent technology are amortized over the estimated useful life of 10 
years, with an average annual amortization period. 
③ Franchise rights are amortized over the estimated useful life of 30 years, with an average annual 
amortization period. 
(2) Scope of R&D expenses and related accounting treatment 
The scope of our Company’s R&D expenses is primarily determined based on the Company’s R&D projects. 
It includes R&D personnel salaries, direct input costs, depreciation and amortization expenses, design and testing 
expenses, outsourced R&D expenses, and other expenses. 
The Group classifies the expense on an internal R&D project into expense at the research phase and expense 
at the development phase. 
Expense at the research phase is recognized in the current profits and losses when incurred. 
Expense at the development phase is recognized as an intangible asset if all of the following conditions are 
satisfied at the same time, and otherwise, it is recognized in the current profits and losses: 
① It is technically feasible to complete the intangible asset so that it will be available for use or sale; 
② It is intended to complete and to use or sell the intangible asset; 
③ It can be demonstrated how the intangible asset will generate economic benefits, including demonstrating 
that there is an existing market for products produced by the intangible asset or for the intangible asset itself, 
and that it can be proven to be useful if the intangible asset is to be used internally; 
④ There are adequate technical, financial and other resources to complete the development and 
the ability  to use or sell the intangible assets; 
⑤ The expense attributable to the intangible asset at its development phase can be reliably measured. 
All the expenses on R&D which cannot be distinguished between the research phase and development phase 
are recognized in the profits and losses when incurred. 
The specific criteria for dividing internal research and development projects into research phase and 
development phase are as follows: Once the corresponding project meets the aforementioned conditions and is 
approved through a review process, it enters the development phase and begins capitalization. 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
192 
 
(3) The impairment testing method and provision for impairment of intangible assets 
For the impairment testing method and provision for impairment of intangible assets, please refer to Item 25 
of Note V “Impairment of long-term assets.” 
25. Impairment of long-term assets 
For non-current non-financial assets such as fixed assets, construction in progress, right of use assets, intangible 
assets with limited useful life, investment real estate measured at cost and long-term equity investments in 
subsidiaries, joint ventures and associates, the Group determines whether there are signs of impairment on the 
balance sheet date. If the asset shows signs of impairment, the recoverable amount is estimated, and impairment test 
is conducted. Goodwill, intangible assets with indefinite useful lives and intangible assets that have not yet ready 
for use are tested annually for impairment regardless of whether there is an indication of impairment. 
If the impairment test results show that the recoverable amount of an asset is lower than its carrying value, the 
impairment provision shall be made and the impairment loss shall be recorded according to the difference. The 
recoverable amount is the higher between the net value of the fair value of the asset less the disposal expense and 
the present value of the estimated future cash flow of the asset. The fair value of the asset is determined based on 
the sales agreement price in fair transactions. Where there is no sales agreement but there is an active market for the 
asset, the fair value shall be determined according to the buyer’s bid for the asset. 
Where there is neither sales agreement nor active market for the asset, the fair value of the asset is estimated 
based on the best information available. Disposal costs include legal costs associated with the disposal of the asset, 
related taxes, removal costs and direct costs incurred to bring the asset to marketable status. The present value of 
the expected future cash flow of the asset shall be determined according to the discounted amount of the expected 
future cash flow generated by the asset in the process of continuous use and final disposal, which is converted 
according to the appropriate discount rate. The asset impairment provision is calculated and recognized on a single 
asset basis. If it is difficult to estimate the recoverable amount of a single asset, the recoverable amount of the asset 
group to which the asset belongs shall be determined. An asset group is the smallest portfolio of assets that can 
independently generate cash inflows. 
For the goodwill presented separately in the financial statements, when tested for impairment, the book value 
of goodwill will be apportioned to the asset group or combination of asset groups expected to benefit from the 
synergies of the business combination. Where the test results indicate that the recoverable amount of an asset group 
or combination of asset groups containing the apportioned goodwill is less than its book value, the corresponding 
impairment loss is recognized. The impairment loss amount is first set off against the book value of the goodwill 
apportioned to the asset group or combination of asset groups and then set off against the book value of other assets 
based on the proportion of the book value of each asset other than goodwill in the asset group or combination of 
asset groups. 
Once the above asset impairment loss is recognized, it shall not be reversed in subsequent accounting periods 
for the part whose value is restored. 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
193 
 
26. Long-term deferred expenses 
Long-term unamortized expenses are the expenses that have been incurred but shall be borne in the reporting 
period and subsequent periods for a period of assessment of more than one year. The Group’s long-term deferred 
expenses mainly consist of building renovations and project improvements. These long-term deferred expenses are 
amortized using the straight-line method over the estimated period of benefit. 
27. Contractual liabilities 
The contractual liabilities refer to the obligation of the Group to transfer goods to customers for consideration 
received or receivable. If the customer has paid the contractual consideration or the Group has obtained an 
unconditional right of collection prior to the transfer of goods by the Group to the customer, the Group presents the 
amount received or receivable as a contractual liability on the date when the actual payment is made by the customer 
or the payment due date, whichever is earlier. Contractual assets and contractual liabilities under the same contract 
are presented on a net basis, and contractual assets and contractual liabilities under different contracts are not offset. 
28. Employee compensation 
(1) Accounting treatment for short-term employee compensation 
The employee compensation of the Group includes short-term compensation, post-employment benefits, 
termination benefits and other long-term employee benefits. Where: 
Short-term compensation mainly includes wages, bonuses, allowances and subsidies, employee welfare 
expenses, medical insurance premiums, maternity insurance premiums, work-related injury insurance premiums, 
housing provident funds, union funds and employee education funds, non-monetary benefits, etc. The Group 
recognizes short-term employee compensation actually incurred during the accounting period in which employees 
provide services to the Group as a liability and includes it in current profits and losses or related asset cost. Non-
monetary benefits are measured at fair value. 
(2) Accounting treatment for post-employment benefits 
Post-employment benefits mainly include basic pension insurance, unemployment insurance and annuity. The 
post-employment benefits plan includes the establishment of a defined contribution plan and the establishment of a 
defined benefit plan. If a defined contribution plan is adopted, the corresponding amount due is included in the 
relevant asset cost or current profits and losses at the time of occurrence. 
If the employment relationship with the employee is terminated before the expiration of the employee’s 
employment contract, or a compensation proposal is made to encourage the employee to voluntarily accept the 
reduction, the employee compensation liabilities arising from termination benefits shall be recognized and included 
in current profits and losses when the Group cannot unilaterally withdraw the termination benefits provided as a 
result of the termination plan or the reduction proposal, or the Group recognizes the costs associated with the 
reorganization involving the payment of termination benefits, whichever is earlier. However, if the termination 
benefits cannot be fully paid within 12 months after the end of the annual reporting period, they shall be treated as 
other long-term employee compensations. 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
194 
 
(3) Accounting treatment for termination benefits 
Internal employee retirement plans are treated in the same way as the termination benefits mentioned above. 
The Group will recognize the salary of internal retirees and social insurance premiums to be paid during the period 
from the date the employee ceases to provide service to the normal retirement date in the current profits and losses 
(termination benefits) when the conditions for recognition of the estimated liabilities are met. 
(4) Accounting treatment for other long-term employee benefits 
Other long-term employee benefits provided by the Group to employees that meet the defined contribution 
plan are accounted for in accordance with the defined contribution plan. Other benefits shall be accounted for in 
accordance with the defined benefit plan. 
29. Estimated liabilities 
An obligation relating to a contingency is recognized as an estimated liability when the following conditions 
are met: (1) The obligation is a current obligation undertaken by the Group; (2) The performance of the obligation 
is likely to result in the outflow of economic benefits; (3) The amount of the obligation can be measured reliably. 
On the balance sheet date, estimated liabilities are measured according to the best estimate of expenses required 
to meet the relevant current obligations, taking into account factors such as risks, uncertainties and the time value 
of money associated with contingencies. 
If all or part of the expenses required to pay off the estimated liabilities are expected to be compensated by a 
third party, the compensation amount shall be recognized separately as an asset when it is basically determined that 
it can be received, and the recognized compensation amount shall not exceed the book value of the estimated 
liabilities. 
(1) Loss-making contract 
A loss-making contract is a contract in which the cost of fulfilling the contractual obligation inevitably exceeds 
the expected economic benefit. If the contract to be executed becomes a loss-making contract and the obligations 
arising from the loss-making contract meet the conditions for recognition of the above-mentioned estimated 
liabilities, the portion of the estimated loss of the contract exceeding the recognized impairment loss (if any) of the 
underlying asset of the contract is recognized as an estimated liability. 
(2) Reorganization obligation 
For a detailed, formal reorganization plan that has been announced to the public, the estimated liability amount 
is determined on the basis of direct expenses related to the reorganization, subject to meeting the conditions for 
recognition of the estimated liabilities described above. 
30. Share-based payments 
(1) Accounting treatment for share-based payment 
Share-based payments are transactions in which equity instruments are granted or liabilities are assumed on 
the basis of equity instruments in exchange for services rendered by employees or other parties. The share-based 
payments are divided into equity-settled share-based payment and cash-settled share-based payment. 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
195 
 
① Equity-settled share-based payments 
Equity-settled share-based payments in exchange for services rendered by employees shall be measured at days 
the fair value of the equity instruments granted to employees. For the equity-settled share-based payment that can 
only be vested after services during a waiting period are provided, or required performance conditions are met, the 
amount of such fair value is calculated on a straight-line basis, based on the best estimate of the number of equity 
instruments that can be vested during the waiting period, and is included in the relevant costs or expenses, or if 
available immediately after grant, included in the relevant costs or expenses on the grant date, increasing capital 
reserves accordingly. 
On each balance sheet date during the waiting period, the Group makes the best estimate based on the latest 
follow-up information such as changes in the number of employees that satisfy vesting conditions, and revises the 
number of equity instruments expected to be vested. The impact of the above estimates is included in the relevant 
costs or expenses for the period, and capital reserves are adjusted accordingly. 
The equity-settled share-based payments in exchange for services rendered by other parties shall be measured 
at the fair value of the services on the acquisition date if the fair value of services rendered by other parties can be 
reliably measured. However, if the fair value of services rendered by other parties cannot be reliably measured, but 
the fair value of the equity instruments can be reliably measured, the equity-settled share-based payments shall be 
measured at the fair value of the equity instruments on the acquisition date of the services, and included in the 
relevant costs or expenses, increasing shareholders’ equity correspondingly. 
When the fair value of equity instruments granted cannot be reliably measured, the intrinsic value of the equity 
instruments is used to measure their value on the grant date, subsequent balance sheet dates, and settlement dates. 
Changes in the intrinsic value are recognized in the current period’s income statement. 
② Cash-settled share-based payments 
A cash-settled share-based payment shall be measured in accordance with the fair value of liability determined 
based on the shares or other equity instruments undertaken by the Group. If the cash-settled share-based payment 
can be vested immediately after granting, it shall be included in the relevant costs or expenses on the grant date, 
increasing the liabilities correspondingly. For the cash-settled share-based payment that can only be vested after 
services during a waiting period are provided or required performance conditions are met, on each balance sheet 
date during the waiting period, the services obtained during the current period are included in the cost or expense at 
the fair value of the liabilities assumed by the Group based on the best estimate of the situation of vesting, increasing 
the corresponding liabilities correspondingly. 
The Group shall, on each balance sheet date and each account date prior to the settlement of the relevant 
liabilities, re-measure the fair values of the liabilities and include the changes in the current profits and losses. 
(2) Accounting treatment for modification and termination of share-based payment plan 
When the Group makes a modification to the share-based payment plan, if the modification increases the fair 
value of the equity instrument granted, the increase in services obtained is recognized in accordance with the increase 
in the fair value of the equity instrument. The increase in the fair value of equity instruments refers to the difference 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
196 
 
between fair values of the equity instruments before and after the modification on the date of modification. If a 
modification reduces the total fair value of share-based payments or is otherwise unfavorable to the employees, the 
acquired services continue to be accounted for as if the change never occurs, unless the Group cancels some or all 
of the equity instruments granted. 
If a grant of equity instruments is canceled during the waiting period, the Group treats the cancellation of the 
granted equity instruments as accelerated exercise of right and includes the amount to be recognized over the 
remaining waiting period in the current profits and losses immediately, and recognizes the capital reserve at the 
same time. If employees or other parties can choose to meet the non-vesting conditions but have not met the 
conditions within the waiting period, the Group treats it as cancellation of equity instruments granted. 
(3) Accounting treatment for share-based payment transactions involving the shareholders or de facto 
controllers of the Group and Company 
Transactions involving share payments between the shareholders or de facto controllers of the Group and 
Company are accounted for in the Group’s consolidated financial statements in accordance with the following 
provisions if either one of the settlement enterprises and receiving enterprises is within the Group, while the other 
one is outside the Group: 
① If the settlement enterprise settles by its own equity instruments, the share-based payment transaction shall 
be treated as the equity-settled share-based payment; otherwise, they shall be treated as the cash-settled share-based 
payment. 
If the settlement enterprise is an investor of the enterprise receiving the services, it shall be recognized as a 
long-term equity investment in the enterprise receiving the services according to the fair value of the equity 
instrument on the grant date or the fair value of the liability assumed, and the capital reserve (other capital reserve) 
or liability shall be recognized at the same time. 
② If the enterprise receiving the services has no settlement obligation or the equity instrument granted to its 
employees is its own equity instrument, the share-based payment transaction shall be treated as the equity-settled 
share-based payment. If the enterprise receiving the services has settlement obligation and the equity instrument 
granted to its employees is not its own equity instrument, the share-based payment transaction shall be treated as 
the cash-settled share-based payment. 
For the share-based payment transaction occurring among the enterprises within the Group, where the 
enterprise receiving the services and the settlement enterprise are not the same enterprise, the recognition and 
measurement of the share-based payment transaction in the individual financial statements of the enterprise 
receiving the services and the settlement enterprise shall be processed in accordance with the above principles. 
31. Revenue 
Revenue is the total inflow of economic benefits arising from the Group’s ordinary activities that would result 
in an increase in shareholders’ equity and are unrelated to capital contributions by shareholders. When the contract 
between the Group and the customer meets the following conditions, revenue is recognized when the customer 
obtains control of the relevant goods (including services, the same below) : The parties to the contract have approved 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
197 
 
the contract and undertake to perform their obligations; The contract specifies the rights and obligations of the 
parties to the contract in relation to the goods transferred or the provision of services; The contract has clear payment 
terms related to the transferred goods; The contract is commercial in nature, i.e. the performance of the contract will 
change the risk, timing or amount of the Group’s future cash flows; The consideration to which the Group is entitled 
as a result of the transfer of goods to customers is likely to be recovered. Gaining control of the relevant goods 
means being able to dominate the use of that goods and derive almost all of the economic benefits from it. 
On the commencement date of the contract, the Group identifies the individual performance obligation existing 
in the contract and allocates the transaction price to each individual performance obligation in proportion to the 
individual selling price of the goods promised by each individual performance obligation. Factors such as variable 
consideration, significant financing elements in the contract, non-cash consideration, and consideration payable to 
customers are considered in determining the transaction price. 
For each individual performance obligation in the contract, the Group will recognize the transaction price 
allocated to the individual performance obligation in accordance with the performance progress during the relevant 
performance period as revenue if one of the following conditions is met: The customer acquires and consumes the 
economic benefits arising from the Group’s performance at the same time as the Group fulfills its obligations; The 
customer can control the goods under construction in the course of the Group’s performance; The goods produced 
in the course of the Group’s performance have irreplaceable uses and the Group is entitled to receive payment 
throughout the contract period for the cumulative part of the performance completed to date. The performance 
progress is determined by the input or output method, depending on the nature of the goods transferred. When the 
performance progress cannot be reasonably determined, and the costs incurred by the Group are expected to be 
compensated, revenue is recognized at the amount of the costs incurred until the progress of performance can be 
reasonably determined. 
If one of the above conditions is not met, the Group recognizes revenue at the point at which the customer 
obtains control of the relevant goods at the transaction price apportioned to the individual performance obligation. 
In determining whether a customer has acquired control of the goods, the Group considers the following indications: 
The enterprise has the current right of collection in respect of the goods, that is, the customer has the current payment 
obligation in respect of the goods; The enterprise has transferred the legal ownership of the goods to the customer, 
that is, the customer has the legal ownership of the goods; The enterprise has physically transferred the goods to the 
customer, that is, the customer has physically possessed the goods; The enterprise has transferred the main risks and 
returns in the ownership of the goods to the customer, that is, the customer has obtained the main risks and returns 
in the ownership of the goods; The customer has accepted the goods; Other indications that the customer has taken 
control of the goods. 
Revenue recognition principles for specific scenarios are as follows: 
(1) Domestic sales 
Revenue is recognized when control is transferred to the customer upon delivering the products to the 
customer’s specified location and obtaining customer acknowledgement through a signed confirmation, as stipulated 
in the sales contract or order. 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
198 
 
Revenue is recognized when control is transferred to the customer upon delivering the products to the 
customer’s specified location and completing the customer's inspection based on relevant standards, as stipulated in 
the sales contract or order. 
Revenue is recognized when the hotel rooms or catering services have been provided, and the right to collect 
service fees is obtained. 
(2) International sales 
Revenue is recognized when control is transferred to the customer upon the products being dispatched and 
customs clearance procedures being completed, as stipulated in the sales contract or order. 
32. Contract cost 
Incremental cost incurred by the Group to acquire contract that is expected to be recovered is taken as the 
contract acquisition cost and recognized as an asset. However, if the amortization period of the asset does not exceed 
one year, it is included in the current profits and losses when it occurs.  
The cost incurred for the performance of the contract is recognized as an asset if it does not fall within the 
scope of Accounting Standard for Business Enterprises No. 14 - Revenue (Revised in 2017) and meets the following 
conditions: ① The cost is directly related to a current or anticipated contract, including direct labor, direct materials, 
manufacturing expenses (or similar expenses), cost expressly borne by the customer, and other costs incurred solely 
as a result of the contract; ② This cost increases the Group’s future resources to meet its performance obligations; 
③ This cost is expected to be recovered.  
Assets related to contract costs are amortized on the same basis as for the recognition of the commodity revenue 
associated with the assets and are recognized in current profits and losses. 
When the carrying amount of an asset related to contract costs exceeds the difference between the following 
two amounts, an impairment provision is recognized for the excess amount, and an asset impairment loss is 
recognized: (1) The expected remaining consideration to be obtained from transferring the goods related to that asset. 
(2) The estimated costs necessary to complete the transfer of the related goods. If there is a change in the factors 
that led to impairment in previous periods, resulting in the difference between (1) minus (2) exceeding the carrying 
amount of the asset, the previously recognized impairment provision is reversed and recognized in the current 
period’s income statement. However, the carrying amount of the asset after the reversal should not exceed the 
carrying amount of the asset on the date of the reversal, assuming no impairment provision had been recognized. 
33. Government subsidy 
Government subsidy refers to the Cash and bank balance and non-Cash and bank balance that the Group obtains 
from the government free of charge, excluding the capital invested by the government as an investor with the 
corresponding owners’ equity. Government subsidies are divided into asset-related government subsidies and 
income-related government subsidies. The Group defines government subsidies obtained for the acquisition or 
otherwise formation of long-term assets as asset-related government subsidies. Other government subsidies are 
defined as income-related government subsidies. If the government document does not specify the recipients of the 
subsidies, the subsidies divided into asset-related government subsidies and income-related government subsidies 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
199 
 
in the following way: (1) If the government documents specify the specific project for which the subsidy is targeted, 
the division shall be made according to the relative proportion of the disbursement amount forming assets and the 
disbursement amount included in the expenses in the budget of the specific project, and the division proportion shall 
be reviewed on each balance sheet date and changed if necessary; (2) Where the government document only has a 
general description of the purpose and no specific project is specified, it shall be regarded as an income-related 
government subsidy. For a government subsidy in the form of transfer of Cash and bank balance, the subsidy is 
measured at the amount received or receivable. For a government subsidy in the form of transfer of non-Cash and 
bank balance, it is measured at fair value; if the fair value cannot be reliably determinable, the subsidy is measured 
at nominal amount. Government subsidies measured at nominal amounts are directly included in current profits and 
losses. 
The Group usually recognizes and measures government subsidies in accordance with the amount actually 
received when they are actually received. However, government subsidies are recognized at the amount receivable 
if there is evidence that the Group can meet the relevant conditions specified in the financial support policy at the 
end of the period and the Group is expected to receive the financial support funds. Government subsidies measured 
at the amounts receivable shall also meet the following conditions: (1) The amount of the receivable subsidies has 
been confirmed by the competent government department in writing, or can be reasonably calculated according to 
the relevant provisions of the officially issued measures for the management of financial funds, and there is no 
significant uncertainty in the estimated amount; (2) It is based on the financial support projects and financial fund 
management measures officially issued by the local financial department and actively disclosed in accordance with 
the provisions of the Regulations on the Disclosure of Government Information, and the management measures 
should be inclusive (that is, any enterprise that meets the prescribed conditions can apply), rather than specifically 
formulated for specific enterprises; (3) The relevant grant approval has clearly promised the disbursement period, 
and the disbursement of the amount is guaranteed by the corresponding financial budget, so it can be reasonably 
guaranteed that it can be received within the specified period; (4) Other relevant conditions that should be met based 
on the specific circumstances of the Group and the grant in question (if any). 
Asset-related government subsidies are recognized as deferred revenues and included in the current profits and 
losses over the useful life of the related assets in accordance with a reasonable and systematic method. Income-
related government subsidies that compensate the future costs, expenses or losses are recorded as deferred income 
and recognized in current profits and losses in the period in which the related costs, expenses or losses are recognized; 
Income-related government subsidies that compensate the incurred expenses or losses are included directly in the 
current profits and losses. 
For government subsidies that contain both parts related to assets and parts related to income, accounting 
treatments shall be made separately for different parts. If it is difficult to distinguish, it shall be classified as the 
income-related government subsidy. 
Government subsidies related to ordinary activities are recorded in other income in accordance the substance 
of economic operations. Government subsidies unrelated to daily activities are included in non-operating revenue 
and expense. 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
200 
 
When confirmed government subsidies need to be returned and there is a related balance of deferred income, 
the related deferred income balance is offset. Any excess amount is recognized in the current period’s income 
statement or adjusted against the carrying value of the asset (for government subsidies that were initially offset 
against the carrying value of the asset); in other cases, it is recognized directly in the current profits and losses. 
34. Deferred income tax assets/deferred income tax liabilities 
(1) Current income tax 
The current income tax liabilities (or assets) generated in the current period and previous periods are measured 
on the balance sheet date in accordance with the expected payable (or refunded) income tax amount calculated 
according to the tax law. The taxable income amount on which the current income tax expense is calculated is based 
on the corresponding adjustment of the pre-tax accounting profit of the reporting period in accordance with the 
relevant provisions of the tax law. 
(2) Deferred income tax assets and deferred income tax liabilities 
The deferred income tax assets and deferred income tax liabilities can be determined with the balance sheet 
liability method, based on the difference between the book value of certain assets and liabilities and the tax basis, 
as well as the temporary difference between the tax basis and the book value of the items not recognized as assets 
and liabilities but whose tax basis can be determined according to the tax law. 
For taxable temporary differences relating to the initial recognition of goodwill and the initial recognition of 
assets or liabilities arising from transactions that are neither a business combination nor affect accounting profit and 
taxable income (or deductible losses) at the time of occurrence, the relevant deferred tax liabilities are not recognized 
(except for individual transactions in which the initial recognition of assets and liabilities results in equal amounts 
of taxable temporary differences and deductible temporary differences). 
In addition, for taxable temporary differences related to investments in subsidiaries, associates and joint 
ventures, deferred tax liabilities are not recognized if the Group is able to control the timing of the reversal of the 
temporary difference and it is likely that the temporary difference will not be reversed in the foreseeable future. 
Subject to the above exceptions, the Group recognizes all other deferred tax liabilities arising from taxable 
temporary differences. 
For deductible temporary differences relating to the initial recognition of assets or liabilities arising from 
transactions that are neither a business combination nor affect accounting profit and taxable income (or deductible 
losses) at the time of occurrence, the relevant deferred tax assets are not recognized (except for individual 
transactions in which the initial recognition of assets and liabilities results in equal amounts of taxable temporary 
differences and deductible temporary differences). For deductible temporary differences associated with 
investments in subsidiaries, associates and joint ventures, the relevant deferred tax asset is not recognized if it is not 
likely that the temporary differences will reverse in the foreseeable future and it is not likely that taxable income 
will be available against which the deductible temporary differences can be utilized  in the future. Subject to the 
above exceptions, the Group recognizes other deferred income tax assets arising from deductible temporary 
differences to the extent that it is probable that taxable income will be available against which deductible temporary 
differences can be utilized. 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
201 
 
For the deductible losses and tax credits that can be carried forward to future years, the Group recognizes the 
corresponding deferred tax assets to the extent that it is probable that future taxable income will be available against 
which the deductible losses and tax credits can be utilized. 
On the balance sheet date, deferred income tax assets and deferred income tax liabilities are measured at the 
tax rates that are expected to apply in the period in which the asset is recovered or the liability is settled according 
to the tax law. 
On the balance sheet date, the Group reviews the book value of deferred income tax assets. If no sufficient 
taxable income is probably obtained in the future to offset the benefits of deferred income tax assets, the book value 
of the deferred income tax assets shall be written down. When it is probable to obtain sufficient taxable income 
taxes, such write-down amount shall be reversed. 
(3) Income tax expense 
Income tax expenses include current income tax expenses and deferred income tax expenses. 
Except for current income tax and deferred income tax related to transactions and events recognized as other 
comprehensive income or directly included in shareholders’ equity, and the book value of deferred income tax 
adjusted goodwill resulting from business combination, the remaining current income tax and deferred income tax 
expenses or gains are included in current profits and losses. 
(4) Offsetting of income tax 
If the Group has the legal right to settle on a net basis, and intends to settle on a net basis or acquire assets and 
settle liabilities simultaneously, the current income tax assets and current income tax liabilities are presented on a 
net basis after offsetting. 
If the Group has a legally enforceable right to settle current income tax assets and liabilities on a net basis， 
and the deferred income tax assets and liabilities are related to the income taxes levied by the same taxation authority 
on either the same taxable entity or different taxable entities, which intend either to settle current income tax assets 
and liabilities on a net basis or to realize the assets and settle the liabilities simultaneously, in each future period in 
which significant amounts of deferred income tax assets and liabilities are expected to be reversed, the deferred 
income tax assets and liabilities can be offset and presented on a net basis. 
35. Leases 
Leasing refers to the contract in which the Group transfers or acquires the right to control the use of 
identified assets for a specified period in exchange for consideration. On the commencement date of a contract, 
the Group assesses whether the contract is, or contains, a lease. 
(1) Accounting treatment as the lessee 
The Group’s lease assets are mainly housing and buildings. 
① Initial measurement 
On the date of commencement of the lease term, the Group recognizes the right to use the lease asset during 
the lease term as a right of use asset and recognizes the present value of the outstanding lease payments as a lease 
liability, except for short-term leases and low value asset leases. When calculating the present value of lease 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
202 
 
payments, the interest rate implicit in the lease is used as the discount rate. If the interest rate implicit in the lease 
cannot be determined, the lessor’s incremental borrowing rate is used as the discount rate. 
② Subsequent measurement 
The Group shall depreciate the right of use assets in accordance with the relevant depreciation provisions of 
Accounting Standard for Business Enterprises No. 4 - Fixed Assets (see Section 19 “Fixed assets” under Note 
V for details). If the ownership of the leased asset can be reasonably determined at the end of the lease term, the 
Group shall depreciate the leased asset during the remaining useful life. Where it is unable to reasonably determine 
the ownership of the leased asset at the end of the lease term, the Group shall make depreciation provision over the 
lease term or the remaining useful life of the leased asset, whichever is shorter. 
The Group calculates the interest expense on lease liabilities for each period of the lease term at a fixed periodic 
rate, which is included in the current profits and losses, or the relevant asset costs. Variable lease payments that are 
not included in the measurement of the lease liability are recognized in current profits and losses, or the relevant 
asset costs when they are actually incurred. 
After the commencement date of the lease term, when there is a change in the substantive fixed payment amount, 
a change in the amount expected to be payable for the guaranteed residual value, a change in the index or rate used 
to determine the lease payment amount, or a change in the evaluation result or actual exercise of the purchase option, 
renewal option or termination option, the Group remeasures the lease liability at the present value of the changed 
lease payment amount and adjusts the carrying value of the right-of-use asset accordingly. If the book value of the 
right-of-use asset has been reduced to zero but the lease liability is subject to further reduction, the Group recognizes 
the remaining amount in current profits and losses. 
③ Short-term leases and leases of low-value assets 
For short-term leases (leases with a lease term of not more than 12 months since the commencement date of 
the lease) and low-value asset leases (the value of a single lease asset, which is a brand-new asset, is lower than 
either RMB 40,000 or USD 5,000), the Group adopts a simplified approach whereby the right of use assets and lease 
liabilities are not recognized and the lease payments are recognized in the relevant asset cost or current profits and 
losses in accordance with the straight-line method or other systematic and reasonable methods during the various 
periods of the lease term. 
(2) Accounting treatment as the lessor 
On the inception date of the lease, the Group classifies the lease as a finance lease and an operating lease based 
on the substance of transaction. A finance lease is a lease that transfers substantially all the risks and returns 
associated with ownership of the leased asset. An operating lease is a lease other than a finance lease. 
① Operating lease 
Lease receipts under operating leases are recognized as rental income on a straight-line basis over the respective 
periods of the lease term. Variable lease payments acquired in connection with operating leases that are not included 
in the lease receipts are recognized in current profits and losses when they are actually incurred. 
② Finance lease 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
203 
 
The Group recognizes finance lease receivables and derecognizes finance lease assets on the commencement 
date of the lease term. Finance lease receivables are initially measured at the net lease investment (the sum of the 
unsecured balance and the unreceived lease proceeds on the commencement date of the lease term at the present 
value discounted with the intrinsic interest rate of the lease), and interest income is recognized during the lease term 
at a fixed periodic interest rate. Variable lease payments obtained by the Group which are not included in the net 
lease investment measurement are recognized in current profits and losses when they are actually incurred. 
36. Other significant accounting policies and accounting estimates 
(1) Share repurchase 
Consideration and transaction costs paid in share repurchases reduce shareholders’ equity and no profits or 
losses is recognized when shares of the Company are repurchased, transferred or cancelled. 
For the transfer of treasury shares, the difference between the amount actually received and the book value of 
treasury shares shall be included in the capital reserve. If the capital reserve is insufficient for deduction, the surplus 
reserve and undistributed profits shall be deducted. For the cancellation of treasury shares, the share capital shall be 
reduced according to the par value of the shares and the number of shares cancelled, and the difference between the 
book balance and the par value of treasury shares shall be charged to the capital reserve. If the capital reserve is 
insufficient for deduction, the surplus reserve and undistributed profits shall be deducted. 
37. Changes in significant accounting policies and accounting estimates 
(1) Changes in significant accounting policies 
□ Applicable  ☑ Not applicable 
(2) Changes in significant accounting estimates 
□ Applicable  ☑ Not applicable 
(3) First-time implementation of the new accounting standard in 2023 to adjust relevant items in the 
financial statements at the beginning of the year of first-time implementation 
□ Applicable  ☑ Not applicable 
38. Significant accounting judgment and estimate 
As operating activities have inherent uncertainties, the Group needs to make judgments, estimates and 
assumptions upon report items that cannot be accurately calculated in applying the above accounting policies. These 
judgments, estimates and assumptions are made based on historical experiences of the management of the Group, 
taking other related factors into consideration. These judgments and estimates may affect the presented amounts of 
incomes, expenses, assets and liabilities and, as well as the disclosure of contingent liabilities on the balance sheet 
date. However, the uncertainty in these estimates may result in actual results that differ from the current estimates 
of the Group's management, resulting in material adjustments to the book value of assets or liabilities affected in the 
future. 
The Group reviews the above judgments, estimates and assumptions periodically based on going concern. If 
the changes of accounting estimates only affect the current period, the influence amount is recognized in the current 
period. If the changes of accounting estimates affect both of the current year and the future period, the influence 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
204 
 
amount is recognized in the current period and the future period. 
As at the balance sheet date, the significant areas in which the Group is required to make judgments, estimates 
and assumptions regarding the amounts of items in the financial statements are as follows: 
(1) Revenue recognition 
As set out in Section 39 “Revenue” under Note V, the Group’s revenue recognition involves significant 
accounting judgments and estimates such as: identifying customer contracts; estimating the recoverability of the 
consideration to which the Group is entitled as a result of the transfer of goods to the customer; identifying the 
performance obligations in the contract; estimating the variable consideration present in the contract and the amount 
of accumulated recognized revenue that is highly unlikely to be materially reversed when the related uncertainty is 
eliminated; whether there is any significant financing component to the contract; estimating the individual selling 
price of the individual performance obligations in the contract; determining whether the performance obligation is 
to be performed within a certain period of time or at a certain point; determining the implementation progress, etc. 
The Group mainly relies on past experience and work to make judgments, and these significant judgments and 
changes in estimates may have an impact on the operating revenue, operating costs, and profits and losses of the 
period for the current or subsequent periods, and may constitute a material impact. 
(2) Leases 
① Identification of leases 
When identifying whether a contract is a lease or contains a lease, the Group needs to assess whether there 
exists an identified asset and the customer controls the use of the asset for a certain period of time. In this assessment, 
consideration needs to be given to the nature of the asset, substantial replacement rights, and whether the customer 
is entitled to receive virtually all of the economic benefits arising from the use of the asset during that period and 
able to direct the use of the asset. 
② Classification of leases 
When acting as a lessor, the Group classifies leases into operating leases and finance leases. When making the 
classification, the management needs to make an analysis and judgment as to whether all the risks and rewards 
associated with ownership of the leased asset have been substantially transferred to the lessee. 
③ Lease liabilities 
When the Group is the lessee, the lease liabilities shall be initially measured at the present value of the 
outstanding lease payment on the commencement date of the lease term. When measuring the present value of lease 
payments, the Group estimates the discount rate used and the lease term of a lease contract with a renewal or 
termination option. When assessing the lease term, the Group takes into account all relevant facts and circumstances 
relating to the economic benefits arising from the exercise of the option by the Group, including expected changes 
in facts and circumstances between the commencement date of the lease term and the exercise date of the option. 
Different judgments and estimates may affect the recognition of lease liabilities and right-of-use assets and will 
affect the profits or losses in subsequent periods. 
(3) Impairment of financial assets 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
205 
 
The Group uses the expected credit loss model to evaluate the impairment of financial instruments, and the 
application of the expected credit loss model requires significant judgments and estimates that take into account all 
reasonable and evidence-based information, including forward-looking information. When making such judgments 
and estimates, the Group extrapolates the expected changes in the debtors' credit risk based on historical data and 
factors such as changes in economic policies, macroeconomic indicators, industry risks, external market conditions, 
technological environment and customer conditions. 
(4) Provision for inventory impairment 
According to the inventory accounting policy, the Group makes provision for inventory impairment based on 
either the cost or the realizable net value of the old and unsalable inventory, whichever is lower, if the cost is higher 
than the realizable net value. The impairment of inventory to net realizable value is based on assessing the 
marketability of the inventory and its net realizable value. Assessment of inventory impairment requires the 
management to make judgments and estimates on the basis of obtaining solid evidence and considering factors such 
as the purpose of holding inventory and the impact of events after the balance sheet date. The difference between 
actual results and the original estimate will affect the book value of inventory and the withdrawal or reversal of the 
provision for inventory impairment during the period in which the estimate is changed. 
(5) Fair value of financial instruments 
For financial instruments without active market, the Group will determine their fair values through various 
valuation methods. These valuation methods include discounted cash flow model analysis. In the valuation, the 
Group needs to estimate future cash flows, credit risk, market volatility and correlation, and select an appropriate 
discount rate. These assumptions are subject to uncertainty, and changes in them can have an impact on the fair 
value of financial instruments. Where equity instrument investments or contracts are publicly quoted, the Group 
does not use cost as the best estimate of their fair value. 
(6) Provision for impairment of long-term assets 
On the balance sheet date, the Group makes a judgment on whether there is any sign of possible impairment of 
non-current assets other than financial assets. Intangible assets with uncertain useful life shall be subject to 
impairment tests when there are signs of impairment in addition to annual impairment tests. Non-current assets other 
than financial assets shall be subject to impairment tests when there are signs indicating that their book value is 
uncollectible. 
Impairment occurs when the book value of an asset or asset group is greater than the recoverable amount, that 
is, the net amount of fair value minus disposal expenses and the present value of expected future cash flow, 
whichever is higher. 
The net amount of fair value minus disposal expenses shall be determined by reference to the sale agreement 
price or observable market price of similar assets in an arm’s length transaction, less the incremental cost directly 
attributable to the disposal of the asset. 
When estimating the present value of future cash flows, it is necessary to make significant judgments about the 
output of the asset (or group of assets), the selling price, the associated operating costs, and the discount rate used 
in calculating the present value. When estimating the recoverable amounts, the Group uses all the relevant 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
206 
 
information available, including projections of production volumes, selling prices and related operating costs based 
on reasonable and supportable assumptions. 
The Group tests goodwill for impairment at least annually. This requires an estimate of the present value of the 
future cash flows of the asset group or combination of asset groups to which goodwill has been allocated. When 
estimating the present value of the future cash flow, the Group needs to estimate the expected future cash flow 
generated by the asset group or combination of asset groups, and determine the present value of the future cash flow 
at an appropriate discount rate. 
(7) Depreciation and amortization 
The Group depreciates and amortizes the investment real estate, fixed assets and intangible assets on a straight-
line basis over their useful lives, taking into account their residual value. The Group periodically reviews the useful 
life to determine the amount of depreciation and amortisation expenses to be included in each reporting period. The 
useful life is determined by the Group based on previous experience with similar assets as well as expected 
technological updates. If there is any material change in previous estimates, an adjustment will be made to 
depreciation and amortization expense in future periods. 
(8) Deferred income tax assets 
To the extent that there is likely sufficient taxable profit to offset the loss, the Group recognises deferred tax 
assets on all unutilised tax losses. This requires the management of the Group to use massive judgments to estimate 
the time and amount of taxable profit in the future and then to determine the value of deferred tax assets in 
combination with tax planning strategies. 
(9) Income tax 
In the normal business activities of the Group, there are certain uncertainties in the final tax treatment and 
calculation of some transactions. Whether some items can be deducted before tax requires the approval of the tax 
authority. Where the final tax outcome of these matters is different from the estimated amounts, the differences will 
impact the current income tax and deferred income tax in the period in which such determination is made. 
(10) Estimated liabilities 
Based on the terms of the contract, current knowledge and historical experience, the Group estimates and makes 
corresponding provisions for product quality assurance, expected contract losses, liquidated damages for late 
delivery, etc. Where such contingencies have created a current obligation and the fulfilment of such current 
obligations is likely to result in an outflow of economic benefits from the Group, the Group recognises the 
contingency as an estimated liability based on the best estimate of the expense required to fulfil the relevant current 
obligation. The recognition and measurement of the estimated liabilities relies heavily on the judgment of the 
management. When making this judgment, the Group needs to assess factors such as risks, uncertainties and the 
time value of money associated with such contingencies. 
Among other things, the Group will estimate liabilities for after-sales quality maintenance commitments 
provided to customers in relation to the sale, repair and modification of the products sold. The Group’s recent 
maintenance experience data has been taken into account when estimating liabilities, but recent maintenance 
experience may not reflect future maintenance situation. Any increase or decrease in this provision may affect profits 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
207 
 
or losses in future years. 
(11) Measurement at fair value 
Certain assets and liabilities of the Group are measured at fair value in the financial statements. When 
estimating the fair value of an asset or liability, the Group uses available observable market data. If the 
inputs of level 1 are not available, the Group uses appropriate valuation techniques and relevant models for 
valuation. 
39. Others 
None. 
VI. Taxation 
1. Main tax types and tax rates 
Tax type 
Taxation basis 
Tax rate 
Value-added tax 
Value added from sales of goods or 
rendering of services 
13%, 9%, 6%, 5%, 3% 
Consumption tax 
Quantity-based collection and price-
based collection 
Price-based collection: 20%, 15%; Quantity-based 
collection: RMB 0.5 per 0.5kg 
Urban maintenance and 
construction tax 
Amount of turnover tax payables 
7%, 5%, 1% 
Enterprise income tax 
Taxable income 
15%, 16.5%, 20%, 25% 
Education surcharge 
Amount of turnover tax payables 
3% 
Local education surcharge 
Amount of turnover tax payables 
2% 
If there are taxable entities with different corporate income tax rates, disclose the description of the situation 
Taxpayer 
Income tax rate 
Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
15% 
Yunnan Baiyao Group Medicine E-commerce Co., Ltd. 
15% 
Yunnan Institute of Materia Medica 
15% 
Yunbaiyao Zhengwu Technology (Shanghai) Co., Ltd. 
15% 
Yunnan Baiyao Group Dali Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd. 
15% 
Yunnan Baiyao Group Health Products Co., Ltd. 
15% 
Yunnan Baiyao Group Traditional Chinese Medicine Resources Co., Ltd. 
15% 
Yunnan Baiyao Group Lijiang Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd. 
15% 
Yunnan Baiyao Group Wenshan Qihua Co., Ltd. 
15% 
Yunnan Baiyao Group Wuding Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd. 
15% 
Yunnan Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd. 
15% 
Yunnan Pharmaceutical Yuxi Sales Co., Ltd. 
15% 
Yunnan Pharmaceutical Xingda Co., Ltd. 
15% 
Yunnan Pharmaceutical Baoshan Drug Development Co., Ltd. 
15% 
Yunnan Pharmaceutical Technology Co., Ltd. 
15% 
Yunnan Pharmaceutical Sanfa Co., Ltd. 
15% 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
208 
 
Yunnan Pharmaceutical Dehong Development Co., Ltd. 
15% 
Yunnan Pharmaceutical Xihui Co., Ltd. 
15% 
Yunnan Pharmaceutical Qujing Co., Ltd. 
15% 
Yunnan Baiyao Pharmacy Co., Ltd. 
15% 
Yunnan Pharmaceutical Wanhe Co., Ltd. 
15% 
Yunnan Pharmaceutical Tianma Co., Ltd. 
15% 
YNBY International Limited 
16.50% 
Beijing Rui’er Testing Technology Co., Ltd. 
20% 
Yunnan Pharmaceutical Jiayuan Co., Ltd. 
20% 
Yunnan Pharmaceutical Xiongyi Co., Ltd. 
20% 
Yunnan Pharmaceutical Tianfu Dahua Co., Ltd. 
20% 
Yunnan Pharmaceutical Lincang Sales Co., Ltd. 
20% 
Yunnan Pharmaceutical Diqing Development Co., Ltd. 
20% 
Yunnan Pharmaceutical Pu’er Co., Ltd. 
20% 
Yunnan Pharmaceutical Dali Development Co., Ltd. 
20% 
Lijiang Yunquan Biological Development Co., Ltd. 
20% 
Yunnan Baiyao Tiancui Business Management Co., Ltd. 
20% 
Beijing Yunzhi Health Management Co., Ltd. 
20% 
Shanghai Wenshu Health Management Co., Ltd. 
20% 
Yunnan Baiyao Yunzhen International Trade Co., Ltd. 
20% 
Kunming Yunzhen Medical Technology Co., Ltd. 
20% 
Shanghai Yunyao Oral Medical Technology Co., Ltd. 
20% 
Yunnan Fengqing Tea Plant Co., Ltd. 
20% 
Tianjin Yunshuda Comprehensive Clinic Co., Ltd. 
20% 
Yunnan Tianzheng Testing Co., Ltd. 
20% 
2. Preferential tax treatment 
(1) Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd, Yunnan Baiyao Group Medicine E-commerce Co., Ltd, Yunnan 
Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd, Yunnan Pharmaceutical Technology Co., Ltd, Yunnan Pharmaceutical Yuxi Sales 
Co., Ltd, Yunnan Pharmaceutical Sanfa Co., Ltd, Yunnan Pharmaceutical Xingda Co., Ltd, Yunnan 
Pharmaceutical Wanhe Co., Ltd, Yunnan Pharmaceutical Baoshan Drug Development Co., Ltd, Yunnan 
Baiyao Group Health Products Co., Ltd, Yunnan Baiyao Group Lijiang Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd, Yunnan 
Baiyao Group Wenshan Qihua Co., Ltd, Yunnan Baiyao Pharmacy Co., Ltd, Yunnan Baiyao Group Wuding 
Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd, Yunnan Baiyao Group Dali Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd, Yunnan Pharmaceutical 
Tianma Co., Ltd, Yunnan Pharmaceutical Hongde Development Co., Ltd, Yunnan Pharmaceutical Qujing Co., 
Ltd and Yunnan Pharmaceutical Xihui Co., Ltd enjoy the preferential tax treatment for the Western 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
209 
 
Development and pay the enterprise income tax at the tax rate of 15%. 
(2) Yunnan Institute of Materia Medica, Yunbaiyao Zhengwu Technology (Shanghai) Co., Ltd and 
Yunnan Baiyao Group Traditional Chinese Medicine Resources Co., Ltd enjoy the preferential tax treatment 
for high-tech enterprises and pay the enterprise income tax at the tax rate of 15%. 
(3) For Yunnan Baiyao Group Sanqi Industry Co., Ltd, Yunnan Baiyao Group Tai’an Biotechnology 
Industry Co., Ltd and Yunnan Yunyao Flavor and Fragrance Co., Ltd, the primary processing of agricultural 
products is exempt from enterprise income tax, and the income other than that is taxed at 25%. 
For Lijiang Yunquan Biological Development Co., Ltd, the primary processing of agricultural products is 
exempt from enterprise income tax, and the income other than that shall be subject to enterprise income tax 
for small and micro enterprises. 
(4) According to the Announcement of the General Administration of Taxation of the Ministry of Finance 
on the Further Implementation of the Preferential Income Tax Policy for Small and Micro Enterprises (Finance 
and Taxation [2022] No. 13), “the part of the annual taxable income of small and micro profit enterprises 
exceeding RMB 1 million but not exceeding RMB 3 million shall be included in the taxable income at a 
reduced rate of 25%, and the enterprise income tax shall be paid at a tax rate of 20%. The period of 
implementation of this announcement is from January 1, 2022 to December 31, 2024,” the Announcement of 
the General Administration of Taxation of the Ministry of Finance on Preferential Income Tax Policies for 
Small and Micro Enterprises and Individual Industrial and Commercial Households (Finance and Taxation 
[2023] No. 6), “the part of the annual taxable income of small and micro profit enterprises that does not exceed 
RMB 1 million shall be included in the taxable income at a reduced rate of 25%, and the enterprise income tax 
shall be paid at a tax rate of 20%. The period of enforcement of this Announcement is from January 1, 2023 to 
December 31, 2024,” and the Announcement of the General Administration of Taxation of the Ministry of 
Finance on Tax Policies for Further Supporting the Development of Small and Micro Enterprises and 
Individual Industrial and Commercial Enterprises (Finance and Taxation [2023] No. 12), “For small, low-
profit enterprises, the taxable income amount shall be calculated at a reduced rate of 25%, and the enterprise 
income tax shall be paid at a tax rate of 20%. The policy shall be continued until December 31, 2027.” Eighteen 
companies, including Yunnan Fengqing Tea Plant Co., Ltd, and Beijing Rui’er Testing Technology Co., Ltd 
pay enterprise income tax at a tax rate of 20% according to this policy.  
3. Others 
None. 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
210 
 
VII. Notes to Items in Consolidated Financial Statements 
1. Cash and bank balance 
Unit: RMB 
Item 
Closing balance 
Opening balance 
Cash on hand 
258,600.92 
224,637.14 
Bank deposit 
14,132,709,154.14 
13,006,283,524.34 
Other cash and bank balance 
85,375,321.61 
49,605,550.99 
Total 
14,218,343,076.67 
13,056,113,712.47 
Including: Total amount of money 
deposited overseas 
190,267,321.90 
177,953,497.45 
Other explanations: None.  
2. Financial assets held for trading 
Unit: RMB 
Item 
Closing balance 
Opening balance 
Financial assets at fair value through 
profits or losses 
149,366,687.56 
2,415,722,075.60 
Including: 
 
 
Investments in debt instruments 
 
 
Investments in equity instruments 
144,766,687.56 
2,357,680,635.18 
Others 
4,600,000.00 
58,041,440.42 
Total 
149,366,687.56 
2,415,722,075.60 
Other explanations: None.  
3. Notes receivable 
(1) Notes receivable by type 
       Unit: RMB 
Item 
Closing balance 
Opening balance 
Banker’s acceptance bill 
227,542,572.56 
789,465,084.93 
Total 
227,542,572.56 
789,465,084.93 
 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
211 
 
(2) Disclosure by provision for bad debts  
Unit: RMB 
Category 
Closing balance 
Opening balance 
Book balance 
Provision for bad debts 
Book value 
Book balance 
Provision for bad debts 
Book value 
Amount 
Proportion 
Amount 
Provision 
proportion 
 
Amount 
Proportion 
Amount 
Provision 
proportion 
 
Bills receivable with provision for bad debts by 
portfolio 
227,542,572.56 
100.00% 
 
 
227,542,572.56 
789,465,084.93 
100.00% 
 
 
789,465,084.93 
Including: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Banker’s acceptance bill 
227,542,572.56 
100.00% 
 
 
227,542,572.56 
789,465,084.93 
100.00% 
 
 
789,465,084.93 
Total 
227,542,572.56 
100.00% 
 
 
227,542,572.56 
789,465,084.93 
100.00% 
 
 
789,465,084.93 
 
 
Provision for bad debts by portfolio: 
Unit: RMB 
Item 
Closing balance 
Book balance 
Provision for bad debts 
Provision proportion 
Banker’s acceptance bill 
227,542,572.56 
 
 
Total 
227,542,572.56 
  
If provision was made for bad debts of notes receivable in accordance with the general expected credit loss model: 
□ Applicable  
☑ Not applicable 
 
 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
212 
 
(3) Provision for bad debts accrued, recovered or reversed during the reporting period: None. 
(4) Notes receivable pledged by the Company at the end of the reporting period: None. 
(5) Notes receivable endorsed or discounted by the Company, which were not yet due on the balance 
sheet date as at the end of the reporting period 
Unit: RMB 
Item 
Amount derecognized at the end of the 
period 
Amount not derecognized at the end of the 
period 
Banker’s acceptance bill 
7,122,953.97  
Total 
7,122,953.97  
(6) Actual write-off of notes receivable for the period: None.  
4. Accounts receivable 
(1) Disclosure by aging  
Unit: RMB 
Aging 
Closing balance  
Opening balance  
Within 1 year (inclusive of 1 year)  
9,849,981,025.64 
9,171,153,870.19 
1 to 2 years 
830,787,332.12 
515,648,957.18 
2 to 3 years  
86,210,266.13 
21,889,679.33 
Above 3 years 
33,448,661.91 
36,176,763.82 
Total  
10,800,427,285.80 
9,744,869,270.52 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
               
213 
 
 
(2) Disclosure by provision for bad debts  
Unit: RMB 
Category 
Closing balance 
Opening balance 
Book balance 
Provision for bad debts 
Book value 
Book balance 
Provision for bad debts 
Book value 
Amount 
Proportion 
Amount 
Provision 
proportion 
 
Amount 
Proportion 
Amount 
Provision 
proportion 
 
Accounts receivable 
with provision for bad 
debts on individual 
basis 
7,404,800.00 
0.07% 
7,404,800.00 
100.00% 
 
7,404,800.00 
0.08% 
7,404,800.00 
100.00% 
 
Including: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Accounts receivable 
with provision for bad 
debts on individual 
basis 
7,404,800.00 
0.07% 
7,404,800.00 
100.00% 
 
7,404,800.00 
0.08% 
7,404,800.00 
100.00% 
 
Accounts receivable 
with provision for bad 
debts on portfolio basis 
10,793,022,485.80 
99.93% 
826,852,038.59 
7.66% 9,966,170,447.21 
9,737,464,470.52 
99.92% 647,642,318.59 
6.65% 9,089,822,151.93 
Including: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Aging portfolio 
10,793,022,485.80 
99.93% 
826,852,038.59 
 9,966,170,447.21 
9,737,464,470.52 
99.92% 647,642,318.59 
6.65% 9,089,822,151.93 
Total 
10,800,427,285.80 
100.00% 
834,256,838.59 
7.72% 9,966,170,447.21 
9,744,869,270.52 
100.00% 655,047,118.59 
6.72% 9,089,822,151.93 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
               
214 
 
Provision for bad debts made on an individual basis: 
Unit: RMB 
Name  
Opening balance  
Closing balance  
Book balance  Provision for bad 
debts 
Book balance 
Provision for bad 
debts 
Provision 
proportion  
Reason for 
provision  
Ningbo Qingbing 
Biotechnology 
Co., Ltd 
7,404,800.00 
7,404,800.00 
7,404,800.00 
7,404,800.00 
100.00% Little chance of 
recovery 
Total  
7,404,800.00 
7,404,800.00 
7,404,800.00 
7,404,800.00  
 
Provision for bad debts made on a portfolio basis: 
Unit: RMB 
Name 
Closing balance 
Book balance 
Provision for bad debts 
Provision proportion 
Aging portfolio 
10,793,022,485.80 
826,852,038.59 
7.66% 
Total 
10,793,022,485.80 
826,852,038.59 
 
Explanation on the basis for determining the portfolio: None.  
If provision was made for bad debts of accounts receivable in accordance with the general expected credit loss model: 
□ Applicable 
☑ Not applicable  
(3) Provision for bad debts accrued, recovered or reversed during the reporting period 
Provision for bad debts for the period: 
Unit: RMB 
Category 
Opening balance 
Changes in this period 
Closing balance 
Provision 
Recovery or 
reversal 
Write-off 
Others 
Single account 
receivable with 
provision for bad debts 
7,404,800.00 
 
 
 
 
7,404,800.00 
Aging portfolio 
647,642,318.59 
179,435,027.97 
 
225,307.97 
 
826,852,038.59 
Total 
655,047,118.59 
179,435,027.97 
 
225,307.97 
 
834,256,838.59 
Provision for bad debts during the reporting period: None.  
(4) Actual write-off of accounts receivable for the period: 
Unit: RMB 
Item 
Amount of write-off 
Actual write-off of accounts receivable 
225,307.97 
Significant write-off of accounts receivable: None.   
Explanation on write-off of accounts receivable: None.  


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
               
215 
 
(5) Top five customers in closing balance of accounts receivable and contractual assets summarized 
by debtor 
Unit: RMB 
Entity name 
Closing balance of 
accounts receivable 
Closing balance 
of contractual 
assets 
Closing balance of 
accounts receivable 
and contractual 
assets  
Percentage of total 
of closing balance 
of accounts 
receivable and 
contractual assets  
Closing balance of 
provision for bad debts of 
account receivable and 
provision for impairment 
of contractual assets  
Customer A 
708,200,548.76 
0.00 
708,200,548.76 
6.56% 
93,710,938.28 
Customer B 
524,026,774.26 
0.00 
524,026,774.26 
4.85% 
26,201,338.71 
Customer C 
468,933,274.24 
0.00 
468,933,274.24 
4.34% 
23,446,663.71 
Customer D 
429,426,908.33 
0.00 
429,426,908.33 
3.98% 
43,573,681.69 
Customer E 
405,341,546.93 
0.00 
405,341,546.93 
3.75% 
72,237,381.49 
Total 
2,535,929,052.52 
0.00 
2,535,929,052.52 
23.48% 
259,170,003.88 
5. Accounts receivable financing 
(1) Accounts receivable financing by type  
Unit: RMB 
Item 
Closing balance 
Opening balance 
Bank acceptance bill 
1,081,485,346.18 
834,668,231.58 
Domestic Letter of Credit in China 
509,264,464.56 
 
Total 
1,590,749,810.74 
834,668,231.58 
(2) Financing of receivable pledged by the Company at the end of the reporting period: None.   
(3) Financing of receivable endorsed or discounted by the Company, which was not yet due on the 
balance sheet date as at the end of the reporting period:  
Unit: RMB 
Item 
Amount derecognized at the end of the 
period 
Amount not derecognized at the end of the 
period 
Banker’s acceptance bill 
4,546,781,651.31 
 
Domestic letter of credit in China 
114,000,000.00 
 
Total 
4,660,781,651.31 
 
(4) Financing of receivable pledged by the Company at the end of the period: None.   
(5) Increase/decrease in the financing of accounts receivable and in their fair values during their 
financing period: None.  
(6) Other explanations: None.  
6. Other receivables 
 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
               
216 
 
Unit: RMB 
Item 
Closing balance 
Opening balance 
Dividends receivable 
4,531,100.00 
 
Other receivables 
99,519,609.53 
118,948,994.06 
Total 
104,050,709.53 
118,948,994.06 
(1) Dividends receivable 
1) Dividends receivable by type 
Unit: RMB 
Project (or investee) 
Closing balance 
Opening balance 
Jacobson Pharama Corporation  
4,531,100.00  
Total 
4,531,100.00  
2) Major dividends receivable aged over one year: None. 
3) Disclosure by provision for bad debts 
□Applicable 
☑Not applicable  
4) Withdrawal, recovery and reversal of provision for bad debts during the period: None.  
5) Actual write-off of dividend receivable during the period: None. 
(2) Other receivables 
1) Other receivables by nature 
Unit: RMB 
Nature of payment 
Book balance at the end of the reporting 
period 
Book balance at the beginning of the 
reporting period 
Deposits and guarantees 
292,908,411.96 
341,475,970.72 
Petty cash 
12,098,577.52 
40,949,868.07 
Borrowings 
6,777,211.78 
9,889,172.38 
Others 
286,715,486.83 
584,078,713.91 
Total 
598,499,688.09 
976,393,725.08 
2) Disclosure by aging  
Unit: RMB 
Aging 
Closing balance  
Opening balance  
Within 1 year (inclusive of 1 year)  
76,994,145.16 
246,320,241.73 
1 to 2 years 
24,492,402.85 
280,922,568.80 
2 to 3 years  
101,816,008.74 
239,820,193.82 
Above 3 years 
395,197,131.34 
209,330,720.73 
Total  
598,499,688.09 
976,393,725.08 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
               
217 
 
3) Disclosure by provision for bad debts  
☑ Applicable 
 
□ Not applicable 
Provision was made for bad debts in accordance with the general expected credit loss model: 
Unit: RMB 
Provision for bad debts 
Phase I 
Phase II 
Phase III 
Total 
Expected credit losses 
for the next 12 
months 
Lifetime ECL (not credit-
impaired) 
Lifetime ECL (credit-
impaired) 
Balance as of January 1, 2023 
271,949,622.49 
 
585,495,108.53 
857,444,731.02 
Balance as of January 1, 2023 in 
the current period 
 
 
 
 
Current provision 
 
 
896,174.86 
896,174.86 
Current reversal 
43,875,998.47 
 
 
43,875,998.47 
Current write-off 
13,600.00 
 
 
13,600.00 
Other changes 
 
 
-315,471,228.85 
-315,471,228.85 
Balance as of December 31, 2023 
228,060,024.02 
 
270,920,054.54 
498,980,078.56 
Division base for each phase and proportion of provision for bad debts  
Changes in book balance with significant changes in loss reserves in the current period 
□ Applicable 
☑ Not applicable   
4) Provision for bad debts accrued, recovered or reversed during the current period 
Provision for bad debts during the reporting period: 
Unit: RMB 
Category 
Opening balance 
Changes in this period 
Closing balance 
Provision 
Recovery or 
reversal 
Resell or 
write off 
Others 
Other accounts receivable 
with provision for bad 
debts by credit risk 
characteristics portfolio 
857,444,731.02 
896,174.86 
43,875,998.474 
13,600.00 
-315,471,228.85 
498,980,078.564 
Total 
857,444,731.02 
896,174.86 
43,875,998.474 
13,600.00 
-315,471,228.85 
498,980,078.564 
Recovery or reversal of provision for bad debts with significant amount during the reporting period: None.   
5) Actual write-off of other receivables for the period: None.  
Unit: RMB 
Item 
Amount of write-off 
The actual write-off of other receivables 
13,600.00 
Write-off of important other receivables: None.   
Explanation on write-off of other receivables: None.  


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
               
218 
 
6) Top five customers in closing balance of other receivables summarized by debtor 
Unit: RMB 
Entity name 
Nature of payment 
Closing balance 
Aging 
Percentage of total 
of closing balance 
of other receivables 
Closing balance of 
provision for bad 
debt 
Entity A 
Security deposit 
100,000,000.00 Above 3 years 
16.71% 
100,000,000.00 
Entity B 
Security deposit 
30,000,000.00 Above 3 years 
5.01% 
30,000,000.00 
Entity C 
Security deposit 
18,000,000.00 Above 3 years 
3.01% 
18,000,000.00 
Entity D 
Security deposit 
12,000,000.00 2 to 3 years 
2.01% 
12,000,000.00 
Entity E 
Security deposit 
10,000,000.00 Above 3 years 
1.67% 
3,000,000.00 
Total 
 
170,000,000.00  
28.41% 
163,000,000.00 
7) Presentation under Other Receivables due to centralized fund management: None.  
7. Prepayments 
(1) Prepayments by aging 
 Unit: RMB 
Aging 
Closing balance 
Opening balance 
Amount 
Proportion 
Amount 
Proportion 
Within 1 year 
274,935,247.83 
88.04% 
498,263,637.61 
91.77% 
1 to 2 years 
31,179,366.00 
9.98% 
31,396,687.61 
5.78% 
2 to 3 years 
2,366,049.64 
0.76% 
7,040,632.08 
1.30% 
Above 3 years 
3,818,063.54 
1.22% 
6,247,483.55 
1.15% 
Total 
312,298,727.01  
542,948,440.85  
Explanation on why prepayments with aging of more than 1 year and an important amount not settled in time: None.  
(2) Top five suppliers in closing balance of prepayment summarized by payee 
Unit: RMB 
Series No. 
Company name 
Book balance 
Percentage of prepayments (%) 
1 
Supplier A 
27,214,953.30 
8.71% 
2 
Supplier B 
18,367,480.94 
5.88% 
3 
Supplier C 
17,162,093.00 
5.50% 
4 
Supplier D 
14,433,174.20 
4.62% 
5 
Supplier E 
11,832,597.42 
3.79% 
Total 
89,010,298.86 
28.50% 
Other explanations: None. 
8. Inventories 
Did the Company need to comply with the disclosure requirements of the real estate industry: No. 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
               
219 
 
(1) Categories of inventories 
Unit: RMB 
 
 
 
 
 
Item 
Closing balance 
Opening balance 
 
 
 
 
Book balance 
 
Provision for 
decline in value 
of inventories or 
provision for 
impairment of 
contract 
fulfillment costs 
 
 
 
 
Book value 
 
 
 
 
Book balance 
Provision for 
inventory 
impairment or 
provision for 
impairment of 
contract 
performance 
costs 
 
 
 
 
Book value 
Raw materials 
1,850,907,681.12 
71,368,550.13 1,779,539,130.99 2,392,701,254.76 
118,815,553.26 2,273,885,701.50 
Work in 
process 
192,411,841.66 
 
192,411,841.66 
142,723,757.34 
 
142,723,757.34 
Finished 
goods 
4,444,660,840.07 
67,539,262.09 4,377,121,577.98 5,520,098,866.23 
55,694,955.01 5,464,403,911.22 
Consumptive 
biological 
assets 
28,031,085.47 
 
28,031,085.47 
36,074,617.71 
 
36,074,617.71 
Contract 
performance 
costs 
 
 
 
13,070,656.42 
 
13,070,656.42 
Materials 
outsourced for 
processing 
185,148.88 
 
185,148.88 
447,210.05 
 
447,210.05 
Packaging 
materials and 
low value 
consumables 
67,439,762.34 
2,533,723.65 
64,906,038.69 
64,864,577.24 
2,263,387.22 
62,601,190.02 
Total 
6,583,636,359.54 
141,441,535.87 6,442,194,823.67 8,169,980,939.75 
176,773,895.49 7,993,207,044.26 
 
(2) Provision for inventory impairment or provision for impairment of contract performance costs 
Unit: RMB 
 
Item 
 
Opening 
balance 
Increase in the current period 
Decrease in the current period 
 
Closing balance 
 
Provision 
 
Others 
Reversal or 
reselling 
 
Others 
Raw materials 
118,815,553.26 
-11,983,273.53 
 35,463,729.60 
 
71,368,550.13 
Stocks 
55,694,955.01 
22,954,138.44 
 11,109,831.36 
 
67,539,262.09 
Packaging 
materials 
and low 
value 
consumables 
2,263,387.22 
519,660.31 
 
249,323.88 
 
2,533,723.65 
Total 
176,773,895.49 
11,490,525.22 
 46,822,884.84 
 141,441,535.87 
 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
               
220 
 
(3) Explanation on closing balance of inventories involving capitalized amount of borrowing costs: None. 
(4) Explanation on the current amortization amount of contract performance costs: None. 
9. Non-current assets due within one year 
Unit: RMB 
Item 
Closing balance 
Opening balance 
Certificate of deposit and interest 
442,772,777.78 
361,774,444.44 
Total 
442,772,777.78 
361,774,444.44 
 (1) Debt investments due within one year 
□ Applicable  
☑ Not applicable 
 (2) Other debt investments due within one year 
□ Applicable  
☑ Not applicable 
10. Other current assets 
Unit: RMB 
Item 
Closing balance 
Opening balance 
Time deposits and other wealth management 
products 
2,219,049,423.96 
11,209,672.18 
Input tax to be deducted and certified 
397,271,600.13 
309,513,536.94 
Cost of returned goods receivable 
147,880,091.79 
136,588,595.19 
Prepaid taxes and fees 
90,685,070.74 
13,248,495.90 
Others 
7,190,030.58 
3,779,807.55 
Total 
2,862,076,217.20 
474,340,107.76 
Other explanations: None.  
 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
               
221 
 
11. Other equity instrument investments 
Unit: RMB 
Item name 
Closing 
balance 
Opening 
balance 
Gains included in 
other comprehensive 
income during the 
period  
Loss included in 
other comprehensive 
income during the 
period  
Accumulated gains 
included in other 
comprehensive income 
at the end of the period  
Accumulated loss 
included in other 
comprehensive income 
at the end of the period  
Dividend 
income 
recognized in 
the current 
period 
Reason for designating 
measurement at fair 
value through other 
comprehensive income 
ImmuneSensor 
Therapeutics 
Inc. 
71,745,000.00 
71,745,000.00 
 
 
 
 
 
The 
investment 
is 
strategic and is a non-
trading equity instrument 
investment 
Total 
71,745,000.00 
71,745,000.00 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Derecognition during the period: None.   
Itemized disclosure of investment in non-trading equity instruments for the period: None. 
12. Long-term equity investments 
Unit: RMB 
 
 
 
Investee 
Opening 
balance (book 
value) 
Opening 
balance of 
the 
impairment 
provision 
Increase and decrease in the current period 
Closing balance 
(book value) 
Closing 
balance of 
impairment 
provision 
Additional 
investment 
Decreased 
investment 
Profits and losses 
on investments 
confirmed under 
the 
equity method 
Adjustment of 
other 
comprehensive 
income 
Change in other 
equities 
Cash dividends or 
profit declared to 
be issued 
Provision for 
impairment 
Others 
I. Joint ventures 
II. Associates 
Shanghai 
Pharmaceuticals 
Holding Co., 
Ltd. 
11,318,607,693.92 
 
 
 
627,651,828.07 
-22,425,249.10 
18,844,632.23 
406,032,345.56 
 
 
11,536,646,559.56 
 
Yunnan Baiyao 
Chinese Herbal 
Medicine 
Technology Co., 
Ltd. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Lijiang 
Changgengming 
Trading Co., Ltd. 
142,253.18 
 
 
 
-142,253.18 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
               
222 
 
Ban Loong 
Jacobson JBM 
Pharma 
Limited 
 
 
55,318.80 
 
-38,630.37 
 
 
 
 
-2,255.06 
14,433.37 
 
Subtotal 
11,318,749,947.10 
 
55,318.80 
 
627,470,944.52 
-22,425,249.10 
18,844,632.23 
406,032,345.56 
 
-2,255.06 
11,536,660,992.93 
 
Total 
11,318,749,947.10 
 
55,318.80 
 
627,470,944.52 
-22,425,249.10 
18,844,632.23 
406,032,345.56 
 
-2,255.06 
11,536,660,992.93  
 
The recoverable amount is determined based on fair value less the disposal expense.  
□ Applicable 
☑ Not applicable 
The recoverable amount is determined based on the present value of estimated future cash flows. 
□ Applicable 
☑ Not applicable 
Reasons for significant differences between the foregoing information and information used for impairment testing in previous years or external information: None.   
Reasons for significant differences between the information used in the Company's impairment tests in previous years and the actual situation in the corresponding year: None.  
Other explanations: None. 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
223 
 
13. Other non-current financial assets 
Unit: RMB 
Item 
Closing balance 
Opening balance 
Financial assets at fair value through 
profits or losses 
324,674,379.63 
380,786,134.24 
Total 
324,674,379.63 
380,786,134.24 
Other explanations: None.   
14. Investment properties 
(1) Adoption of the cost measurement model for investment properties 
☑Applicable 
□Not applicable 
Unit: RMB 
Item 
Buildings and structures 
Land use rights 
Construction in progress 
Total 
I. Original book value 
 
 
 
 
1. Opening balance 
52,663,738.12 
38,294,126.24 
 
90,957,864.36 
2. Increase in the current 
period 
19,837,775.99 
7,801,587.20 
 
27,639,363.19 
(1) Outsourcing 
 
 
 
 
(2) Transfer from 
inventory\fixed assets\ 
construction in progress 
19,837,775.99 
7,801,587.20 
 
27,639,363.19 
(3) Increase in business 
combination 
 
 
 
 
3. Decrease in the current 
period 
17,534,546.83 
13,910,913.51 
 
31,445,460.34 
(1) Disposal 
 
 
 
 
(2) Other transfer out 
17,534,546.83 
13,910,913.51 
 
31,445,460.34 
4. Closing balance 
54,966,967.28 
32,184,799.93 
 
87,151,767.21 
II. Accumulated depreciation 
and accumulated 
amortization 
 
 
 
 
1. Opening balance 
31,783,351.89 
3,350,735.98 
 
35,134,087.87 
2. Increase in the current 
period 
14,128,329.86 
2,722,016.86 
 
16,850,346.72 
    (1) Provision or 
amortization 
661,466.76 
609,580.32 
 
1,271,047.08 
(2) Others  
13,466,863.10 
2,112,436.54 
 
15,579,299.64 
3. Decrease in the current 
period 
10,157,667.79 
1,217,204.91 
 
11,374,872.70 
   (1) Disposal 
 
 
 
 
(2) Other transfer out 
10,157,667.79 
1,217,204.91 
 
11,374,872.70 
4. Closing balance 
35,754,013.96 
4,855,547.93 
 
40,609,561.89 
III. Provision for impairment 
 
 
 
 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
224 
 
1. Opening balance 
 
 
 
 
2. Increase in the current 
period 
2,438,059.35 
 
 
2,438,059.35 
   (1) Provision 
 
 
 
 
(2) Other 
2,438,059.35 
 
 
2,438,059.35 
3. Decrease in the current 
period 
 
 
 
 
(1) Disposal 
 
 
 
 
     (2) Other transfer out 
 
 
 
 
4. Closing balance 
2,438,059.35 
 
 
2,438,059.35 
IV. Book value 
 
 
 
 
1. Closing book value 
16,774,893.97 
27,329,252.00 
 
44,104,145.97 
2. Opening book value 
20,880,386.23 
34,943,390.26 
 
55,823,776.49 
 
The recoverable amount is determined based on fair value less the disposal expense. 
□Applicable   
☑Not applicable 
The recoverable amount is determined based on the present value of estimated future cash flows. 
□Applicable  
☑Not applicable 
Reasons for significant differences between the foregoing information and information used for impairment testing in previous 
years or external information: None.  
Reasons for significant differences between the information used in the Company's impairment tests in previous years and the 
actual situation in the corresponding year: None. 
Other explanations: None. 
(2) Adoption of the fair value measurement model for investment properties 
□Applicable  
☑Not applicable 
(3) Conversion to investment properties and adoption of fair value measurement: None.   
(4) Investment properties for which the title certificate has not been obtained: None.  
15. Fixed assets 
Unit: RMB 
Item 
Closing balance 
Opening balance 
Fixed assets 
2,662,805,209.03 
2,721,970,469.98 
Liquidation of fixed assets 
94,805.00 
1,331,895.67 
Total 
2,662,900,014.03 
2,723,302,365.65 
(1) Fixed assets 
Unit: RMB 
Item 
Houses and 
buildings 
Machinery and 
equipment 
Transportation 
vehicles 
Electronic 
equipment 
Others 
Total 
I. Original book value: 
 
 
 
 
 
 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
225 
 
1. Opening balance 
2,480,173,132.48 
1,533,268,006.94 
60,443,544.48 
176,201,281.24 
2,140,485.56 
4,252,226,450.70 
2. Increase in the 
current period 
99,117,695.62 
78,291,644.49 
10,708,750.69 
3,361,027.13 
28,580.67 
191,507,698.60 
 (1) Purchase 
 
36,172,352.82 
10,708,750.69 
 
28,580.67 
46,909,684.18 
 (2) Transfer from 
construction in 
progress 
81,583,148.79 
42,119,291.67 
 
3,361,027.13 
 
127,063,467.59 
 (3) Increase in 
business 
combination 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(4) Others 
17,534,546.83 
 
 
 
 
17,534,546.83 
3. Decrease in the 
current period 
29,698,036.70 
7,989,056.66 
5,255,451.68 
21,434,572.13 
911,472.37 
65,288,589.54 
 (1) Disposal or 
scrapping 
9,860,260.71 
7,989,056.66 
5,255,451.68 
21,434,572.13 
911,472.37 
45,450,813.55 
 (2) Other transfer-
out  
19,837,775.99 
 
 
 
 
19,837,775.99 
4. Closing balance 
2,549,592,791.40 
1,603,570,594.77 
65,896,843.49 
158,127,736.24 
1,257,593.86 
4,378,445,559.76 
II. Accumulated 
depreciation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1. Opening balance 
503,358,238.26 
843,895,176.28 
36,330,631.77 
78,536,215.59 
1,564,749.64 
1,463,685,011.54 
2. Increase in the 
current period 
71,733,418.97 
115,085,045.96 
2,982,076.44 
27,206,500.15 
163,942.43 
217,170,983.95 
 (1) Provision 
61,575,751.18 
115,085,045.96 
2,982,076.44 
27,206,500.15 
163,942.43 
207,013,316.16 
 (2) Others 
10,157,667.79 
 
 
 
 
10,157,667.79 
3. Decrease in the 
current period 
16,971,659.88 
5,830,013.93 
4,574,933.73 
4,159,590.10 
692,293.86 
32,228,491.50 
 (1) Disposal or 
scrapping 
3,504,796.78 
5,830,013.93 
4,574,933.73 
4,159,590.10 
692,293.86 
18,761,628.40 
 (2) Other transfer-
out 
13,466,863.10 
 
 
 
 
13,466,863.10 
4. Closing balance 
558,119,997.35 
953,150,208.31 
34,737,774.48 
101,583,125.64 
1,036,398.21 
1,648,627,503.99 
III. Provision for 
impairment 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1. Opening balance 
63,002,508.17 
3,558,224.02 
 
10,236.99 
 
66,570,969.18 
2. Increase in the 
current period 
12,773.34 
 
 
4,157,005.70 
 
4,169,779.04 
(1) Provision 
12,773.34 
 
 
4,157,005.70 
 
4,169,779.04 
   (2) Others 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3. Decrease in the 
current period 
2,438,059.35 
1,289,842.13 
 
 
 
3,727,901.48 
 (1) Disposal or 
scrapping 
 
1,289,842.13 
 
 
 
1,289,842.13 
(2) Other transfer-
out 
2,438,059.35 
 
 
 
 
2,438,059.35 
4. Closing balance 
60,577,222.16 
2,268,381.89 
 
4,167,242.69 
 
67,012,846.74 
IV. Book value 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1. Closing book value 
1,930,895,571.89 
648,152,004.57 
31,159,069.01 
52,377,367.91 
221,195.65 
2,662,805,209.03 
2. Opening book value 
1,913,812,386.05 
685,814,606.64 
24,112,912.71 
97,654,828.66 
575,735.92 
2,721,970,469.98 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
226 
 
(2) Temporarily idle fixed assets 
Unit: RMB 
 
Item 
Original book 
value 
Accumulated 
depreciation 
Impairment 
provision 
Book value 
Remarks 
Electronic equipment 
7,112,776.58 
2,588,427.63 
4,167,242.69 
357,106.26  
Machinery and equipment 
7,013,818.18 
4,657,313.45 
0.00 
2,356,504.73  
(3) Fixed assets leased through operating lease: None.  
(4) Fixed assets for which the title certificate has not been obtained 
  Unit: RMB 
Other explanations: None. 
(5) Impairment test of fixed assets 
□Applicable 
 
☑Not applicable 
(6) Liquidation of fixed assets 
Unit: RMB 
Item 
Closing balance 
Opening balance 
Machinery and equipment 
94,206.37 
1,223,963.94 
Electronic equipment 
 
107,058.13 
Transportation vehicles 
598.63 
873.60 
Total 
94,805.00 
1,331,895.67 
Other explanations:  
 
16. Construction in progress 
Unit: RMB 
Item 
Closing balance 
Opening balance 
Construction in progress 
529,708,553.58 
193,993,194.93 
Total 
529,708,553.58 
193,993,194.93 
(1) Construction in progress 
 
 
Item 
Book value 
Reasons for not obtaining the title certificate 
No.51 Xiba Road (general workshop)  
3,906,752.88 
It was unable to apply for the certificate due to the loss of 
relevant documents  
Yunjian Assets 
2,178,828.56 
It was acquired by judicial auction, with land title but no 
real estate property certificate. 
Overall relocation project of Wenshan 
Qihua 
33,578,434.11 
Some title certificates have been obtained, and the rest is 
under application. 
Drug Division of Dali Pharmaceutical 
Economic Development Zone 
27,136,680.35 
Under application 
Buildings in planting base of Yunquan 
1,373,159.38 
The land is a leased land 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
227 
 
Unit: RMB 
Item 
Closing balance 
Opening balance 
Book balance 
Impairment 
provision 
Book value 
Book balance 
Impairment 
provision 
Book value 
Project of Yunnan 
Baiyao International 
Center (Shanghai) 
389,398,864.33 
 
389,398,864.33 
115,853,670.95 
 
115,853,670.95 
Yunnan Baiyao R&D 
platform - Kunming 
center construction 
project 
82,578,321.10 
 
82,578,321.10 
15,674,946.37 
 
15,674,946.37 
Optimization project of 
new factory of Yunnan 
Baiyao toothpaste 
23,403,647.03 
 
23,403,647.03 
 
 
 
Granules Production 
Increase and Expansion 
Project of 
Pharmaceutical 
Business Group of 
Yunnan Baiyao Group   
16,649,408.02 
 
16,649,408.02 
 
 
 
Government-Enterprise 
Cooperation Project of 
Yunnan Baiyao Group 
in Lijiang Ecological 
Science and 
Technology Industrial 
Park (Phase I)  
5,655,808.43 
 
5,655,808.43 
 
 
 
Chinese Medicine 
Pharmaceutical Service 
Kunming Center Project 
of Yunnan Baiyao 
Group  
2,667,581.02 
 
2,667,581.02 
 
 
 
Yunnan Baiyao 
Wenshan Sanqi smart 
technology park project 
1,081,007.34 
 
1,081,007.34 
3,986,332.63 
 
3,986,332.63 
Production base 
construction project of 
Yunnan Baiyao Group 
Shanghai Technology 
Co., Ltd. 
1,024,787.20 
 
1,024,787.20 
 
 
 
Yunnan Baiyao 
Shanghai project office 
decoration project 
396,852.43 
 
396,852.43 
5,513,196.92 
 
5,513,196.92 
Upgrading project of 
the old workshop in the 
economic development 
zone 
 
 
 
9,585,081.75 
 
9,585,081.75 
Health Industry Project 
(Phase I) of Yunnan 
Baiyao Group 
593,826.74 
 
593,826.74 
6,979,457.53 
 
6,979,457.53 
Yunnan Baiyao Taian 
project phase III 
 
 
 
2,271,149.08 
 
2,271,149.08 
Cosmetic medicine 
supporting commercial 
and office projects of 
Yunnan Baiyao in 
Beijing SOHO 
 
 
 
2,218,701.36 
 
2,218,701.36 
PKU-YBIMRC 
renovation project 
 
 
 
1,890,969.29 
 
1,890,969.29 
Others 
6,258,449.94 
 
6,258,449.94 
30,019,689.05 
 
30,019,689.05 
Total 
529,708,553.58 
 
529,708,553.58 
193,993,194.93 
 
193,993,194.93 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
228 
 
(2) Changes in important projects of construction in progress for the period 
 
Unit: RMB 
Item name 
Budget amount 
Opening 
balance 
Increase in the 
current period 
Transfer to 
fixed assets in 
the current 
period 
Other 
decrease in 
the current 
period 
Closing balance 
Proportion 
of total 
project 
investment 
in budget 
Engineering 
progress 
Accumulated 
amount of 
interest 
capitalized 
Including: 
Amount of 
interest 
capitalized 
for the 
period 
Capitalization 
rate of interest 
for the period 
Source 
of 
funds 
Shanghai 
International Center 
of Yunnan Baiyao 
1,389,170,500.00 115,853,670.95 273,545,193.38 
 
 389,398,864.33 
40.85% 
50.89% 
 
 
 Other 
Yunnan Baiyao 
R&D platform - 
Kunming center 
construction project 
921,670,000.00 
15,674,946.37 
66,903,374.73 
 
 
82,578,321.10 
8.96% 
11.04% 
 
 
 Other 
Optimization project 
of new factory of 
Yunnan Baiyao 
toothpaste 
38,000,000.00 
1,677,435.34 
22,042,140.89 
315,929.20 
 
23,403,647.03 
76.75% 
90% 
 
 
 Other 
Government-
Enterprise 
Cooperation Project 
of Yunnan Baiyao 
Group in Lijiang 
Ecological Science 
and Technology 
Industrial Park 
(Phase I)  
17,860,000.00 
 
7,156,693.39 
1,500,884.96 
 
5,655,808.43 
40.07% 
40% 
 
 
 Other 
Chinese Medicine 
Pharmaceutical 
Service Kunming 
Center Project of 
Yunnan Baiyao 
Group 
68,096,000.00 
 
2,667,581.02 
 
 
2,667,581.02 
8.17% 
40% 
 
 
 Other 
Health Industry 
Project (Phase I) of 
Yunnan Baiyao 
Group 
1,158,174,400.00 
6,979,457.53 
54,270,650.85 55,686,770.01 4,969,511.63 
593,826.74 
90.00% 
99% 
 
 
 Other 
Total 
3,592,970,900.00 140,185,510.19 426,585,634.26 57,503,584.17 4,969,511.63 504,298,048.65  
 
 
 
 
 


 
       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
229 
 
(3) Provision for impairment of construction in progress for the period: None.   
(4) Impairment test of construction in progress 
□ Applicable 
☑ Not applicable  
(5) Project materials: None.  
17. 
Productive biological assets 
(1) Adoption of the cost measurement model for productive biological assets 
☑ Applicable 
□ Not applicable 
Unit: RMB 
 
Item 
Planting 
Stockbreeding 
Forestry 
Aquaculture 
Total 
 
Tea tree 
 
 
 
 
I. Original book value 
 
 
 
 
 
1. Opening balance 
2,578,500.00 
 
 
 
2,578,500.00 
2. Increase in the 
current period 
 
 
 
 
 
(1) Outsourcing 
 
 
 
 
 
(2) Self-cultivation 
 
 
 
 
 
3. Decrease in the 
current period 
 
 
 
 
 
(1) Disposal 
 
 
 
 
 
(2) Others 
 
 
 
 
 
4. Closing balance 
2,578,500.00 
 
 
 
2,578,500.00 
II. Accumulated 
depreciation 
 
 
 
 
 
1. Opening balance 
1,418,175.15 
 
 
 
1,418,175.15 
2. Increase in the 
current period 
171,900.00 
 
 
 
171,900.00 
(1) Provision 
171,900.00 
 
 
 
171,900.00 
3. Decrease in the 
current period 
 
 
 
 
 
(1) Disposal 
 
 
 
 
 
(2) Others 
 
 
 
 
 
4. Closing balance 
1,590,075.15 
 
 
 
1,590,075.15 
III. Provision for 
impairment 
 
 
 
 
 
1. Opening balance 
 
 
 
 
 
2. Increase in the 
current period 
 
 
 
 
 
(1) Provision 
 
 
 
 
 


 
       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
230 
 
3. Decrease in the 
current period 
 
 
 
 
 
(1) Disposal 
 
 
 
 
 
(2) Others 
 
 
 
 
 
4. Closing balance 
 
 
 
 
 
IV. Book value 
 
 
 
 
 
1. Closing book value 
988,424.85 
 
 
 
988,424.85 
2. Opening book value 
1,160,324.85 
 
 
 
1,160,324.85 
 
(2) Impairment test of productive biological assets measured at cost  
□ Applicable  ☑ Not applicable 
(3) Adoption of the fair value measurement model for productive biological assets 
□ Applicable  ☑ Not applicable 
18. Right-of-use assets 
(1) Right-of-use assets  
Unit: RMB 
Item 
Houses and buildings 
Total 
I. Original book value 
 
 
1. Opening balance 
580,165,392.75 
580,165,392.75 
2. Increase in the current period 
60,930,940.63 
60,930,940.63 
(1) Lease 
60,930,940.63 
60,930,940.63 
(2) Others 
 
 
3. Decrease in the current period 
135,436,027.40 
135,436,027.40 
(1) Disposal 
135,436,027.40 
135,436,027.40 
(2) Others  
 
 
4. Closing balance 
505,660,305.98 
505,660,305.98 
II. Accumulated depreciation 
 
 
1. Opening balance 
190,190,002.02 
190,190,002.02 
2. Increase in the current period 
100,305,178.75 
100,305,178.75 
(1) Provision 
100,305,178.75 
100,305,178.75 
(2) Others  
 
 
3. Decrease in the current period 
43,154,360.37 
43,154,360.37 
(1) Disposal 
43,154,360.37 
43,154,360.37 
(2) Others  
 
 
4. Closing balance 
247,340,820.40 
247,340,820.40 
III. Provision for impairment 
 
 
1. Opening balance 
 
 
2. Increase in the current period 
 
 
(1) Provision 
 
 
3. Decrease in the current period 
 
 
(1) Disposal 
 
 


 
       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
231 
 
4. Closing balance 
 
 
IV. Book value 
 
 
1. Closing book value 
258,319,485.58 
258,319,485.58 
2. Opening book value 
389,975,390.73 
389,975,390.73 
(2) Impairment test of right-of-use assets:  
□ Applicable 
☑ Not applicable  
Other explanations: None.  
 
 


 
       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
232 
 
19. Intangible assets 
(1) Intangible assets 
                                                                                           Unit: RMB 
Item 
Land use rights 
Patent Right 
Non-patent 
technology 
Software 
Trademark 
Franchise rights 
Total 
I. Original book value 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1. Opening balance 
683,358,811.53 
35,290,624.52 
2,150,381.86 
44,659,022.05 
20,000.00 151,853,515.32 
917,332,355.28 
2. Increase in the current period 
13,910,913.51 
 
 
30,805,130.71 
 
2,228,167.25 
46,944,211.47 
(1) Purchase 
 
 
 
4,557,800.53 
 
2,228,167.25 
6,785,967.78 
(2) Transfer from construction in progress 
 
 
 
26,247,330.18 
 
 
26,247,330.18 
(3) Increase in business combination 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(4) Others 
13,910,913.51 
 
 
 
 
 
13,910,913.51 
3. Decrease in the current period 
7,801,587.20 
797,947.92 
 
 
 
 
8,599,535.12 
(1) Disposal 
 
797,947.92 
 
 
 
 
797,947.92 
(2) Other transfer-out 
7,801,587.20 
 
 
 
 
 
7,801,587.20 
4. Closing balance 
689,468,137.84 
34,492,676.60 
2,150,381.86 
75,464,152.76 
20,000.00 154,081,682.57 
955,677,031.63 
II. Accumulated amortization 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1. Opening balance 
144,827,547.65 
24,852,586.94 
2,150,381.86 
11,566,287.48 
925.55 
16,855,816.42 
200,253,545.90 
2. Increase in the current period 
15,005,804.96 
2,802,967.77 
 
13,538,803.31 
2,222.22 
808,399.92 
32,158,198.18 


 
       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
233 
 
(1) Provision 
13,788,600.05 
2,802,967.77 
 
13,538,803.31 
2,222.22 
808,399.92 
30,940,993.27 
(2) Others  
1,217,204.91 
 
 
 
 
 
1,217,204.91 
3. Decrease in the current period 
2,108,684.95 
797,947.92 
 
 
 
 
2,906,632.87 
(1) Disposal 
 
797,947.92 
 
 
 
 
797,947.92 
(2) Other transfer-out 
2,108,684.95 
 
 
 
 
 
2,108,684.95 
4. Closing balance 
157,724,667.66 
26,857,606.79 
2,150,381.86 
25,105,090.79 
3,147.77 
17,664,216.34 
229,505,111.21 
III. Provision for impairment 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1. Opening balance 
6,382,453.60 
 
 
 
 119,710,531.48 
126,092,985.08 
2. Increase in the current period 
 
 
 
 
 
16,706,934.75 
16,706,934.75 
(1) Provision 
 
 
 
 
 
16,706,934.75 
16,706,934.75 
3. Decrease in the current period 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(1) Disposal 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4. Closing balance 
6,382,453.60 
 
 
 
 136,417,466.23 
142,799,919.83 
IV. Book value 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1. Closing book value 
525,361,016.58 
7,635,069.81 
 
50,359,061.97 
16,852.23 
 
583,372,000.59 
2. Opening book value 
532,148,810.28 
10,438,037.58 
 
33,092,734.57 
19,074.45 
15,287,167.42 
590,985,824.30 


 
       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
234 
 
(2) Land use rights for which the title certificate has not been obtained: None.  
(3) Impairment test of intangible assets 
☑Applicable 
□Not applicable  
The recoverable amount is recognized by the fair value, net of the disposal expenses 
□Applicable 
     ☑Not applicable  
The recoverable amount is recognized by the present value of expected future cash flows 
☑Applicable 
 □Not applicable  
Unit: RMB 
Item 
Book value 
Recoverable 
amount 
Impairment 
amount 
Expected 
years 
Key parameters 
for the expected 
years 
Key parameters for 
the stable years 
Basis for 
determining 
the key 
parameters for 
the stable 
years 
Franchise of 
Lincang 
Manor 
16,706,934.75 
0.00 
16,706,934.75 
21 
Cost growth rate 
being 0.56% -
0.87%, discount 
rate being 
12.19% 
The remaining 
benefit period is 21 
years, and 
predictions are 
made for the 
remaining benefit 
period 
 
Total 
16,706,934.75 
0.00 
16,706,934.75 
  
 
 
 
20. Goodwill 
(1) Original book value of goodwill 
Unit: RMB 
Name of the investee or items forming 
goodwill 
Opening balance 
Increase in the current 
period 
Decrease in the 
current period 
Closing balance 
Formed by 
business 
combination 
 
 
 
Disposal 
 
 
YNBY International Limited (Formerly 
Ban Loong Holdings Limited)  
645,635,327.81 
 
 
 
 
645,635,327.81 
Yunnan Baiyao Group Medical 
Technology Hefei Co., Ltd. 
26,904,931.64 
 
 
 
 
26,904,931.64 
Shanghai Hanshi Health Consulting 
Co., Ltd. 
23,247,992.08  
 
 
 
23,247,992.08 
Yunnan Baiyao Group Wuxi 
Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd. 
12,843,661.62  
 
 
 
12,843,661.62 
Lijiang Yunquan Biological Development 
Co., Ltd. 
721,770.39  
 
 
 
721,770.39 
Total 
709,353,683.54  
 
 
 
709,353,683.54 
 


 
       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
235 
 
(2) Provision for impairment of goodwill 
Unit: RMB 
Name of the investee or items forming 
goodwill 
Opening balance 
Increase in 
the current 
period 
Decrease in the 
current period 
Closing balance 
Provision 
Disposal 
Shanghai Hanshi Health Consulting Co., Ltd. 
 
16,089,461.58  
16,089,461.58 
YNBY International Limited (Formerly Ban 
Loong Holdings Limited)  
561,515,748.26 
 
 
561,515,748.26 
Yunnan Baiyao Group Medical Technology 
Hefei Co., Ltd. 
17,234,070.00 
9,670,861.64  
26,904,931.64 
Lijiang Yunquan Biological Development 
Co., Ltd. 
721,770.39 
 
 
721,770.39 
Total 
579,471,588.65 
25,760,323.22  
605,231,911.87 
(3) Related information on asset group or combination of asset groups containing goodwill 
Name 
Composition and basis of the asset group or portfolio to 
which it belongs 
Business 
segments and 
basis 
Whether 
consistent with 
the previous 
years 
YNBY International Limited 
(Formerly Ban Loong Holdings 
Limited) 
The asset group consists of “notes and accounts receivable, 
prepayments, inventories, other receivables, other current 
assets, fixed assets, right-to-use assets, accounts payable, 
contractual liabilities, other payables and goodwill,” which 
is the smallest portfolio of assets or the smallest portfolio of 
asset groups that can generate major cash inflows 
independently  
The 
management’s 
approach to 
managing and 
monitoring 
business 
activities 
Yes 
Yunnan Baiyao Group Medical 
Technology Hefei Co., Ltd. 
The asset group consists of “fixed assets, intangible assets, 
right-of-use assets, long-term deferred expenses and 
goodwill,” which is the smallest portfolio of assets or the 
smallest portfolio of asset groups that can generate major 
cash inflows independently  
The 
management’s 
approach to 
managing and 
monitoring 
business 
activities 
Yes 
Shanghai Hanshi Health Consulting 
Co., Ltd. 
The asset group consists of “fixed assets, construction in 
progress (equipment), right-of-use assets, long-term 
deferred expenses and goodwill,” which is the smallest 
portfolio of assets or the smallest portfolio of asset groups 
that can generate major cash inflows independently  
The 
management’s 
approach to 
managing and 
monitoring 
business 
activities 
Yes 
Yunnan Baiyao Group Wuxi 
Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd. 
The asset group consists of “fixed assets, intangible assets 
and goodwill,” which is the smallest portfolio of assets or 
the smallest portfolio of asset groups that can generate 
major cash inflows independently  
The 
management’s 
approach to 
managing and 
monitoring 
business 
activities 
Yes 
 
 
 


 
       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
236 
 
(4) Determination of recoverable amount  
The recoverable amount is determined based on fair value less the disposal expense. 
□Applicable 
     ☑Not applicable 
The recoverable amount is determined based on the present value of estimated future cash flows. 
☑Applicable 
□Not applicable 
Unit: RMB 
Item 
Book value 
Recoverable 
amount 
Impairment 
amount 
Forecast 
period 
(years) 
Key 
parameters 
for the 
forecast 
period 
Key 
parameters 
for the 
stable 
period 
Basis for determining the 
key parameters for the 
stable period 
YNBY 
International 
Limited 
(Formerly 
Ban Loong 
Holdings 
Limited) 
1,175,006,194.96 
455,828,700.00 
561,515,748.26 
2024-
2028 
(followe
d by the 
stable 
period) 
Growth rate 
10.58% to 
11.53%, 
profit 
margin 
2.77% to 
3.25%, pre-
tax discount 
rate 9.10% 
Growth rate 
0.00%, 
profit 
margin 
2.77%, 
discount 
rate 9.10% 
The income growth rate 
for the stable period is 
0%, the profit margin and 
discount rate are for the 
last year of the forecast 
period, and the discount 
rate is a pre-tax discount 
rate that reflects the risks 
specific to the relevant 
asset group or portfolio of 
asset groups. 
Yunnan 
Baiyao Group 
Medical 
Technology 
Hefei Co., 
Ltd. 
52,868,433.83 
14,000,000.00 
26,904,931.64 
2024-
2028 
(followe
d by the 
stable 
period) 
Growth rate 
0.34% to 
0.40%, 
profit 
margin 
6.30% to 
6.75%, pre-
tax discount 
rate 13.75% 
Growth rate 
0.00%, 
profit 
margin 
6.75%, 
discount 
rate 13.75% 
The income growth rate 
for the stable period is 
0%, the profit margin and 
discount rate are for the 
last year of the forecast 
period, and the discount 
rate is a pre-tax discount 
rate that reflects the risks 
specific to the relevant 
asset group or portfolio of 
asset groups. 
Shanghai 
Hanshi Health 
Consulting 
Co., Ltd. 
40,089,461.58 
24,000,000.00 
16,089,461.58 
2024-
2028 
(followe
d by the 
stable 
period) 
Growth rate 
20%, profit 
margin -
33.44% to 
10.49%, 
pre-tax 
discount 
rate 13.69% 
Growth rate 
0%, profit 
margin 
10.49%, 
discount 
rate 13.69% 
The income growth rate 
for the stable period is 
0%, the profit margin and 
discount rate are for the 
last year of the forecast 
period, and the discount 
rate is a pre-tax discount 
rate that reflects the risks 
specific to the relevant 
asset group or portfolio of 
asset groups. 
Yunnan 
Baiyao Group 
Wuxi 
Pharmaceutic
al Co., Ltd. 
32,644,949.63 
55,000,000.00 
0 
2024-
2028 
(followe
d by the 
stable 
period) 
Growth rate 
0%, profit 
margin 
4.13% to 
4.23%, pre-
tax discount 
rate 14.11% 
Growth rate 
0%, profit 
margin 
4.13%, 
discount 
rate 14.11% 
The income growth rate 
for the stable period is 
0%, the profit margin and 
discount rate are for the 
last year of the forecast 
period, and the discount 
rate is a pre-tax discount 


 
       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
237 
 
rate that reflects the risks 
specific to the relevant 
asset group or portfolio of 
asset groups. 
Total 
1,300,609,040.00 
548,828,700.00 
604,510,141.48 
 
 
 
 
Reasons for significant differences between the foregoing information and information used for impairment testing 
in previous years or external information: Not applicable 
Reasons for significant differences between the information used in the Company’s impairment tests in previous 
years and the actual situation in the corresponding year: Not applicable 
(5) Fulfillment of undertakings and goodwill impairment  
Performance commitments existed at the time goodwill was formed and the reporting period, or the previous period 
of the reporting period was within the performance commitment period 
□ Applicable 
☑ Not applicable 
Other explanations: None.  
21. Long-term deferred expenses 
Unit: RMB 
 
Item 
 
Opening balance 
Increase in the 
current period 
Amortization in 
the current period 
 
Other decrease 
 
Closing balance 
Building 
decoration and 
project 
renovation 
90,442,503.49 
33,160,372.79 
27,178,754.57 
 
96,424,121.71 
Nanping Street 
renovation project 
of Yunnan Baiyao 
9,497,542.66 
964,501.89 
3,962,925.04 
 
6,499,119.51 
External 
preparation 
demonstration 
hall renovation 
project 
1,434,420.64 
0.00 
1,434,420.64 
 
0.00 
Others 
1,665,425.97 
1,664,442.75 
917,559.63 
 
2,412,309.09 
Total 
103,039,892.76 
35,789,317.43 
33,493,659.88 
0.00 
105,335,550.31 
Other explanations: None.  
22. Deferred income tax assets/deferred income tax liabilities 
(1) Deferred tax assets before offset 
Unit: RMB 
 
Item 
Closing balance 
Opening balance 
Deductible temporary 
differences 
Deferred income tax 
assets 
Deductible temporary 
differences 
Deferred income tax 
assets 
Provision for 
asset impairment 
and provision for 
credit impairment   
149,391,736.51 
29,733,789.86 
183,093,535.46 
35,612,233.01 


 
       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
238 
 
Unrealised profits 
of intra-group 
transactions 
355,719,960.08 
56,616,299.10 
433,164,555.99 
68,246,952.21 
Deductible losses 
85,261,634.28 
12,772,083.95 
98,294,872.23 
16,407,198.08 
Provision for credit 
impairment 
1,031,702,042.48 
155,456,724.98 
858,738,207.86 
130,874,447.83 
Deferred income 
174,855,238.93 
26,308,248.51 
112,673,439.27 
16,991,015.89 
Contractual liabilities 
927,324,390.56 
139,098,658.58 
744,264,425.60 
111,639,663.83 
Payroll payable and 
long-term 
employee benefits 
payable 
442,302,070.56 
66,345,310.57 
213,880,961.43 
32,082,144.21 
Expenses beyond 
overall planning for 
employee status 
conversion expenses 
of state-owned 
enterprises and social 
security expenses of 
retirees 
488,564,678.84 
73,284,701.83 
523,242,481.81 
78,486,372.27 
Lease liabilities 
247,083,412.30 
33,532,096.13 
377,446,471.13 
78,492,672.52 
Changes in fair value 
31,774,859.47 
4,766,228.92 
511,601,593.57 
76,740,239.04 
Other payables 
390,202,998.08 
58,530,449.71 
439,458,968.57 
65,918,845.29 
Others 
56,028,058.38 
8,404,208.76 
1,709,349.66 
254,929.90 
Estimated income from 
returned goods   
172,763,638.76 
26,020,408.22 
9,912,179.43 
1,500,065.58 
Total 
4,552,974,719.23 
690,869,209.12 
4,507,481,042.01 
713,246,779.66 
 
(2) Deferred tax liabilities before offset 
Unit: RMB 
 
Item 
Closing balance 
Opening balance 
Taxable temporary 
differences 
Deferred income tax 
liabilities 
Taxable temporary 
differences 
Deferred income tax 
liabilities 
Changes in fair value 
 
 
111,313,586.41 
16,988,794.59 
Right-of-use assets 
258,319,485.58 
34,427,707.34 
359,106,274.04 
74,402,624.87 
Fixed assets subject 
to one-time pre-tax 
deduction 
26,760,390.32 
4,014,058.55 
25,258,729.32 
3,788,809.41 
Appreciation of asset 
valuation 
5,464,293.67 
1,366,073.41 
7,642,418.23 
1,148,270.17 
Investment income 
from business 
combination not 
under common 
control achieved in 
stages 
2,282,373.90 
570,593.48 
2,282,373.90 
570,593.48 
Others 
65,373,768.09 
9,806,065.22 
7,867,630.46 
1,180,144.57 
Cost of returned goods 
receivable  
163,264,685.39 
24,587,573.70 
 
 
Total 
521,464,996.95 
74,772,071.70 
513,471,012.36 
98,079,237.09 
 


 
       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
239 
 
(3) Deferred income tax assets or liabilities after offset, net 
Unit: RMB 
Item 
Offsetting amount of 
deferred income tax 
assets and deferred 
income tax liabilities 
at the end of the 
reporting period 
Closing balance of 
deferred income tax 
assets or liabilities 
after offset 
Offsetting amount of 
deferred income tax 
assets and deferred 
income tax liabilities 
at the beginning of the 
reporting period 
Opening balance of 
deferred income tax 
assets or liabilities 
after offset 
Deferred income 
tax assets 
 
690,869,209.12 
 
713,246,779.66 
Deferred income 
tax liabilities 
 
74,772,071.70 
 
98,079,237.09 
(4) Details of unrecognized deferred income tax assets 
Unit: RMB 
Item 
Closing balance 
Opening balance 
Deductible losses 
697,042,370.78 
443,245,994.93 
Provision for asset impairment and 
provision for credit impairment 
505,835,499.95 
840,097,956.04 
Deferred income 
63,955,872.11 
65,948,373.73 
Others 
10,735,715.83 
9,339,644.36 
Total 
1,277,569,458.67 
1,358,631,969.06 
 
(5) Deductible losses for which deferred income tax assets were unrecognized will expire in the following 
years 
Unit: RMB 
Year 
Closing balance 
Opening balance 
Remarks 
2023 
 
9,639,436.11 
 
2024 
18,092,739.35 
4,973,973.57 
 
2025 
20,152,321.40 
15,423,790.17 
 
2026 
136,477,740.18 
125,859,640.03 
 
2027 
202,345,894.66 
209,472,670.65 
 
2028 
299,773,438.15 
6,005,279.37 
 
2029 
1,476,119.82 
12,571,801.89 
 
2030 
4,028,298.39 
7,604,046.31 
 
2031 
12,861,719.12 
19,011,681.19 
 
2032 
1,599,912.28 
32,683,675.64 
 
2033 
234,187.43 
 
 
Total 
697,042,370.78 
443,245,994.93 
 
Other explanations: None.  


 
       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
240 
 
23. Other non-current assets 
Unit: RMB 
 
Item 
Closing balance 
Opening balance 
 
Book balance 
Impairment 
provision 
 
Book value 
 
Book balance 
Impairment 
provision 
 
Book value 
Time deposit and 
interest 
913,499,670.63 
 913,499,670.63 
1,044,622,324.57 
 1,044,622,324.57 
Advance 
payment for the 
purchase 
of fixed assets 
3,485,598.75 
 
3,485,598.75 
24,712,674.27 
 
24,712,674.27 
Cost of returned 
goods 
receivable  
15,394,540.30 
 15,394,540.30 
17,595,832.83 
 
17,595,832.83 
Stocks of 
special 
materials 
42,000,723.80 
 42,000,723.80 
30,000,000.00 
 
30,000,000.00 
Value-added tax 
credit refund 
9,867,575.47 
 
9,867,575.47 
9,867,575.47 
 
9,867,575.47 
Less: the part 
due within 1 year -442,772,777.78 
 
-442,772,777.78 
-161,580,000.00 
 -161,580,000.00 
Total 
541,475,331.17 
 541,475,331.17 
965,218,407.14 
 
965,218,407.14 
Other explanations: None.  
 
 


 
       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
241 
 
24. Assets with Restricted Ownership or Use Rights:  
Unit: RMB 
Item 
At the end of the period 
At the beginning of the period 
Book balance 
Book value 
Type of 
restriction  
Restriction  
Book balance 
Book value 
Type of 
restriction 
Restriction 
Cash and bank 
balance 
2,643,393.65 
2,643,393.65 
Special use 
Special fund for paying the cost 
of employee status conversion 
in 
state-owned 
enterprises, 
housing reform and housing 
maintenance costs 
 
 
 
 
Cash and bank 
balance 
500,000.00 
500,000.00 
Property 
preservation 
The lawsuit has been won, and 
we are promoting the lifting of 
the freeze and other related 
matters. 
 
 
 
 
Cash and bank 
balance 
48,618,045.43 
48,618,045.43 
Security 
deposit 
Security deposit 
9,953,700.00 
9,953,700.00 
Security 
deposit 
Security deposit 
Various assets of 
the restructured 
special account 
627,116,169.10 
627,116,169.10 
Special use 
Special fund for paying the cost 
of employee status conversion 
in state-owned enterprises 
641,477,826.99 
641,477,826.99 
Special use 
Special fund for paying 
the cost of employee 
status conversion in state-
owned enterprises 
Long-term equity 
investments 
11,536,646,559.56 
11,536,646,559.56 
Restricted 
The holdings shall not be 
transferred within 36 months 
since the ending date of the 
private placement in 2021 
11,318,607,693.92 
11,318,607,693.92 
Restricted 
The holdings shall not be 
transferred 
within 
36 
months since the ending 
date 
of 
the 
private 
placement in 2021 
Total 
12,215,524,167.74 
12,215,524,167.74 
 
 
11,970,039,220.91 
11,970,039,220.91 
 
 
Other explanations: None. 


 
       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
242 
 
25. Short-term loans 
(1) Classification of short-term loans 
Unit: RMB 
Item 
Closing balance 
Opening balance 
Loan in credit 
1,014,634,728.09 
890,531,958.04 
Discounted internal bills 
732,668,972.25 
960,335,928.55 
Total 
1,747,303,700.34 
1,850,867,886.59 
Explanation on classification of short-term loans: None. 
(2) Overdue and outstanding short-term loans: None.  
26. Notes payable 
Unit: RMB 
Type 
Closing balance 
Opening balance 
Commercial acceptance bill 
 
100,000.00 
Banker’s acceptance bill 
 
 
1,850,863,313.78 
1,991,807,836.96 
Total 
1,850,863,313.78 
1,991,907,836.96 
Total notes payable due and unpaid at the end of the period were RMB 0.    
27. Accounts payable 
(1) Accounts payable 
Unit: RMB 
Item 
Closing balance 
Opening balance 
Payment for goods 
4,326,110,424.11 
4,598,356,773.61 
Payment for engineering equipment 
33,522,218.09 
40,782,479.02 
Labor expenses and others 
 
122,143.82 
Total 
4,359,632,642.20 
4,639,261,396.45 
(2) Major accounts payable aged over one year:  
Unit: RMB 
Item 
Closing balance 
Reasons for outstanding or carry-forward 
Kunming Derun Jindi Trading Co., Ltd. 
7,235,339.76 
The payment conditions have not been 
met  
Total  
7,235,339.76 
 
28. Other payables 
Unit: RMB 
Item 
Closing balance 
Opening balance 
Dividend payable 
86,490,742.04 
89,413,484.03 
Other payables 
938,595,137.50 
954,279,725.75 
Total 
1,025,085,879.54 
1,043,693,209.78 


 
       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
243 
 
(1) Dividends payable 
Unit: RMB 
Item 
Closing balance 
Opening balance 
State-owned Assets Supervision and 
Administration Commission of the 
People’s Government of Yunnan 
Province, New Huadu Industrial Group 
Co., Ltd. 
86,490,742.04 
86,490,742.04 
Kunming Nuo’an Enterprise 
Management Co., Ltd. 
 
2,922,741.99 
Total 
86,490,742.04 
89,413,484.03 
(2) Other payables 
1) Other payables by nature of payment 
Unit: RMB 
Item 
Closing balance 
Opening balance 
Market maintenance fee 
459,313,752.19 
449,675,991.26 
Deposits and guarantees 
266,970,613.85 
305,330,173.64 
Other current accounts 
81,677,453.94 
31,366,513.19 
Hospital management fee payable 
70,325,588.08 
85,937,574.20 
Collection and payment 
20,013,555.07 
14,954,473.71 
Loans and interests 
 
60,956,390.23 
Others 
40,294,174.37 
6,058,609.52 
Total 
938,595,137.50 
954,279,725.75 
2) Other important payables aged over 1 year or overdue: None.  
29. Receipts in advance 
(1) Receipts in advance 
Unit: RMB 
Item 
Closing balance 
Opening balance 
Receipts in advance - lease 
486,612.12 
1,569,799.63 
Total 
486,612.12 
1,569,799.63 
(2) Major receipts in advance aged over one year: None.  
30. Contractual liabilities 
Unit: RMB 
Item 
Closing balance 
Opening balance 
Receipts in advance - goods contract 
1,737,952,687.45 
2,575,823,948.53 
Others 
1,912,541.30 
2,440,672.60 
Total 
1,739,865,228.75 
2,578,264,621.13 
Significant contractual liabilities with aging more than 1 year: None.    


 
       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
244 
 
31. Payroll payable 
(1) Payroll payable 
Unit: RMB 
 
Item 
 
Opening balance 
Increase in the current 
period 
Decrease in the current 
period 
 
Closing balance 
I. Short-term 
compensation 
440,330,260.27 
2,939,567,358.61 
2,359,647,788.43 
1,020,249,830.45 
II. Welfare after 
demission - 
defined 
contribution plan 
27,839,224.27 
211,857,267.29 
192,811,926.46 
46,884,565.10 
III. Dismissal welfare 
280,863.98 
9,564,670.27 
9,789,264.72 
56,269.53 
Total 
468,450,348.52 
3,160,989,296.17 
2,562,248,979.61 
1,067,190,665.08 
(2) Short-term compensation 
Unit: RMB 
 
Item 
 
Opening balance 
Increase in the current 
period 
Decrease in the current 
period 
 
Closing balance 
1. Salary, bonus, 
allowance, and subsidy 
163,058,986.84 
2,083,922,628.73 
1,712,403,323.99 
534,578,291.58 
2. Staff welfare 
12,216,670.96 
229,998,404.91 
226,106,664.10 
16,108,411.77 
3. Social insurance 
contribution 
829,224.27 
88,280,369.51 
88,822,248.85 
287,344.93 
Of which: Medical 
insurance premiums 
809,268.95 
80,096,124.97 
80,653,254.82 
252,139.10 
Industrial injury 
insurance premiums 
7,217.66 
5,486,413.52 
5,484,743.93 
8,887.25 
Maternity 
insurance premiums 
12,737.66 
2,697,831.02 
2,684,250.10 
26,318.58 
4. Housing provident fund 
215,632.66 
105,774,649.56 
105,583,334.56 
406,947.66 
5. Union dues and staff 
training fees 
27,188,273.65 
34,722,534.78 
31,338,662.73 
30,572,145.70 
6. Short-term paid 
absence 
23,383.99 
 
23,383.99 
 
7. Short-term profit-
sharing plan 
236,797,817.90 
283,810,831.02 
82,496,090.38 
438,112,558.54 
8. Other short-term 
compensation 
270.00 
113,057,940.10 
112,874,079.83 
184,130.27 
Total 
440,330,260.27 
2,939,567,358.61 
2,359,647,788.43 
1,020,249,830.45 
 


 
       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
245 
 
(3) Defined contribution plans 
Unit: RMB 
 
Item 
 
Opening balance 
Increase in the current 
period 
Decrease in the current 
period 
 
Closing balance 
1. Basic endowment 
insurance 
466,997.59 
158,013,057.69 
157,959,365.51 
520,689.77 
2. Unemployment 
insurance premiums 
15,428.02 
5,791,900.67 
5,786,447.64 
20,881.05 
3. Corporate pension 
payment 
27,356,798.66 
48,052,308.93 
29,066,113.31 
46,342,994.28 
Total 
27,839,224.27 
211,857,267.29 
192,811,926.46 
46,884,565.10 
Other explanations: None.  
32. Tax payables 
Unit: RMB 
Item 
Closing balance 
Opening balance 
Value added tax 
74,507,524.44 
105,116,961.78 
Consumption tax 
9,690.71 
274,825.30 
Enterprise Income Tax 
215,055,624.82 
366,975,428.61 
Individual income tax 
13,584,778.64 
16,268,091.05 
Urban maintenance and construction tax 
5,944,928.97 
6,874,277.78 
Property tax 
11,470,392.03 
152,423.60 
Land use tax 
5,324,861.58 
25,004.80 
Stamp duty 
5,765,684.18 
4,476,145.74 
Education surcharge 
2,628,898.41 
3,110,941.91 
Local education surcharge 
1,752,038.22 
2,049,949.71 
Environmental protection tax 
10,222.02 
18,065.25 
Water conservancy fund 
4,724.15 
11,439.47 
Collected and remitted taxes and fees 
3,611,481.85 
3,933,367.32 
Total 
339,670,850.02 
509,286,922.32 
Other explanations: None. 
33. Non-current liabilities due within one year 
Unit: RMB 
Item 
Closing balance 
Opening balance 
Lease liabilities due within one year 
74,736,102.58 
93,870,902.64 
Total 
74,736,102.58 
93,870,902.64 
Other explanations: None.  
34. Other current liabilities 
Unit: RMB 
Item 
Closing balance 
Opening balance 
Returns payable 
157,398,378.74 
145,436,712.72 


 
       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
246 
 
Transfer to output tax 
373,745,525.66 
233,949,060.47 
Special financial support funds of 
“transferring loan to subsidy” for the 
use of intelligent voice cluster 
development base in the R&D project of 
intelligent medical devices based on 
medical big 
data 
1,800,000.00 
1,800,000.00 
Total 
532,943,904.40 
381,185,773.19 
Changes in short-term bonds payable: None. 
35. Long-term loans 
Long-term loans by type 
Unit: RMB 
Item 
Closing balance 
Opening balance 
Loan in credit 
2,100,000.00 
2,100,000.00 
Total 
2,100,000.00 
2,100,000.00 
Explanation on classification of long-term loans: None.  
Other explanations, including the range of interest rate: None.  
 
36. Lease liabilities 
Unit: RMB 
Item 
Closing balance 
Opening balance 
Buildings and structures 
247,083,412.30 
379,654,631.37 
Less: Non-current liabilities reclassified to 
liabilities due within one year 
-74,736,102.58 
-93,870,902.64 
Total 
172,347,309.72 
285,783,728.73 
Other explanations: None. 
37. Long-term payables 
Unit: RMB 
Item 
Closing balance 
Opening balance 
Long-term payables 
626,897,323.88 
641,235,559.39 
Special payables 
4,838,584.16 
4,838,584.16 
Total 
631,735,908.04 
646,074,143.55 
 
(1) Long-term payables by nature of payment 
Unit: RMB 
Item 
Closing balance 
Opening balance 
Expenses beyond overall planning for 
employee status conversion expenses 
of state-owned enterprises and social 
security expenses of retirees 
626,897,323.88 
641,235,559.39 
Other explanations: None.  


 
       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
247 
 
(2) Special payables 
Unit: RMB 
Item 
Opening balance 
Increase in the 
current period 
Decrease in the 
current period 
Closing balance 
Reasons 
Preliminary funds 
for major 
technological 
transformation 
projects 
888,468.00 
 
 
888,468.00 
Transfer from 
Baiyao Holdings due 
to merger by 
absorption 
Fulintang chain 
operating funds 
500,000.00 
 
 
500,000.00 
Transfer from 
Baiyao Holdings 
due to merger by 
absorption 
Funds for 
Kunming 
medicine 
distribution center 
500,000.00 
 
 
500,000.00 
Transfer from 
Baiyao 
Holdings due to 
merger by 
absorption 
Yunnan Sanqi 
brand 
registration 
project 
164,272.00 
 
 
164,272.00 
Transfer from 
Baiyao 
Holdings due to 
merger by 
absorption 
Group 
company 
management 
information 
system project 
250,978.00 
 
 
250,978.00 
Transfer from 
Baiyao 
Holdings due to 
merger by 
absorption 
Group company 
technology 
center 
construction 
expenses 
231,265.00 
 
 
231,265.00 
Transfer from 
Baiyao 
Holdings due to 
merger by 
absorption 
Nefuramide 
oxalate 
project 
funding 
85,426.00 
 
 
85,426.00 
Transfer from 
Baiyao 
Holdings due to 
merger by 
absorption 
Yunnan Natural 
Medicine 
Engineering 
Center project 
998,506.00 
 
 
998,506.00 
Transfer from 
Baiyao 
Holdings due to 
merger by 
absorption 
New drug 
research project 
for treatment of 
back pulp injury 
472,062.56 
 
 
472,062.56 
Transfer from 
Baiyao 
Holdings due to 
merger by 
absorption 
Material 
purchase project 
research expense 
489,575.00 
 
 
489,575.00 
Transfer from 
Baiyao 
Holdings due to 
merger by 
absorption 


 
       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
248 
 
R&D of new 
drugs for treating 
cardiovascular 
and 
cerebrovascular 
diseases (TCM)  
258,031.60 
 
 
258,031.60 
Transfer from 
Baiyao 
Holdings due to 
merger by 
absorption 
Total 
4,838,584.16 
 
 
4,838,584.16  
Other explanations: None.  
38. Long-term payroll payable 
(1) 
Details of long-term payroll payable 
Unit: RMB 
Item 
Closing balance 
Opening balance 
II. Termination benefits 
409,232.99 
598,998.08 
III. Other long-term benefits 
3,681,455.00 
3,681,455.00 
Total 
4,090,687.99 
4,280,453.08 
(2) 
Change of defined benefit plan: None.  
39. Estimated liabilities: None.  
40. Deferred income 
Unit: RMB 
 
Item 
 
Opening balance 
Increase in the 
current period 
Decrease in the 
current period 
 
Closing balance 
 
Reasons 
Government 
subsidies 
 
 
 
 
 
Including: 
Government 
subsidies related 
to income 
20,353,660.72 
67,596,671.93 
7,026,939.27 
80,923,393.38 
 
Government 
subsidies related to 
assets 
158,268,152.28 
16,418,070.75 
16,798,505.37 
157,887,717.66 
 
Total 
178,621,813.00 
84,014,742.68 
23,825,444.64 
238,811,111.04  
Other explanations: None.   
41. Other non-current liabilities 
Unit: RMB 
Item 
Closing balance 
Opening balance 
Receipts of real estate sale under staff 
housing reform 
1,931,554.36 
1,931,554.36 
Returns payable 
15,365,260.05 
18,716,979.93 
Total 
17,296,814.41 
20,648,534.29 
Other explanations: None.  


 
       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
249 
 
42. Share capital 
Unit: RMB 
 
 
 
Opening balance 
Increase or decrease (＋,－) 
 
 
Closing balance 
 
Issuance of 
new shares 
 
Share 
dividend 
Capitalization 
of capital 
reserve into 
share capital 
 
 
Others 
 
 
Subtotal 
Total 
number of 
shares 
1,796,862,549.00 
 
 
 
 
 
1,796,862,549.00 
Other explanations: None.  
43. Capital reserves 
Unit: RMB 
 
Item 
 
Opening balance 
Increase in the current 
period 
Decrease in the current 
period 
 
Closing balance 
Capital premium (equity 
premium)  
18,178,665,010.12 
 
3,648,728.86 
18,175,016,281.26 
Other capital reserves 
52,758,828.60 
18,844,632.23 
 
71,603,460.83 
Total 
18,231,423,838.72 
18,844,632.23 
3,648,728.86 
18,246,619,742.09 
Other explanations, including changes and reasons thereof as at the end of the reporting period: 
(1) Reasons for increase during the period:  
1) In the current year, other changes in equity in associates and passive dilution of shares due to the exercise 
of rights to issue new shares were recognized, and an increase of RMB 18,844,632.23 in capital surplus - other 
capital surplus was recognized in accordance with the proportion of shares held. 
(2) Reasons for decrease during the period:  
1) During the year, the Company purchased a 30% minority interest in a subsidiary, Yunnan Baiyao Group 
Medical Technology Hefei Co., Ltd and recognized a decrease of RMB 3,648,728.86 in capital surplus - other 
capital surplus at the consolidated level based on the difference between the purchase price paid and the amount 
of equity interest. 
44. Treasury stock 
Unit: RMB 
 
Item 
 
Opening balance 
Increase in the current 
period 
Decrease in the current 
period 
 
Closing balance 
Share repurchase for equity 
incentives 
707,428,892.15 
 
 
707,428,892.15 
Total 
707,428,892.15 
 
 
707,428,892.15 
Other explanations, including changes and reasons thereof as at the end of the reporting period: None.  
 


 
       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
250 
 
45. Other comprehensive income 
                                                                                                                             Unit: RMB 
 
 
 
 
Item 
 
 
 
Opening 
balance 
Amount for the current period 
 
 
 
 
Closing balance 
 
Amount before 
income tax in the 
current period 
Less: Amount previously 
included in other 
comprehensive income but 
transferred to profits and 
losses in the 
current period 
Less: Amount previously 
included in other 
comprehensive income but 
transferred to retained 
earnings in the 
current period 
 
 
Less: 
income tax 
expenses 
 
 
That attributable 
to the Company 
after tax 
 
 
That 
attributable to 
minority 
interests after 
tax 
I. Other comprehensive 
incomes that will not be 
reclassified into profits 
or losses 
8,731,257.88 
-8,280,710.37 
 
 
 
-8,280,710.37 
 
450,547.51 
Including: Other 
comprehensive income 
that cannot be transferred 
to profits or losses under 
equity method 
8,731,257.88 
-8,280,710.37 
 
 
 
-8,280,710.37 
 
450,547.51 
II. Other 
comprehensive 
incomes to be 
reclassified into profits 
and losses 
-76,818,908.83 
-13,169,810.81 
 
 
 
-13,169,810.81 
-397,300.60 
-89,988,719.64 


 
       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
251 
 
Including: Other 
comprehensive income 
that can be transferred to 
profits or losses under 
equity method 
-42,284,342.91 
-14,144,538.73 
 
 
 
-14,144,538.73 
 
-56,428,881.64 
Exchange 
differences from 
translation of financial 
statements denominated 
in 
foreign currencies 
-34,534,565.92 
974,727.92 
 
 
 
974,727.92 
-397,300.60 
-33,559,838.00 
Total other comprehensive 
income 
-68,087,650.95 
-21,450,521.18 
 
 
 
-21,450,521.18 
-397,300.60 
-89,538,172.13 
Other explanations, including adjustments to the effective portion of the cash flow hedge profits or losses transferred to the amount initially recognized for the hedged item: None. 


 
       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
252 
 
46. Surplus Reserves 
                                                                                             Unit: RMB 
 
Item 
 
Opening balance 
Increase in the current 
period 
Decrease in the current 
period 
 
Closing balance 
Statutory 
surplus reserves 
2,530,458,968.58 
 
 
2,530,458,968.58 
Total 
2,530,458,968.58 
 
 
2,530,458,968.58 
Explanations on surplus reserves, including changes and reasons thereof for the period: None. 
47. Undistributed profit 
                                                                                              Unit: RMB 
Item 
Current period 
Previous period 
Undistributed profit at the end of the 
previous period before adjustment 
16,720,444,918.66 
16,285,350,424.41 
Undistributed profit at the beginning of the 
period after adjustment 
16,720,444,918.66 
16,285,350,424.41 
Plus: Net profits attributable to equity 
owners the Company’s owners in the 
current period 
4,093,782,074.02 
3,001,125,887.45 
Minus: Ordinary share dividends payable 
2,712,079,156.56 
2,566,031,393.20 
Undistributed profit at the end of the 
period 
18,102,147,836.12 
16,720,444,918.66 
Details on adjustment of undistributed profits at the beginning of the period: 
1) Due to retrospective adjustments in accordance with Accounting Standards for Business Enterprises and relevant 
new provisions, 
the undistributed profits at the beginning of the period were affected by RMB 0. 
2) Due to changes in accounting policies, the undistributed profits at the beginning of the period were affected by RMB 0. 
3) Due to correction of material accounting errors, the undistributed profits at the beginning of the period were affected by RMB 0. 
4) Due to changes in the consolidation scope under common control, the undistributed profits at the beginning of the period were 
affected by RMB 0. 
5) Due to other adjustments, the undistributed profits at the beginning of the period were affected by RMB 0. 
48. Operating revenue and operating cost 
                                                                                Unit: RMB 
 
Item 
Amount for the current period 
Amount for the previous period 
Revenue 
Cost 
Revenue 
Cost 
Principal businesses 
39,062,420,069.47 
28,704,978,123.36 
36,439,562,325.77 
26,860,675,164.12 
Other businesses 
48,872,086.53 
39,539,516.93 
48,810,323.96 
22,810,141.34 
Total 
39,111,292,156.00 
28,744,517,640.29 
36,488,372,649.73 
26,883,485,305.46 
Whether the lower of the audited net profit before and after deduction of non-recurring gains or losses is negative 
□ Yes ☑No 


 
       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
253 
 
Breakdown information of operating revenue and operating cost:  
Unit: RMB 
Type of contract 
Drug sales 
Health and daily chemical 
TCM resources 
Operating revenue 
Operating cost 
Operating revenue 
Operating cost 
Operating revenue 
Operating cost 
Business type 
6,684,519,641.40 
2,383,515,724.30 
6,503,861,736.75 
2,086,408,849.77 
1,633,112,219.00 
1,446,815,933.46 
Including: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Industrial sales income 
6,684,519,641.40 
2,383,515,724.30 
6,503,861,736.75 
2,086,408,849.77 
483,690,767.27 
411,715,375.62 
Commercial sales income 
 
 
 
 
1,147,985,373.53 
1,034,252,529.43 
Technical services 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Hotel catering industry 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Planting sales income 
 
 
 
 
1,436,078.20 
848,028.41 
Other  
 
 
 
 
 
 
By operating areas 
      6,684,519,641.40  
   2,383,515,724.30  
      6,503,861,736.75  
  2,086,408,849.77  
      1,633,112,219.00  
   1,446,815,933.46  
Including: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In Yunnan province 
1,023,670,435.93 
143,865,938.13 
343,446,449.59 
222,007,997.07 
697,568,277.52 
603,846,136.30 
Outside 
Yunnan 
province 
(excluding overseas)  
5,626,042,110.70 
2,226,272,256.89 
6,159,007,075.54 
1,863,912,964.87 
663,781,849.03 
580,838,464.89 
Overseas 
34,807,094.77 
13,377,529.28 
1,408,211.62 
487,887.83 
271,762,092.45 
262,131,332.27 
Total  
6,684,519,641.40 
2,383,515,724.30 
6,503,861,736.75 
2,086,408,849.77 
1,633,112,219.00 
1,446,815,933.46 
 
 


 
       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
254 
 
 
Type of contract  
Drug circulation 
Others 
Total 
Operating revenue 
Operating cost 
Operating revenue 
Operating cost 
Operating revenue 
Operating cost 
Business type 
23,559,399,059.10 
22,203,298,707.09 
730,399,499.75 
624,478,425.67 
39,111,292,156.00 
28,744,517,640.29 
Including: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Industrial sales income 
 
 
68,484,915.70 
32,112,768.54 
13,740,557,061.12 
4,913,752,718.23 
Commercial sales income 
23,559,399,059.10 
22,203,298,707.09 
587,872,844.72 
531,614,450.02 
25,295,257,277.35 
23,769,165,686.54 
Technical services 
 
 
10,743,024.62 
7,388,761.76 
10,743,024.62 
7,388,761.76 
HHotel and catering  
 
 
14,426,628.18 
13,822,928.42 
14,426,628.18 
13,822,928.42 
Planting sales income 
 
 
 
 
1,436,078.20 
848,028.41 
Other 
 
 
48,872,086.53 
39,539,516.93 
48,872,086.53 
39,539,516.93 
By operating areas 
23,559,399,059.10 
22,203,298,707.09 
      730,399,499.75  
   624,478,425.67  
39,111,292,156.00  
   28,744,517,640.29  
Including: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In Yunnan province 
23,487,863,019.51 
22,124,468,960.75 
275,117,974.26 
256,766,618.40 
25,827,666,156.81 
23,350,955,650.65 
Outside 
Yunnan 
province 
(excluding overseas)  
71,536,039.59 
78,829,746.34 
129,074,154.07 
52,885,891.51 
12,649,441,228.93 
4,802,739,324.50 
Overseas 
 
 
326,207,371.42 
314,825,915.76 
634,184,770.26 
590,822,665.14 
Total 
23,559,399,059.10 
22,203,298,707.09 
730,399,499.75 
624,478,425.67 
39,111,292,156.00 
28,744,517,640.29 
Information related to performance obligations: The Company and its subsidiaries are mainly engaged in sale of drugs, medicinal materials, health and daily chemical products, etc. and recognize the 
realization of revenue upon delivery of products to customers and confirmation by customers that they have obtained control over the products. No contracts are for the purpose of significant financing. 
But, some contracts may include some discount and concession clauses. Usually, no contracts contain expected refunds to customers or other similar obligations assumed by the Company.  
Information about variable consideration in the contract: None.  
Other explanations: None. 


 
       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
255 
 
49. Taxes and surcharges 
Unit: RMB 
Item 
Amount for the current period 
Amount for the previous period 
Consumption tax 
1,334,001.60 
854,138.47 
Urban maintenance and construction tax 
87,286,116.05 
84,697,210.82 
Education surcharge 
38,006,819.35 
37,323,173.77 
Property tax 
20,854,291.61 
24,008,483.52 
Land use tax 
11,015,525.09 
11,316,849.02 
Vehicle and vessel use tax 
82,456.83 
178,747.19 
Stamp duty 
26,724,523.32 
24,429,646.95 
Land value-added tax 
 
2,563,445.92 
Local education surcharge 
25,358,176.63 
24,927,946.73 
Others 
139,568.24 
189,799.77 
Total 
210,801,478.72 
210,489,442.16 
Other explanations: None. 
50. Administrative expenses 
Unit: RMB 
Item 
Amount for the current period 
Amount for the previous period 
Employee compensation 
699,216,701.82 
456,376,184.90 
Depreciation and amortization 
119,934,021.71 
117,326,492.90 
Agency service fee 
52,485,577.72 
77,396,074.12 
Office expenses 
22,359,108.91 
30,820,796.23 
Technical service fee 
31,860,830.97 
21,061,758.60 
Business entertainment fee 
15,994,289.45 
16,462,082.25 
Travel expenses 
20,122,003.15 
10,754,258.51 
Utilities and property management fee 
5,926,154.60 
8,704,893.66 
Security and cleaning fee 
6,322,427.76 
6,244,773.62 
Advertising and promotion expenses 
3,570,476.33 
4,335,561.43 
Afforestation and pollution discharge fee 
4,477,164.69 
4,179,829.13 
Lease cost  
6,457,746.85 
3,666,584.08 
Share payment expenses  
0.00 
-7,505,567.02 
Other 
69,777,019.94 
83,960,541.05 
Total 
1,058,503,523.90 
833,784,263.46 
Other explanations: None. 
51. Selling expenses 
Unit: RMB 
Item 
Amount for the current period 
Amount for the previous period 
Employee compensation 
1,831,501,877.46 
1,434,593,352.34 
Market maintenance and promotion 
expenses 
1,861,437,876.57 
1,426,225,492.30 
Advertising expenses 
661,244,437.69 
608,977,960.14 
Information technology service fee 
53,262,914.17 
113,030,603.00 
Travel expenses 
109,139,900.74 
91,116,431.47 
Hospital management fee 
76,739,145.81 
79,327,385.62 


 
       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
256 
 
Depreciation and amortization 
72,950,345.58 
73,415,253.68 
Planning service fee 
68,134,522.07 
62,926,565.58 
Office expenses 
62,544,576.41 
55,484,596.00 
Manufacturing expenses 
19,174,909.92 
37,238,976.99 
Warehousing expenses 
12,101,737.90 
32,133,896.26 
Material consumption 
28,242,998.85 
23,136,193.24 
Transportation and handling fees 
33,389,355.68 
21,892,197.34 
Promotion fee 
21,239,165.85 
20,076,357.00 
Service fee 
13,445,297.11 
10,179,229.86 
Lease fee 
7,395,782.20 
9,794,581.18 
Sample fee 
8,188,682.02 
9,584,584.03 
Others 
52,024,065.08 
56,430,244.88 
Total 
4,992,157,591.11 
4,165,563,900.91 
 
Other explanations: None.  
52. R&D expenses 
Unit: RMB 
Item 
Amount for the current period 
Amount for the previous period 
Employee compensation 
155,787,826.65 
112,076,284.66 
Materials consumption and inspection 
fee 
32,779,955.16 
73,207,131.01 
Depreciation and amortisation 
18,203,654.61 
54,292,927.85 
Test out-sourcing expenses 
38,162,026.18 
28,857,450.09 
Commissioned R&D cost 
59,308,976.45 
19,390,700.49 
New product design fee 
4,086,610.07 
6,075,819.03 
Others 
27,684,385.71 
42,823,377.13 
Total 
336,013,434.83 
336,723,690.26 
Other explanations: None 
53. Financial expenses 
Unit: RMB 
Item 
Amount for the current period 
Amount for the previous period 
Interest expenses 
49,601,252.93 
67,849,588.22 
Less: interest income 
-315,758,812.17 
-374,310,143.23 
Net loss on foreign exchange 
-2,073,485.41 
-60,629,900.19 
Bank charges 
6,759,007.86 
21,845,875.93 
Others 
2,228,291.91 
2,366,197.47 
Total 
-259,243,744.88 
-342,878,381.80 
Other explanations:  
54. Other income 
Unit: RMB 
Other sources of income 
Amount for the current period 
Amount for the previous period 
Government subsidies directly included in 
current profit and loss during the period  
51,549,775.52 
78,679,223.60 
Amortization of government subsidies 
related to assets 
16,798,505.37 
14,059,549.50 
Amortization of government subsidies 
7,026,939.27 
7,159,585.65 


 
       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
257 
 
related to income 
Return of individual income tax service 
charge 
4,121,718.75 
3,950,966.78 
Others 
3,818,208.41 
878,392.67 
Total 
83,315,147.32 
104,727,718.20 
55. Gains on changes in fair value 
Unit: RMB 
Sources of gains on changes in fair value 
Amount for the current period 
Amount for the previous period 
Financial assets held for trading 
179,678,085.07 
-667,561,834.94 
Other non-current financial assets 
-56,111,754.61 
47,224,578.50 
Change in fair value of bank wealth 
management products outstanding 
 
434,308.13 
Total 
123,566,330.46 
-619,902,948.31 
Other explanations: None.  
56. Investment income 
Unit: RMB 
Item 
Amount for the current period Amount for the previous period 
Gain on long-term equity investments subject to accounting 
with equity method 
628,531,524.35 
732,233,328.71 
Investment income from disposal of long-term equity 
investment  
110,398,541.09 
-73,495,210.33 
Investment income on financial assets held for trading 
during holding period 
7,606,635.89 
7,577,722.83 
Investment income from disposal of financial assets held 
for trading 
-7,010,382.50 
204,640,032.15 
Investment income earned during the holding period of 
other non-current financial assets  
75,617,211.23 
10,253,018.90 
Others 
-36,132,801.24 
-13,010,502.10 
Total 
779,010,728.82 
868,198,390.16 
Other explanations: None.   
57. Credit impairment losses 
Unit: RMB 
Item 
Amount for the current period 
Amount for the previous period 
Bad debt losses on accounts receivable 
-179,435,027.97 
-186,806,590.38 
Bad debt losses on other receivables 
42,979,823.61 
-537,747,962.34 
Total 
-136,455,204.36 
-724,554,552.72 
Other explanations: None.   
58. Asset impairment losses 
 
 
 


 
       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
258 
 
 
Unit: RMB 
Item 
Amount for the current period 
Amount for the previous period 
I. Inventory impairment losses and   
contract performance cost impairment 
losses 
-11,490,525.22 
-65,630,502.65 
II. Impairment loss of fixed assets 
-4,169,779.04 
-19,958,298.01 
III. Impairment loss of intangible assets  
-16,706,934.75 
 
IV. Goodwill impairment loss 
-25,760,323.22 
-578,749,818.26 
Total 
-58,127,562.23 
-664,338,618.92 
Other explanations: None.   
59. Gains on disposal of assets 
Unit: RMB 
Source of gains on disposal of assets 
Amount for the current period 
Amount for the previous period 
Profit from disposal of non-current assets 
-105,279.84 
2,133,959.03 
Profit from disposal of right-of-use assets 
10,759,718.22 
3,810,809.38 
Total 
10,654,438.38 
5,944,768.41 
 
60. Non-operating revenue 
Unit: RMB 
 
Item 
 
Amount for the current period 
 
Amount for the previous 
period 
Amount of non-recurring 
profits or losses included in 
the current period 
Profits from destruction 
and scrapping of non-
current assets 
171,572.75 
48,404.12 
171,572.75 
 
Including: fixed assets 
171,572.75 
48,404.12 
171,572.75 
Others 
12,062,476.51 
13,540,774.63 
12,062,476.51 
Total 
12,234,049.26 
13,589,178.75 
12,234,049.26 
Other explanations: None.   
61. Non-operating expenses 
Unit: RMB 
 
Item 
 
Amount for the current period 
 
Amount for the previous 
period 
Amount of non-recurring 
profits or losses included in the 
current period 
Donation 
3,439,155.47 
4,382,049.94 
3,439,155.47 
Losses from destruction 
and scrapping of non-
current assets 
10,746,640.25 
1,550,976.51 
10,746,640.25 
 
Including: fixed assets  
10,746,640.25 
1,545,176.45 
10,746,640.25 


 
       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
259 
 
Others 
10,542,607.30 
1,932,914.70 
10,542,607.30 
Total 
24,728,403.02 
7,865,941.15 
24,728,403.02 
Other explanations: None.  
62. Income tax expense 
(1) Table of income tax expenses 
Unit: RMB 
Item 
Amount for the current period 
Amount for the previous period 
Current income tax expenses 
696,380,255.02 
701,797,672.02 
Deferred income tax expenses 
-929,594.85 
-165,204,942.51 
Total 
695,450,660.17 
536,592,729.51 
(2) Adjustment process of accounting profit and income tax expense 
Unit: RMB 
Item 
Amount for the current period 
Total profit 
4,818,011,756.66 
Income tax expense calculated at statutory/applicable tax rate 
722,701,763.50 
Effect of different tax rates applied to subsidiaries 
33,488,195.50 
Effect of adjusting income tax for prior periods 
9,319,135.48 
Effect of non-taxable income 
-119,956,874.62 
Effect of non-deductible costs, expenses and losses 
35,249,500.23 
Effect of deductible losses on the use of deferred tax assets not 
recognized in prior periods 
-14,480,104.50 
Effect of deductible temporary differences or deductible losses 
on deferred income tax assets not recognized in the current 
period 
68,303,837.20 
Extra tax deductions for R&D costs 
-41,760,357.09 
Others 
2,585,564.47 
Income tax expenses 
695,450,660.17 
Other explanations: None.   
63. Other comprehensive income 
For details, please refer to Note 45 “Other comprehensive income.”  
64. Cash flow statement 
(1) Cash relating to operating activities  
Cash received relating to other operating activities 
Unit: RMB 
Item 
Amount for the current period 
Amount for the previous period 
Interest income 
343,668,676.54 
373,821,901.39 


 
       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
260 
 
Deposits and guarantees 
137,533,597.44 
146,882,290.06 
Government subsidy 
134,140,444.78 
95,383,223.60 
Current account and petty cash 
23,924,789.88 
94,214,478.71 
Others 
49,853,998.90 
31,391,960.79 
Total 
689,121,507.54 
741,693,854.55 
Explanations on cash received relating to other operating activities: None.  
Cash payments relating to other operating activities 
Unit: RMB 
Item 
Amount for the current period 
Amount for the previous period 
Expenses of cost nature 
2,788,122,677.99 
2,508,477,763.35 
Deposits and guarantees 
121,204,248.66 
88,797,398.36 
Current account and petty cash 
41,963,044.67 
17,136,959.72 
Others 
29,831,773.08 
69,233,481.29 
Total 
2,981,121,744.40 
2,683,645,602.72 
Explanations on cash payments relating to other operating activities: None.  
(2) Cash relating to investment activities  
Cash received relating to other investment activities 
Unit: RMB 
Item 
Amount for the current period 
Amount for the previous period 
Principal and interest of time deposits and 
other financial products redeemed  
1,978,176,523.10 
1,170,771,170.00 
Total 
1,978,176,523.10 
1,170,771,170.00 
Important cash received relating to investment activities 
Unit: RMB 
Item 
Amount for the current period 
Amount for the previous period 
Principal and proceeds of stocks and funds, etc.  
2,858,040,561.69 
4,319,636,258.97 
Principal and interest of time deposits and other 
wealth management products 
1,978,176,523.10 
1,170,771,170.00 
Principal and interest of other bank wealth 
management products 
136,597,866.72 
1,328,105,917.87 
Total 
4,972,814,951.51 
6,818,513,346.84 
Explanations on cash received relating to other investing activities: None.  
Cash payments relating to other investment activities 
Unit: RMB 
Item 
Amount for the current period 
Amount for the previous period 
Time deposits and other bank wealth 
management products 
3,805,272,300.00 
478,644,953.13 
Net cash outflow from disposal of 
subsidiary  
37,021.72 
 
Equity investment consulting fee  
 
9,548,207.57 
Total 
3,805,309,321.72 
488,193,160.70 
Important cash paid relating to investment activities 
 


 
       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
261 
 
Unit: RMB 
Item 
Amount for the current period 
Amount for the previous 
period 
Time deposits and other bank wealth management products 
3,805,272,300.00 
478,644,953.13 
Cash paid to acquire fixed assets, intangible assets and other 
long-term assets 
575,507,137.90 
446,732,820.54 
Other bank wealth management products 
68,700,000.00 
654,500,000.00 
Payments for subscription of equity of Shanghai Pharma 
 
10,909,623,186.44 
Net cash paid for acquisition of subsidiaries and other business 
units 
 
569,283,888.24 
Total 
4,449,479,437.90 
13,058,784,848.35 
Explanations on cash payments relating to other investing activities: None. 
(3) Cash received relating to financing activities 
Cash received relating to other financing activities: None.  
Cash paid relating to other financing activities 
Unit: RMB 
Item 
Amount for the current period 
Amount for the previous period 
Repurchase of treasury stock 
 
707,428,892.15 
Payment of lease costs 
91,230,648.56 
91,337,801.12 
Handling fee for financing activities 
953,227.70 
16,927,901.57 
Dividend Margin 
 
1,000,000.00 
Payments for acquisition of minority 
equity in Hefei Company  
8,100,000.00 
 
Payment for minority equity upon 
cancellation and liquidation of subsidiary  
4,900,000.00 
4,900,000.00 
Total 
105,183,876.26 
821,594,594.84 
Explanations on cash payments relating to other financing activities: 
Change of liabilities resulting from financing activities  
Applicable 
□Not applicable 
Unit: RMB 
Item 
Opening balance 
Increase in the current period 
Decrease in the current period 
Closing balance 
Cash change 
Non-cash change 
Cash change 
Non-cash change 
Short-term 
borrowings 
1,850,867,886.59 
1,376,188,273.49 
38,610,693.19 
1,459,780,314.30 
58,582,838.63 
1,747,303,700.34 
Dividend payable 
89,413,484.03 
 
2,729,013,580.53 
2,731,936,322.52 
 
86,490,742.04 
Lease 
liabilities 
(Lease liabilities due 
within one year)  
379,654,631.37 
 
68,242,372.11 
91,230,648.56 
109,582,942.62 
247,083,412.30 
Long-term borrowings 
2,100,000.00 
 
 
 
 
2,100,000.00 
Total 
2,322,036,001.99 
1,376,188,273.49 
2,835,866,645.83 
4,282,947,285.38 
168,165,781.25 
2,082,977,854.68 


 
       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
262 
 
(4) Explanation on presentation of cash flow in net amount: None.   
(5) Significant activities and financial effects that do not involve current cash receipts and 
disbursements but affect the enterprise’s financial position or may affect the enterprise’s cash 
flows in the future 
65. Supplementary information of cash flow statement 
(1) Supplementary information of cash flow statement 
Unit: RMB 
Supplementary information 
Amount for the current period 
Amount for the previous period 
1. Reconciliation of net profit to cash flows from 
operating activities: 
 
 
Net profit 
4,122,561,096.49 
2,840,409,694.19 
Plus: Impairment provision for assets 
194,582,766.59 
1,388,893,171.64 
Depreciation of fixed assets, depreciation of oil 
and gas assets, depreciation of productive 
biological assets 
208,456,263.24 
316,627,661.86 
Depreciation of right-of-use assets 
100,305,178.75 
109,141,890.48 
Amortization of intangible assets 
30,940,993.27 
27,839,854.11 
Amortization of long-term deferred expenses 
33,493,659.88 
27,820,395.79 
Loss on disposal of fixed assets, intangible assets 
and other long-term assets (gain is indicated with “-”)  
79,370.88 
-5,944,768.41 
Losses on scrapping of fixed assets (gain is 
indicated with “-”)  
10,575,067.50 
1,496,772.33 
Losses on changes in fair value (gain is indicated 
with “-”)  
-123,566,330.46 
619,902,948.31 
Financial expenses (income is indicated with “-”)  
49,601,252.93 
67,849,588.22 
Investment losses (gain is indicated with “-”)  
-779,010,728.82 
-868,198,390.16 
Decrease of deferred income tax assets (increase is 
indicated with “-”)  
22,377,570.54 
-198,706,335.80 
Increase of deferred income tax liabilities 
(decrease is indicated with “-”)  
-23,307,165.39 
34,413,109.36 
Decrease in inventories (increase is indicated with 
“-”)  
1,539,521,695.37 
338,741,897.07 
Decrease in operating receivable items (increase is 
indicated with “-”)  
-2,088,116,474.45 
-2,054,964,892.96 
Increase in operating payable items (decrease is 
indicated with “-”)  
198,990,559.88 
1,166,791,741.20 
Others 
5,257,571.82 
-602,704,304.66 
Net cash flows from operating activities 
3,502,742,348.02 
3,209,410,032.57 
2. Major investment and financing activities irrelevant 
to cash income and expense: 
 
 
Conversion of debts into capital 
 
 
Convertible corporate bonds due within one year 
 
 
Fixed assets acquired under finance leases 
 
 


 
       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
263 
 
 
 
(2) Net cash paid for acquisitions of subsidiaries for the period: None.  
(3) Net cash received from disposal of subsidiaries for the period: None.  
(4) Composition of cash and cash equivalents 
Unit: RMB 
Item 
Closing balance 
Opening balance 
I. Cash 
14,151,765,468.49 
13,046,160,012.47 
Including: Cash on hand 
258,600.92 
224,637.14 
Bank deposit available 
for payment at any time 
14,114,677,091.39 
13,006,283,524.34 
Other cash and bank 
balance available for payment at 
any time 
36,829,776.18 
39,651,850.99 
II. Cash and cash equivalents at the end 
of the reporting period 
14,151,765,468.49 
13,046,160,012.47 
(5) Presentation of items with restricted use but still belonging to cash and cash equivalents: None.   
(6) Cash and bank balance which are not cash and cash equivalents:  
Unit: RMB 
Item 
Amount in the 
reporting period 
Amount in the 
previous period 
Reasons for not belonging to 
cash and cash equivalents 
Guarantee deposit, banker’s acceptance bill 
deposit, performance deposit, etc 
48,618,045.43 
9,953,700.00 
Cannot be withdrawn at any 
time 
Cost specially used for housing reform and 
maintenance 
2,643,393.65 
 
Cannot be withdrawn at any 
time 
Cost for property preservation 
500,000.00 
 
Cannot be withdrawn at any 
time 
Cost specially used for identity conversion 
for employees in state-owned enterprises 
14,816,169.10 
 
Cannot be withdrawn at any 
time 
Total 
66,577,608.18 
9,953,700.00 
 
(7) Explanations on other significant activities: None.  
66. Notes to statement of changes in equity 
Explanation on “Others” adjusted for closing balance of the previous year and adjusted amount thereof: None.  
3. Net changes in cash and cash equivalents: 
 
 
Closing balance of cash 
14,151,765,468.49 
13,046,160,012.47 
Less: Opening balance of cash 
13,046,160,012.47 
18,869,864,842.32 
Plus: Closing balance of cash equivalents 
 
 
Less: Opening balance of cash equivalents 
 
 
Net increase in cash and cash equivalents 
1,105,605,456.02 
-5,823,704,829.85 


 
       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
264 
 
67. Monetary items denominated in foreign currencies 
(1) Monetary items denominated in foreign currencies 
Unit: RMB 
 
Item 
Closing balance of foreign 
currency 
 
Exchange rate 
Closing balance converted 
into RMB 
Cash and bank balance 
 
 
 
Including: USD 
7,291,861.95 
7.0827 
51,646,070.63 
Euro 
1,981,507.95 
7.8592 
15,573,067.28 
HKD 
121,443,397.97 
0.90622 
110,054,436.11 
     Japanese yen 
20,877,251.91 
0.05021 
1,048,246.82 
      South Korean 
won 
21,324,422.00 
0.00551 
117,497.57 
THB 
1,116,327.33 
0.20736 
231,481.64 
CAD 
948.07 
5.3673 
5,088.58 
CHF 
20,357.05 
8.4184 
171,373.79 
SGD 
99,868.99 
5.3772 
537,015.53 
Accounts receivable 
 
 
 
Including: USD 
13,507.62 
7.0827 
95,670.43 
Euro 
 
 
 
HKD 
16,232,528.13 
0.90622 
14,710,241.64 
        Japanese yen  
11,960.00 
0.05021 
600.51 
SGD 
544.47 
5.3772 
2,927.72 
Long-term loan  
 
 
 
Including: USD 
 
 
 
Euro 
 
 
 
HKD 
 
 
 
Other current assets 
 
 
 
Including USD 
15,000,000.00 
7.0827 
106,240,500.00 
Accounts payable  
 
 
 
Including: HKD 
2,617,590.31 
0.90622 
2,372,112.69 
Other receivables:  
 
 
 
Including: USD 
1,651.05 
7.0827 
11,693.89 
 HKD 
11,481,477.00 
0.90622 
10,404,744.09 
 THB 
136,496.49 
0.20345 
27,770.21 
 CAD 
966.78 
5.3673 
5,189.00 
 SGD 
9,398.01 
5.3772 
50,534.98 
Contractual liabilities  
 
 
 
Including: HKD 
3,562,953.78 
0.90622 
3,228,819.97 
Other payables 
 
 
 
Including: HKD 
15,450,675.29 
0.90622 
14,001,710.96 
Japanese yen  
950,020.00 
0.05021 
47,700.50 
THB 
53,319.04 
0.20345 
10,847.76 
Other explanations: None.   


 
       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
265 
 
(2) Description of overseas business entities; for material overseas business entities, disclose their major 
business places overseas, functional currency and the selection criterion thereof; should there be any change 
in the functional currency, disclose the reason for such change 
□ Applicable  
Not applicable 
68. Leases 
(1) The Company as the lessee 
 Applicable 
□ Not applicable 
Variable lease payments not included in the measurement of lease liabilities 
 Applicable 
□ Not applicable 
Unit: RMB 
Item 
Amount 
Variable lease payments not included in the measurement 
of lease liabilities 
978,985.95 
Simplified handling of payments of short-term leasing or leasing of low value assets 
 Applicable 
□ Not applicable 
Unit: RMB 
Item 
Amount 
Simplified handling of fees of short-term leasing or leasing 
of low value assets 
12,874,543.10 
After-sales leaseback transactions 
(2) The Company as the lessor 
Operating lease where the Company is the lessor  
 Applicable 
□ Not applicable 
Unit: RMB 
Item 
Receipts from 
lease 
Including: Receipts related to variable lease payments not 
included in lease receipts 
Houses and buildings 
13,621,479.81 
 
Total 
13,621,479.81 
 
Finance lease where the Company is the lessor 
□ Applicable 
☑ Not applicable 
Undiscounted lease receipts for each of the next five years 
□ Applicable 
☑ Not applicable 
Reconciliation of undiscounted lease receipts to net investment in leases: None.  


 
       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
266 
 
(3) Recognition of gains and losses on sales under finance leases as a manufacturer or distributor 
 Applicable 
☑ Not applicable 
69. Others 
None. 
VIII. R&D Expenditure 
Unit: RMB 
Item 
Amount for the current period 
Amount for the previous period 
Employee Benefits 
155,787,826.65 
112,076,284.66 
Materials consumption and inspection 
fees 
33,036,222.54 
73,207,131.01 
Depreciation and amortization 
18,301,737.20 
54,307,942.01 
Test outsourcing fee 
38,167,290.57 
28,857,450.09 
Commissioned R&D cost 
67,328,221.73 
25,400,134.45 
New product design fee 
4,086,610.07 
6,075,819.03 
Others 
27,733,552.52 
42,823,377.13 
Total 
344,441,461.28 
342,748,138.38 
Including: Expensed R&D expenditure  
336,013,434.83 
336,723,690.26 
Capitalized R&D expenditure  
8,428,026.45 
6,024,448.12 
1. R&D projects meeting capitalization conditions  
Unit: RMB 
Important capitalized R&D projects: None.  
Impairment provision for R&D expenditure: None.   
2. Important outsourced project under study: None.   
IX. Changes in the Consolidation Scope 
1. Business combination not under common control 
(1) Business combination not under common control in the current period: None.  
(2) Merger cost and goodwill: None.  
(3) Identifiable assets and liabilities of acquirees as at the acquisition date: None. 
(4) Profits or losses generated from the re-measurement of equity held before the acquisition date at the fair 
value 
Whether there was a transaction that realized mergers step by step via multiple 
transactions and obtained control during the reporting period 
Yes   No 
Item 
Opening balance 
Increase in the current period 
Decrease in the current period 
Closing 
balance 
Internal development 
costs 
Others 
Recognized as 
intangible assets 
Transfer to 
current profits or 
losses 
P137 Project Research 
and Development (IND)  
6,024,448.12 
8,428,026.45 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
14,452,474.57 
Total 
6,024,448.12 
8,428,026.45 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
14,452,474.57 


 
       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
267 
 
(5) Relevant information about the merger consideration that cannot be reasonably determined as at the 
acquisition date or the end of the current period of merger or on the fair value of acquirees’ identifiable 
assets and liabilities:  
None.  
(6) Other explanations: None.  
2. Business combination under common control 
(1) Business combination under common control in the current period: None.  
(2) Merger cost: None. 
(3) Book value of assets and liabilities of the merged entity on the date of merger:  
3. Reverse purchase 
Basic information of the transaction, the basis for the transaction to constitute a reverse purchase, whether the 
assets and liabilities retained by the listed company constitute a business and its basis, the determination of merger 
cost, the amount of equity adjustment and its calculation when dealing with equity transactions:  


 
       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
268 
 
4. Disposal of subsidiaries 
Whether there were any transactions or events during the period in which control of subsidiaries was lost 
Yes     No 
Unit: RMB 
Name of 
subsidiary 
Disposal 
price at 
the time 
point 
when 
the 
control 
was lost 
Disposal 
proportion 
at the time 
point 
when the 
control 
was lost 
Disposal 
method 
at the 
time 
point 
when 
the 
control 
was lost 
The time 
point 
when the 
control 
was lost 
Basis for 
determining 
the time 
point when 
the control 
was lost 
The difference 
between the 
disposal price 
and the share 
of the net 
assets of the 
subsidiary at 
the 
consolidated 
financial 
statement level 
corresponding 
to the disposal 
of the 
investment 
Proportion 
of rest 
equity on 
the date of 
losing 
control 
Carrying 
value of the 
remaining 
equity on the 
date of loss 
of control at 
the level of 
Consolidated 
Financial 
Statements 
Fair value of 
the 
remaining 
equity on the 
date of loss 
of control at 
the level of 
Consolidated 
Financial 
Statements 
Gains or 
losses on re-
measurement 
of remaining 
equity at fair 
value 
Methods and 
key 
assumptions 
for 
determining 
the fair value 
of the 
remaining 
equity at the 
date of loss 
of control at 
the level of 
Consolidated 
Financial 
Statements 
Amount 
transferred 
from other 
comprehensive 
income related 
to equity 
investment in 
former 
subsidiaries to 
investment 
profit and loss 
or retained 
income  
Wan Long Xing 
Ye Commercial 
Trading 
(Shenzhen) 
Limited 
HK1.00 
100.00% 
Agreed 
transfer 
December 
12, 2023 
Loss of 
right for 
making 
business 
decision 
110,398,541.09 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Other explanations: None.  
Whether there was a loss of control in the current period under a progressive disposal of investments in subsidiaries through multiple transactions 
Yes 
No 


 
       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
269 
 
5. Changes in the consolidation scope due to other reasons 
Describe the change in scope of consolidation for other reasons (e.g. Establishing new subsidiaries, liquidating 
subsidiaries, etc.) and its details: 
(1) Cancellation of subsidiaries 
1) Yunnan Pharmaceutical Hanbo Co., Ltd completed the cancellation of industrial and commercial registration in 
February 2023. 
2) Yunnan Baiyao Group Chuxiong Health Products Co., Ltd completed the cancellation of industrial and 
commercial registration in June 2023. 
3) Yunnan Pharmaceutical Ruiyang Shenhua Technology Co., Ltd completed the cancellation of industrial and 
commercial registration in December 2023. 
4) Beijing Yunyi Medical Beauty Clinic Co., Ltd completed the cancellation of business registration in July 2023. 
5) Hainan Yunfan Private Equity Fund Management Co., Ltd completed the cancellation of industrial and 
commercial registration in September 2023. 
6) Ban Loong Fund Investment Co., Ltd was cancelled in February 2023. 
7) Ban Loong Hemp Technology Inc was cancelled in March 2023. 
8) Yunnan Baiyao Qingyitang Hong Kong Limited was deregistered in September 2023. 
9) Yunnan Wuxi Health Technology Co., Ltd was deregistered in November 2023. 
(2) Establishment of new subsidiaries 
1) Yunnan Baiyao Group Traditional Chinese Medicine Resources Co., Ltd established through investment 
Xingzhong Digital Intelligence TCM Service Co., Ltd, with the registered capital of RMB 20 million and the 
shareholding ratio of 100%. Yunnan Baiyao included Xingzhong Digital Intelligence TCM Service Co., Ltd into 
the scope of consolidation in May 2023. 
2) Yunnan Yunyao Co., Ltd established through investment Yunnan Yunyao Nuxiang Co., Ltd, with the registered 
capital of RMB 2 million and the shareholding ratio of 100%. Yunnan Baiyao included Yunnan Yunyao Nuxiang 
Co., Ltd into the scope of consolidation in June 2023. 
3) Yunnan Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd. invested in the establishment of Yunnan Pharmaceutical Dali Co., Ltd with a 
registered capital of RMB 10.00 million and a shareholding ratio of 100%. Yunnan Baiyao has included Yunnan 
Pharmaceutical Dali Co., Ltd in its scope of consolidation from November 2023 onwards. 
4) Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd invested in the establishment of Yunhe Pharmaceutical (Tianjin) Co., Ltd with a 
registered capital of RMB 20.00 million and a shareholding of 100%. Yunnan Baiyao has included Yunhe 
Pharmaceutical (Tianjin) Co., Ltd in its scope of consolidation from July 2023 onwards. 
5) YNBY International Limited invested in the establishment of BL Healthcare (Overseas) Limited, with one share 
issued; totaling HK$ 1. Yunnan Baiyao has included BL Healthcare (Overseas) Limited in its scope of consolidation 
from February 2023 onwards. 
6) YNBY International Limited invested in the establishment of YNBY Health Limited, with one share issued; 
totaling HK$ 1. Yunnan Baiyao has included YNBY Health Limited in its scope of consolidation from February 
2023 onwards. 
7) YNBY International Limited invested in the establishment of YNBY Beauty Limited, with one share issued; 


 
       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
270 
 
totaling HK$ 1. Yunnan Baiyao has included YNBY Beauty Limited in its scope of consolidation from February 
2023 onwards. 
8) YNBY International Limited invested in the establishment of YNBY Pharmaceutical Limited, with one share 
issued; totaling HK$ 1. Yunnan Baiyao has included YNBY Pharmaceutical Limited in its scope of consolidation 
from February 2023 onwards. 
9) YNBY International Limited invested in the establishment of Ban Loong Holdings Group Limited (called as 
YNBY International Limited above), with one share issued; totaling HK$ 1. Yunnan Baiyao has included Ban 
Loong Holdings Group Limited (called as YNBY International Limited above) in its scope of consolidation from 
March 2023 onwards. 
10) YNBY International Limited invested in the establishment of YNBY Limited, with one share issued; totaling 
HK$ 1. Yunnan Baiyao has included YNBY Limited in its scope of consolidation from March 2023 onwards. 
11) YNBY International Limited invested in the establishment of YNBY Holdings Group Limited, with one share 
issued; totaling HK$ 1. Yunnan Baiyao has included YNBY Holdings Group Limited in its scope of consolidation 
from March 2023 onwards. 
12) YNBY International Limited invested in the establishment of YNBY Group Limited, with one share issued; 
totaling HK$ 1. Yunnan Baiyao has included YNBY Group Limited in its scope of consolidation from March 2023 
onwards. 
13) YNBY International Limited invested in the establishment of YNBY Hong Kong Limited, with one share issued; 
totaling HK$ 1. Yunnan Baiyao has included YNBY Hong Kong Limited in its scope of consolidation from March 
2023 onwards. 
14) BL Healthcare (Overseas) Limited invested in the establishment of YNBY Healthcare (Shenzhen) Limited, with 
one share issued; totaling HK$ 1. Yunnan Baiyao has included YNBY Healthcare (Shenzhen) Limited in its scope 
of consolidation from April 2023 onwards. 
15) BL Healthcare (Overseas) Limited invested in the establishment of YNBY Healthcare (Singapore) Pte Ltd, with 
one share issued; totaling SGD 1. Yunnan Baiyao has included YNBY Healthcare (Singapore) Pte Ltd in its scope 
of consolidation from May 2023 onwards. 
16) YNBY Holdings Group Limited invested in the establishment of YNBY Healthcare (Malaysia) SDN.BHD, with 
one share issued; totaling MYR 1. Yunnan Baiyao has included YNBY Healthcare (Malaysia) SDN.BHD in its 
scope of consolidation from September 2023 onwards. 
17) YNBY Holdings Group Limited invested in the establishment of YNBY Health Technology (Yunnan) Co., Ltd, 
with the registered capital of RMB 4 million. Yunnan Baiyao has included YNBY Health Technology (Yunnan) 
Co., Ltd in its scope of consolidation from September 2023 onwards. 
18) YNBY Holdings Group Limited invested in the establishment of YNBY Healthcare (UK) Limited, with 200 
shares issued; totaling GBP 200. Yunnan Baiyao has included YNBY Healthcare (UK) Limited in its scope of 
consolidation from October 2023 onwards. 
19) YNBY Group Limited invested in the establishment of YNBY Coffee Industry Co., Ltd, with one share issued; 
totaling HK$ 1. Yunnan Baiyao has included YNBY Coffee Industry Co., Ltd in its scope of consolidation from 
November 2023 onwards. 


 
       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
271 
 
20) YNBY International Limited invested in the establishment of YNBY Coffee Co., Ltd, with one share issued; 
totaling HK$ 1. Yunnan Baiyao has included YNBY Coffee Co., Ltd in its scope of consolidation from November 
2023 onwards. 
21) YNBY International Limited invested in the establishment of YNBY Holdings Limited, with one share issued; 
totaling HK$ 1. Yunnan Baiyao has included YNBY Holdings Limited in its scope of consolidation from November 
2023 onwards. 
(3) Liquidation 
The structured entity Yunfan No. 1 Private Equity Investment Fund was liquidated in May 2023. 
6. Others: None. 
X. Interest in Other Entities 
1. Interest in subsidiaries 
(1) Composition of the Group 
Unit: RMB 
Name of subsidiary 
Registered 
capital 
Main 
business 
location 
Place of 
registration 
Business nature 
Shareholding 
proportion 
Acquisition 
method 
Direct 
Indirect 
Yunnan Baiyao 
Group Traditional 
Chinese Medicine 
Resources Co., Ltd 
16,400,000.00 
Kunming 
Kunming 
Pharmaceutical 
100.00% 
0.00% 
Set-up or 
investment 
Yunnan Baiyao 
Group Medicine E-
commerce Co., Ltd. 
30,000,000.00 
Kunming 
Kunming 
Wholesale and 
retail of daily 
necessities 
100.00% 
0.00% 
Set-up or 
investment 
Yunnan Baiyao 
Group Wuxi 
Pharmaceutical Co., 
Ltd. 
25,000,000.00 
Wuxi 
Wuxi 
Pharmaceutical 
100.00% 
0.00% 
Set-up or 
investment 
Yunnan Baiyao 
Group Dali 
Pharmaceutical Co., 
Ltd. 
15,515,000.00 
Dali 
Dali 
Pharmaceutical 
100.00% 
0.00% 
Set-up or 
investment 
Yunnan Baiyao 
Group Health 
Products Co., Ltd. 
84,500,000.00 
Chuxiong 
Chuxiong 
Production and 
sales of health and 
daily chemicals 
100.00% 
0.00% 
Set-up or 
investment 
Yunnan 
Pharmaceutical Co., 
Ltd. 
1,000,000,000.00 
Kunming 
Kunming 
Pharmaceutical 
wholesale and 
retail 
100.00% 
0.00% 
Set-up or 
investment 
Yunnan Institute of 
Materia Medica 
54,080,000.00 
Kunming 
Kunming 
New Drug 
Research and 
Development 
100.00% 
0.00% 
Business 
combination 
under common 
control 
Yunnan Baiyao 
Holding Investment 
Co., Ltd. 
100,000,000.00 
Kunming 
Kunming 
Investment 
100.00% 
0.00% 
Business 
combination 
under common 
control 
Yunnan Baiyao 
Teayield Co., Ltd. 
20,000,000.00 
Kunming 
Kunming 
Tea 
100.00% 
0.00% 
Business 
combination 
under common 
control 
Yunnan Baiyao 
15,000,000.00 
Hainan 
Danya 
Import and export 
100.00% 
0.00% 
Set-up or 


 
       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
272 
 
Group (Hainan) 
Co., Ltd. 
agency, technical 
services, etc. 
investment 
Yunnan Baiyao 
Group Shanghai 
Co., Ltd. 
15,000,000.00 
Shanghai 
Shanghai 
Technical services 
100.00% 
0.00% 
Set-up or 
investment 
Yunnan Baiyao 
Group Medical 
Technology Hefei 
Co., Ltd. 
25,970,800.00 
Hefei 
Hefei 
Medical Device 
Production and 
Sales 
100% 
0.00% 
Business 
combination 
not under the 
same control 
Shanghai Yunzhen 
Medical 
Technology Co., 
Ltd. 
900,000.00 
Shanghai 
Shanghai 
Technical 
development and 
service 
100.00% 
0.00% 
Set-up or 
investment 
YNBY International 
Limited 
0.00 
Hong 
Kong 
Hong Kong 
Trade 
28.06% 
45.62% 
Business 
combination 
not under the 
same control 
Yunnan Baiyao 
Tiancui Business 
Management Co., 
Ltd. 
3,000,000.00 
Kunming 
Kunming 
Catering 
100.00% 
0.00% 
Set-up or 
investment 
Yunnan Baiyao 
Group Beijing Co., 
Ltd. 
50,000,000.00 
Beijing 
Beijing 
Technology 
promotion service 
100.00% 
0.00% 
Set-up or 
investment 
Yunhe 
Pharmaceutical 
(Tianjin) Co., Ltd 
20,000,000.00 
Tianjin 
City 
Tianjin City 
Research and 
experimental 
development 
100.00% 
0.00% 
Set-up or 
investment 
Explanation of the inconsistency of the percentage of shares in subsidiaries with the proportion of voting rights: None.   
Basis for holding half or less of the voting rights but still controlling investees, and holding more than half of the voting rights but 
not controlling investees: None. 
Basis for controlling major structured entities consolidated into the financial statements: The structured entities included in the 
scope of consolidation of the Group include CICC Directional Asset Management-GF-CICC Qirui 1 and Shanghai Trust Platinum 
Series Hong Kong Market Investment Single Fund Trust. Because the Group has power over such structured entities, enjoys variable 
returns by participating in related activities, and has the ability to use its power over the investee to influence its variable returns, the 
Group has control over such structured entities. 
Basis for determining whether the Company is an agent or an entrustor: None. 
Other explanations: None. 
(2) Key non-wholly owned subsidiaries 
Unit: RMB 
Name of subsidiary 
Percentage of shares 
held by minority 
interests 
Profit and loss 
attributable to non-
controlling interests in 
the current period 
Dividends declared to 
non-controlling 
interests in the current 
period 
Balance of minority 
shareholders’ equity at 
the end of the period 
YNBY International 
Limited 
26.32% 
28,395,444.46 
 
-62,061,867.97 
Explanation on the inconsistency of the percentage of shares held by minority shareholders in subsidiaries with the proportion of 
voting rights: None.  
Other explanations: None. 


 
       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
273 
 
(3) Main financial information of key non-wholly owned subsidiaries 
Unit: RMB 
Name of 
subsidiary 
Closing balance 
Opening balance 
Current assets 
Non-current 
assets 
Total assets 
Current 
liabilities 
Non-current 
liabilities 
Total 
liabilities 
Current 
assets 
Non-current 
assets 
Total assets 
Current 
liabilities 
Non-current 
liabilities 
Total 
liabilities 
YNBY 
International 
Limited 
336,579,182.52 
17,052,211.25 
353,631,393.77 
112,222,845.17 
21,056,768.96 
133,279,614.13 
276,242,436.69 
4,331,182.05 
280,573,618.74 
138,081,828.97 
449,975,968.80 
588,057,797.77 
 
Unit: RMB 
Name of subsidiary 
Amount for the current period 
Amount for the previous period 
Operating 
revenue 
Net Profit 
Total comprehensive 
income 
Cash flows from 
operating activities 
Operating revenue 
Net Profit 
Total comprehensive 
income 
Cash flows from 
operating activities 
YNBY 
International 
Limited 
651,184,145.52 
122,600,946.27 
123,857,222.10 
27,823,483.10 
293,310,483.90 
-596,404,068.60 
-637,272,549.41 
-98,977,783.70 
Other explanations: None.


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
274 
 
(4) Major restrictions on the use of assets and settlement of debts of the corporate group: None.  
(5) Financial support or other support provided for structured entity included in the scope of consolidation 
for the consolidated financial statements 
Other explanations: None.  
2. Transaction in which the share of owners’ equity in the subsidiary changes while control over 
the subsidiary remains unchanged 
(1) Explanations on changes in the share of owners’ equity in the subsidiary: None.  
(2) Impact of the transaction on the minority shareholders’ equity and the owners’ equity attributable to the 
parent company: None.  
3. Interest in joint arrangement or associates 
(1) Important joint ventures or associates 
 
Name of joint 
venture or 
associate 
 
 
Main business 
location 
 
Place of registration 
 
Business nature 
Shareholding proportion 
The accounting 
method for 
investments in 
joint ventures 
or associates 
Direct 
Indirect 
Shanghai 
Pharmaceuticals 
Holding Co., Ltd. 
Shanghai 
No. 92, Zhangjiang Road, 
China (Shanghai) Pilot 
Free Trade Zone 
Pharmaceuticals 
17.97% 
 
 
Equity 
method for 
long-term 
equity 
investments 
Explanation of the inconsistency of the percentage of shares in joint ventures or associates with the proportion 
of voting rights: None.  
Basis for holding 20% or less voting rights but having important influence, or holding 20% or more voting rights 
but not having important influence: None.  
(2) Main financial information of important joint ventures: None.  
(3) Main financial information of important associates 
Unit: RMB 
 
Closing balance/Amount for the current 
period 
Opening balance/Amount for the previous 
period 
Current assets 
162,433,862,348.46 
149,512,870,619.79 
Non-current assets 
49,538,671,418.34 
48,622,030,879.16 
Total assets 
211,972,533,766.80 
198,134,901,498.95 
Current liabilities 
122,371,879,034.89 
110,691,046,029.78 
Non-current liabilities 
9,274,561,766.98 
9,441,404,411.74 
Total liabilities 
131,646,440,801.87 
120,132,450,441.52 
Minority interests 
11,801,949,913.58 
10,939,445,168.20 
Equity attributable to shareholders of the 
parent company 
68,524,143,051.35 
67,063,005,889.23 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
275 
 
Share of net assets based on percentage 
of shareholding 
12,316,447,243.08 
12,072,581,725.67 
Adjustment 
 
 
- Goodwill 
935,589,606.31 
937,045,521.30 
- Unrealized profit on internal 
transactions 
-5,399,246.55 
-5,425,757.63 
- Others 
-1,709,991,043.28 
-1,685,593,795.42 
Book value of equity investment in 
associates 
11,536,646,559.56 
11,318,607,693.92 
Fair value of equity investments in 
associates for which publicly quoted 
prices exist 
11,135,936,297.08 
11,868,125,772.68 
Operating revenue 
260,295,088,943.53 
231,981,299,764.51 
Net profits 
5,166,570,284.26 
6,992,014,768.55 
Net profits from discontinued operations 
 
 
Other comprehensive income 
-126,719,890.54 
-226,480,312.21 
Total comprehensive income 
5,039,850,393.72 
6,765,534,456.34 
Dividends received from associates 
during the year 
406,032,345.56 
279,563,254.32 
Other explanations: None.  
(4) Combined financial information of insignificant joint ventures and associates 
Unit: RMB 
 
Closing balance/Amount for the current 
period 
Opening balance/Amount for the previous 
period 
Joint ventures: 
 
 
Total of the followings based on the 
percentage of shareholdings 
 
 
Associates: 
 
 
Total book value of investments 
14,433.37 
142,253.18 
Total of the followings based on the 
percentage of shareholdings 
 
 
- Net profit 
-746,786.87 
-11,668,887.07 
- Other comprehensive income 
 
-248,424.18 
- Total comprehensive income 
-746,786.87 
-11,917,311.25 
Other explanations: None.  
 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
276 
 
(5) Explanation on significant restrictions on the ability of joint ventures or associates to transfer funds to 
the Company: None.  
(6) Excess loss generated from joint ventures or associates: None.  
(7) Unrecognised commitment related to investments in joint ventures: None.  
(8) Contingent liabilities related to investments in joint ventures or associates: None.  
4. Significant joint operation: None.  
5. Interest in structured entities not included in the scope of consolidated financial statements: 
None. 
6. Others: None. 
XI. Government Grants 
1. Government grants recognized at the end of the reporting period based on amounts receivable 
□Applicable  
Not applicable 
Reasons for not receiving the estimated amount of government grants at the expected time point  
□Applicable 
     Not applicable 
2. Liabilities involving government grants  
☑Applicable 
Not applicable 
Unit: RMB 
Accounting 
item 
Opening 
balance 
Amount of new 
subsidies in the 
current period 
Amount 
included in 
non-
operating 
revenue 
during the 
period 
Amount 
transferred to 
other income in 
the current 
period 
Other 
changes 
in the 
current 
period 
Closing 
balance 
Related to 
assets/income 
Deferred 
income 
20,353,660.72 
67,596,671.93 
 
7,026,939.27 
 
80,923,393.38 
Related 
to 
income 
Deferred 
income 
158,268,152.28 
16,418,070.75 
 
16,798,505.37 
 
157,887,717.66 
Related 
to 
assets 
3. Government grants included in profit or loss for the current period: 
☑Applicable 
Not applicable 
Unit: RMB 
Accounting item 
Amount for the current period 
Amount for the previous period 
Other income 
75,375,220.16 
99,898,358.75 
Other explanations: None.  
XII. Risks Associated with Financial Instruments 
(I) Risks incurred by financial instruments  


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
277 
 
The Group’s financial instruments include equity investments, debt investments, loans, receivables and 
accounts payable, etc., as detailed in the relevant items under Note VI. The risk management objective of the Group 
is to get an appropriate balance between risk and return, minimize the negative impact of risk on business results of 
the Group, and maximize the interest of shareholders and other equity investors. Based on this risk management 
objective, the basic risk management strategy of the Group is to identify and analyze various risks faced by the 
Group, establish an appropriate risk tolerance bottom line and conduct risk management, and supervise various risks 
in a timely and reliable manner to control risks within a limited range. 
1. Market risks 
Market risk of financial instruments is the risk of fluctuation in the fair value of financial instruments or future 
cash flow arising from changes in market price, including exchange rate risk, interest rate risk and other price risk. 
The Group uses sensitivity analysis techniques to analyze the possible impact of reasonable and possible 
changes in market risk related variables on current profits and losses or shareholders’ equity. Since any risk variable 
rarely changes in isolation, and the correlations that exist between variables will have a significant impact on the 
ultimate amount of a change in a risk variable, in the following explanation, it is assumed that each variable changes 
independently. 
(1) Exchange rate risk 
Exchange rate risk refers to the risk that the fair value or future cash flow of a financial instrument will fluctuate 
due to changes in the exchange rate. Exchange rate risk arises from financial instruments denominated in foreign 
currencies other than the functional currency. The Group's principal operations are located in the PRC, the functional 
currency is RMB, and its principal operations are settled in RMB. The principal place of business of the Group's 
subsidiary, YNBY International, is located in Hong Kong, the PRC, and its functional currency is Hong Kong dollars. 
The Group's exposure to foreign exchange risk relates mainly to the US dollar and Hong Kong dollar, etc. The 
exchange rate risk affects both the Group's transactions and the results of its foreign operations. The balance of the 
Group's foreign currency monetary items as at December 31, 2023 is as shown in 66 "Monetary items denominated 
in foreign currencies” under Note VI. If the RMB had appreciated or depreciated by 3% against the US dollar and 
Hong Kong dollar, while other factors remained unchanged, the net profit of the Company would have increased or 
decreased by approximately RMB 8,108,187.87. 
(2) Interest rate risk 
Interest rate risk is the risk that the fair value or future cash flows of a financial instrument will fluctuate because 
of changes in market interest rates. The Group’s interest rate risk arises from bank loans and bonds payable and 
other interest-bearing long-term debts. Financial liabilities at floating rates expose the Group to the cash flow interest 
rate risk, and financial liabilities at fixed rates expose the Group to the fair value interest rate risk. The Group 
determines the relative proportion of contracts carrying fixed and floating rates according to prevailing market 
conditions. As at December 31, 2023, the Group’s interest-bearing debt consisted mainly of fixed-rate borrowing 
contracts denominated in RMB amounting to RMB 1,016,734,728.09 (end of last year: RMB 892,631,958.04), and 
the exposure to changes in market interest rates was not material. 
(3) Other price risk 
The investments classified as financial assets at fair value through profits or losses held by the Group are 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
278 
 
measured at fair value on the balance sheet date. Therefore, the Group is exposed to fluctuations in the securities 
market. The Group reduces the price risk of equity portfolio investments by holding multiple equity portfolios. 
As at December 31, 2023, if the expected price at which the Group holds the above types of investments had 
increased or decreased by 5%, while other factors remained unchanged, the Group would have increased or 
decreased its net profit by approximately RMB 13,038,142.38. 
2. Credit risk 
As at December 31, 2023, the maximum exposure to credit risk that could cause the Group’s financial loss is 
mainly due to losses on the Group’s financial assets arising from the failure of the other party to perform its 
obligations under the contract and financial guarantees undertaken by the Group, including: 
The book value of recognized financial assets in the consolidated balance sheet. For financial instruments 
measured at fair value, the book value reflects its risk exposure, but not its maximum risk exposure, which will 
change as fair value changes in the future; 
The financial guarantee contract amount disclosed in Note XVI “Commitments and contingencies.” 
To reduce credit risk, the Company’s self-produced drugs and health products are generally sold in accordance 
with the principle of first payment before delivery. When selecting dealers (customers), the Company will 
investigate the scale and financial strength, market resources, operations, brands, sales networks, and sales channels 
of dealers (customers). Only dealers (customers) that meet the requirements of the Company can be selected. 
Yunnan Pharma, a subsidiary of the Company, mainly faces the customer credit risk caused by credit sales. Yunnan 
Pharma strictly implements credit management for the whole process of credit sales. It has established a customer 
credit evaluation management system, and divided customers into various types according to their nature, expected 
sales, operating conditions, and development potential. For each type of customer, it will set assessment credit and 
red line credit days according to a unified division standard, and then confirm the effective sales and the time limit 
to stop billing, and make credit sales forecast and evaluation before the transactions. In the process of cooperation, 
dynamic credit adjustment is carried out according to the actual purchase amount of customers and the change of 
business scale, so that the credit sales amount given matches its business strength. Because the Company only deals 
with recognized and reputable third parties, and customer bases are mainly medical institutions at all levels, large 
pharmacy chains, distributors, community and township medical service outlets, no collateral is required. Credit 
risk concentration is managed by customer type, geographic region and industry. 
Because the Company’s customer base for accounts receivable is widely dispersed in different regions and 
industries, there is no significant concentration of credit risk within the Company. 
The Group’s working capital is held in banks with high credit ratings and therefore the credit risk of working 
capital is low. 
3. Liquidity risk 
Liquidity risk is the risk that a company will run short of funds to meet its obligations settled by delivering 
cash or other financial assets. 
It is the Company’s policy to ensure that it has sufficient cash to pay its debts as they fall due. Liquidity risk is 
centrally controlled by the Company’s Financial Department. The Financial Department ensures that the Company 
has sufficient funds to service its debt with all reasonable projections by monitoring cash balances, readily realizable 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
279 
 
marketable securities and rolling projections of cash flows for the next 12 months. 
The maturity analysis of financial liabilities based on undiscounted contractual cash flows of the Company is 
as follows: 
(1) The Company’s current liabilities include short-term loans, notes payable and accounts payable, and other 
payables, which are expected to be repaid within 1 year. 
(2) The maturity analysis of non-current liabilities (including the non-current liabilities due within 1 year) 
based on undiscounted contractual cash flows of the Company is as follows:  
Unit: RMB 
Item 
December 31, 2023 
Total 
Within one year 
1 to 2 years 
2 to 3 years 
Above 3 years 
Long-term loans 
  
  
  
2,100,000.00 
2,100,000.00 
Total 
  
  
  
2,100,000.00 
2,100,000.00 
(II) Hedging 
(1) The Company carried out hedging business for risk management 
Applicable  
Not applicable 
(2) The Company conducted eligible hedging business and applied hedging accounting: None.  
(3) The Company carried out hedging business for risk management, which is expected to achieve risk 
management target, but did not apply hedging accounting 
Applicable  
Not applicable 
(III) Financial assets 
(1) Classification by type of transfer  
Applicable  
Not applicable 
(2) Derecognition of financial assets due to transfer  
Applicable  
Not applicable 
 (3) Financial assets involved in continued assets transfer  
Applicable  
Not applicable 
Other explanations: None.  
XIII. Disclosure of Fair Value 
1. Final fair value of assets and liabilities measured at fair value 
 
 
 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
280 
 
 
Unit: RMB 
 
Item 
Closing fair value 
Level I fair value 
measurement 
Level II fair value 
measurement 
Level III fair value 
measurement 
 
Total 
I. Continuous fair 
value measurement 
 
-- 
 
-- 
 
-- 
 
-- 
(I) Financial 
assets held for 
trading 
144,766,687.56 
 
4,600,000.00 
149,366,687.56 
(1) Investment in 
equity 
instruments 
144,766,687.56 
 
 
144,766,687.56 
(2) Others 
 
 
4,600,000.00 
4,600,000.00 
(II) Accounts 
receivable 
financing 
 
 
1,590,749,810.74 
1,590,749,810.74 
(1) Notes receivable 
 
 
1,590,749,810.74 
1,590,749,810.74 
(III) Other non-
current financial 
assets 
115,996,160.00 
0.00 
208,678,219.63 
324,674,379.63 
(1) Investment in 
equity instruments 
115,996,160.00 
 
208,678,219.63 
324,674,379.63 
(III) Investment in 
other 
equity 
instruments 
 
 
71,745,000.00 
71,745,000.00 
2. Determination basis of the market price of the item measured using level I fair value measurement 
continuously and non-continuously 
The financial assets at fair value through profits or losses held by the Company are mainly the share and fund 
investments in the secondary market, whose closing fair value is determined by the closing price of the publicly 
traded market on the balance sheet date. 
3. Valuation techniques and qualitative and quantitative information on important parameters adopted 
for items subject to level II continuous and noncontinuous fair value measurement 
The items subject to level II continuous fair value measurement mainly include the wealth management 
products held by the Company. The profits or losses from fluctuation during the holding period are not recognized 
because the fair value fluctuation is small. 
4. Valuation techniques and qualitative and quantitative information on important parameters adopted 
for items subject to level III continuous and noncontinuous fair value measurement 
(1) Other non-current financial assets subject to level III continuous fair value measurement are the equity 
investment in non-listed companies held by the Company. The Company will obtain the annual auditor’s report of 
the investee, consider the operating environment, operating conditions and financial status of the investee enterprise, 
and determine the closing fair value on the basis of the closing net assets of the company. Other investments in other 
equity instruments are the equity of non-listed companies held by the Company. As the investee is a start-up 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
281 
 
biotechnology company, considering that the business environment and operating conditions of the invested 
enterprise, its financial position have not changed substantially at the time of the new investment, the investment 
cost is used as the best estimate of fair value in the current period. 
(2) The accounts receivable financing subject to level III fair value measurement are the notes receivable held 
by the Company, mainly including banker’s acceptance bill. Its credit risk is negligible, its remaining term is short 
(less than 12 months), and its book value is close to its fair value. Therefore, the Company uses the book value as 
its fair value. 
5. The reconciliation information between opening and closing book values and unobservable parameter 
sensitivity analysis for the items subject to level III continuous fair value measurement:  
6. For the items subject to continuous fair value measurement, if there is a conversion between all levels in 
the current period, the reason for the conversion and the policy for determining the time point of the 
conversion: None.  
7. Changes in the valuation technology and the reason for the changes in the current period: None.  
8. Fair value of financial assets and financial liabilities that are not measured at fair value 
The financial assets and liabilities measured at amortized cost reported in the financial statements mainly 
include: notes receivable, accounts receivable, other receivables, long-term borrowings, short-term borrowings, 
notes payable, accounts payable, other payables, long-term payables, etc. 
The management of the Group believes that the book values of financial assets and liabilities reported in the 
financial statements are close to their fair values. 
9. Others: None.  
XIV. Related Parties and Related Party Transactions 
1. Information about the parent company of the Company: None.  
Ultimate controller of the Company: None.   
Other explanations: 
The proposal of merger and overall listing of Yunnan Baiyao Group and Baiyao Holdings by issuing shares 
had been considered and approved at the first Extraordinary General Meeting of Yunnan Baiyao for 2019. On April 
24, 2019, CSRC issued the Approval on the Proposal of Merger and Overall Listing of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., 
Ltd and Yunnan Baiyao Holdings Co., Ltd (Zheng Jian Xu Ke [2019] No. 770). Prior to the completion of the above-
mentioned merger and overall listing, the controlling shareholder of the Company was Baiyao Holdings, and there 
was no de facto controller. After the completion of the transaction, SASAC of Yunnan Province and New Huadu 
with its acting-in-concert parties, were equally the largest shareholder of the Company, and neither of them obtained 
the control over the listed company. SASAC of Yunnan Province, along with New Huadu and its acting-in-concert 
parties, had made long-term share lock-up commitments. Therefore, the listed company did not have de facto 
controller before and after the transaction. 
On May 22, 2020, SASAC of Yunnan Province transferred 321,160,222 shares of the Company held by it to 
its wholly-owned subsidiary Yunnan State-owned Equity Operation Management Company at nil consideration. 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
282 
 
After the completion of the transfer, State-owned Equity Operation and Management Company and New Huadu 
with its acting-in-concert parties, were equally the largest shareholder of the Company, and there was no change in 
the Company’s situation of not having a de facto controller or controlling shareholder. 
On December 8, 2021, SASAC of Yunnan Province transferred 100% of the shares held by State-owned Equity 
Operation and Management Company to Yunnan Investment Group Co., Ltd. After the equity transfer, Yunnan 
Investment Group Co., Ltd would hold 321,160,222 shares of the Company through State-owned Equity Operation 
and Management Company, accounting for 25.04% of the total share capital of the Company. State-owned Equity 
Operation and Management Company and New Huadu and New Huadu with its acting-in-concert parties, were 
equally the largest shareholder of the Company, and the situation that the Company has no de facto controller and 
no controlling shareholder remain unchanged. 
2. Information about subsidiaries of the Company 
For details of subsidiaries of the Company, please refer to 1 “Interest in Subsidiaries” under Note X. 
3. Information about joint ventures and associates of the Company 
For details of important joint ventures or associates of the Company, please refer to Note X3 (1) Important 
Joint Ventures or Associates. 
Details of joint ventures or associates with related party transactions for the period and balances resulting from 
related party transactions in the previous period are as follows: 
 
Name of joint ventures or associates 
Relationship with the Company 
Shanghai Pharmaceuticals Holding Co., Ltd. 
Associate 
Yunnan Baiyao Chinese Herbal Medicine Technology Co., Ltd. 
Associate 
Lijiang Changgengming Trading Co., Ltd. 
Associate 
Other explanations: None.  
4. Information about other related parties 
Name of other related parties 
Relationship between other related parties and the Company 
New Huadu Industrial Group Co., Ltd. 
Substantial shareholder of the Company 
Jiangsu Yuyue Science & Technology Development Co., Ltd. 
Former substantial shareholder of the Company 
Guangxi Zhongheng Chinese Herbal Medicine Industry 
Development Co., Ltd. 
Former shareholder of the equity participation company 
Yunnan Renjiu Technology Co., Ltd. 
Minority shareholder that has significant influence on the 
subsidiary 
Yunnan Tianma Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd. 
Minority shareholder that has significant influence on the 
subsidiary 
Yunnan Jianshui County Xingda Medicine Co., Ltd. 
Minority shareholder that has significant influence on the 
subsidiary 
Yunnan Baoshan Medicine Co., Ltd. 
Minority shareholder that has significant influence on the 
subsidiary 
Qiubei County Wanhe Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd. 
Minority shareholder that has significant influence on the 
subsidiary 
Kaiyuan Sanfa Pharmaceutical Trade Co., Ltd. 
Minority shareholder that has significant influence on the 
subsidiary 
Chuxiong Jiayuan Medicine Co., Ltd. 
Minority shareholder that has significant influence on the 
subsidiary 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
283 
 
Yunnan Jingxing Pharmaceutical Group Co., Ltd. 
Minority shareholder that has significant influence on the 
subsidiary 
Yunnan Salt Wenshan Co., Ltd. 
Sub-subsidiary of the substantial shareholder 
Yunnan Salt Lijiang Co., Ltd. 
Sub-subsidiary of the substantial shareholder 
Yunnan Salt Rixin Co., Ltd. 
Sub-subsidiary of the substantial shareholder 
MB Packaging Limited 
Sub-subsidiary of the substantial shareholder 
Yunnan Medical Investment Management Group Kunming 
Technology Co., Ltd. 
Sub-subsidiary of the substantial shareholder 
Yunnan Drug Technology Development Operation Co., Ltd. 
Subsidiary of the substantial shareholder 
YEIG Power Assembly Park Development Co., Ltd. 
Subsidiary of the substantial shareholder 
Tibet Jiushi Zhihe Marketing Co., Ltd. 
Subsidiary of the substantial shareholder 
Kunming Yusi Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd. 
Subsidiary of the substantial shareholder 
Kunming Guiyan New Material Technology Co., Ltd. 
Subsidiary of the substantial shareholder 
Teh-Ho Canned Food Company 
Subsidiary of the substantial shareholder 
Quanzhou New Huadu Supercenter Co., Ltd. 
Subsidiary of the substantial shareholder 
Kunming Jinkuan Trading Co., Ltd. 
Company controlled by former related party 
Shanghai Skynet Brand Management Crop., Ltd. 
Equity participation company of the subsidiary of the 
substantial shareholder 
Beijing Jingji Chenggong Sports Brokerage Co., Ltd. 
Holding company of former minority shareholder of subsidiary  
Hefei Juyinzhai Health Technology Co., Ltd. 
Holding company of former minority shareholder of subsidiary 
Cao Liangming 
Former minority shareholder of the subsidiary 
Zhang Sulei  
Former minority shareholder of the subsidiary 
Wenshan Yungui Agricultural Development Co., Ltd. 
Former associate 
Kunming Nuo’an Enterprise Management Co., Ltd. 
Minority shareholder of the sub-subsidiary 
Other explanations: None. 
5. Related party transactions 
(1) Related party transactions on purchase and sales of goods and rendering and receiving of services 
Information of commodities purchased/labor services accepted 
Unit: RMB 
 
Related Party 
 
Contents of related 
party transaction 
 
Amount for the 
current period 
 
Approved 
transaction limit 
Whether 
exceeding the 
transaction limit 
 
Amount for the 
previous period 
Shanghai 
Pharmaceuticals 
Holding Co., Ltd 
and its subsidiaries 
 
Purchase of goods 
615,537,706.00 
1,031,000,000.00 
No 
447,658,185.52 
Jiangsu Yuyue 
Science & 
Technology 
Development Co., 
Ltd. and its 
subsidiaries 
 
 
Purchase of medical 
devices, goods and 
drugs 
32,852,184.77 
60,000,000.00 
No 
29,157,418.26 
MB Packaging 
Limited  
 
Purchase of foods 
3,925,036.06 
 
 
5,094,904.12 
Kunming Jinkuan 
Trading Co., Ltd. 
 Purchase of goods and 
services 
2,923,733.27 
 
 
12,091,974.00 
Teh-Ho Canned 
Food Company and 
its subsidiaries 
Purchase of goods, 
promotion services 
2,661,071.80 
 
 
3,531,280.92 
Kunming Yusi 
Pharmaceutical Co., 
Ltd. 
Purchase of foods 
767,124.82 
 
 
418,767.56 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
284 
 
Quanzhou New Huadu 
Supercenter Co., Ltd. 
Purchase service 
336,792.44 
 
 
763,316.21 
Yunnan 
Medical 
Investment 
Management 
Group Kunming 
Technology 
Co., LTD 
Purchase of foods 
232,920.36 
 
 
 
 
Shanghai Skynet 
Brand 
Management 
Crop., Ltd.  
Purchase of goods, 
Dunhuang IP 
licensing fee, yolk 
cat IP licensing and 
derivative product 
design and other 
service fees 
164,408.23 
 
 
1,190,270.33 
Yunnan Salt 
Wenshan Co., Ltd. 
Purchase of 
industrial salt 
56,548.68 
 
 
 
Yunnan Salt Rixin 
Co., Ltd. 
Purchase of raw 
materials 
37,433.63 
 
 
 
Yunnan Salt 
Lijiang Co., Ltd. 
Purchase of 
salt products 
353.98 
 
 
176.99 
Wenshan Yungui 
Agricultural 
Development Co., 
Ltd. 
Purchase of 
raw 
materials 
 
 
 
51,016,777.20 
Yunnan Renjiu 
Technology Co., 
Ltd. 
Purchase of 
drugs 
 
 
 
16,332,301.78 
Yunnan Drug 
Technology 
Development 
Operation Co., Ltd.  
Purchase of 
goods 
 
 
 
3,612.01 
Information of commodities sold/labor services provided 
Unit: RMB 
 
Related Party 
Contents of related party 
transaction 
Amount for the current period 
Amount for the previous period 
Shanghai 
Pharmaceuticals Holding 
Co., Ltd and its 
subsidiaries 
 
Sale of goods 
405,843,813.13 
242,627,647.95 
Tibet Jiushi Zhihe Marketing 
Co., Ltd. 
Sale of goods 
260,774,824.31 
309,118,657.41 
Kunming Jinkuan Trading Co., 
Ltd. 
Sale of goods 
28,520,999.82 
73,879,269.79 
Yunnan Provincial 
Pharmaceutical Technology 
Development and Operation 
Co., Ltd 
Sale of goods 
2,820,416.84 
660,912.09 
Yunnan Baoshan Medicine 
Co., Ltd. 
Sales of drugs 
437,891.88 
927,743.61 
Lijiang Changgengming 
Trading Co., Ltd. 
Sales of drugs 
259,161.96 
2,392,782.79 
Kunming Guiyan New 
Material Technology Co., Ltd 
Testing fee 
2,830.19 
2,547.17 
Guangxi Zhongheng 
Chinese Herbal Medicine 
Industry Development Co., 
Ltd. 
 
Sales of TCM materials 
 
44,981,077.97 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
285 
 
     Explanations on related party transactions on purchase and sales of goods and rendering and receiving of services: None.  
(2) Trusteeship/contracting and entrusted management/outsourcing: None.    
 (3) Leasing between related parties 
The Company as the lessor: 
Unit: RMB 
Name of lessee 
Types of leased assets 
Lease income recognized in 
the current period 
Lease income recognized 
in the previous period 
Teh-Ho Canned Food Company 
Shop 
 
110,730.12 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
286 
 
The Company as the lessee: 
Unit: RMB 
Name of lessor 
Types of leased 
assets 
Rental costs for short-
term leases and leases of 
low-value assets that are 
streamlined (if 
applicable)  
Variable lease 
payments that are not 
included in the 
measurement of the 
lease liability (if 
applicable)  
Rent paid 
Interest expense on lease 
liabilities assumed 
Increased right-to-use assets 
Amount 
for the 
current 
period 
Amount for 
the previous 
period 
Amount 
for the 
current 
period 
Amount 
for the 
previous 
period 
Amount for the 
current period 
Amount for the 
previous period 
Amount for 
the current 
period 
Amount for 
the previous 
period 
Amount for the 
current period 
Amount for the 
previous period 
Yunnan Jianshui 
County Xingda 
Medicine Co., Ltd. 
House 
 
 
 
 
1,552,123.81 
1,552,849.75 
15,144.50 
74,259.07 
 
 
Yunnan Baoshan 
Medicine Co., Ltd. 
House, 
equipment, 
vehicle  
 
 
 
 
2,813,785.08 
1,402,407.08 
17,373.95 
 
8,120,850.14 
1,402,407.08 
Yunnan Tianma 
Pharmaceutical Co., 
Ltd. 
House 
 
 
 
 
770,642.20 
741,713.92 
38,043.92 
8,740.00 
 
 
Kaiyuan Sanfa 
Pharmaceutical Trade 
Co., Ltd. 
Vehicle and 
equipment  
 
 
 
 
602,477.88 
602,477.88 
 
 
602,477.88 
602,477.88 
Chuxiong Jiayuan 
Medicine Co., Ltd. 
Equipment 
 
 
 
 
141,592.93 
141,592.93 
4,104.37 
1,341.51 
 
277,739.98 
Yunnan Jingxing 
Pharmaceutical Group 
Co., Ltd. 
House 
 
 
 
 
633,686.24 
 
60,511.53 
 
1,565,165.47 
 
YEIG Power 
Assembly Park 
Development Co., Ltd. 
House 
 
 
 
 
1,364,087.62 
1,351,218.90 
231,019.21 
291,325.27 
 
 
Explanations on leasing between related parties: None. 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
287 
 
(4) Related party guarantees: None.  
(5) Borrowings with related parties 
Unit: RMB 
Related Party 
Borrowing amount 
Commencement date 
Due date 
Description 
Borrowing 
Entity A 
21,800,000.00 
June 10, 2021 
December 12, 2023 
Repaid 
Entity B 
20,000,000.00 
September 10, 2021 
November 24, 2023 
Repaid 
Entity C 
13,000,000.00 
August 13, 2021 
November 22, 2023 
Repaid 
Loans 
(6) Asset transfer and debt restructuring of related parties: None.  
(7) Remuneration to key management personnel 
Unit: RMB 
Item 
Amount for the current period 
Amount for the previous period 
Remuneration 
to 
key 
management 
personnel 
39,094,528.46 
35,627,687.12 
Note: It is set out in the Article 4 of Accounting Standard for Business Enterprises No.36 - Disclosures of 
Related Parties that key management personnel refer to personnel who have the power and are responsible for 
planning, directing, and controlling enterprise activities. The amount of remuneration to key management personnel 
in this reporting period was the total pretax remuneration received by all directors, supervisors, and senior 
management personnel of the Company during the reporting period. 
(8) Other related party transactions: None.  
6. Amounts receivable from and payable to related parties 
(1) Receivable 
Unit: RMB 
Item name 
Related Party 
Closing balance 
Opening balance 
Book balance 
Provision for 
bad debt 
Book balance 
Provision for 
bad debt 
Accounts 
receivable 
Shanghai Pharmaceuticals Holding 
Co., Ltd and its subsidiaries 
14,929,453.95 
588,430.73 
20,885,033.46 
974,051.40 
Accounts 
receivable 
Lijiang Changgengming Trading Co., 
Ltd. 
2,717,793.63 
610,834.92 
3,722,642.00 
351,110.79 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
288 
 
Accounts 
receivable 
Yunnan Jingxing Pharmaceutical 
Group Co., Ltd 
256,854.37 
12,842.72 
 
 
Accounts 
receivable 
Yunnan Drug Technology 
Development Operation Co., Ltd. 
16,253.88 
812.69 
 
 
Accounts 
receivable 
Kaiyuan Sanfa Pharmaceutical Trade 
Co., Ltd. 
 
 
200,214.52 
60,064.36 
Accounts 
receivable 
Yunnan Baoshan Medicine Co., Ltd. 
 
 
3,721.00 
186.05 
Other 
receivables 
Beijing Jingji Chenggong Sports 
Brokerage Co., Ltd. 
 
 
2,360,000.00 
1,416,000.00 
Other 
receivables 
Yunnan Baiyao Chinese Herbal 
Medicine Technology Co., Ltd 
179,791.57 
158,771.36 
177,922.32 
111,723.90 
Other 
receivables 
Cao Liangming 
 
 
133,368.00 
40,010.40 
Other 
receivables 
Hefei Juyinzhai Health Technology 
Co., Ltd. 
 
 
4,283.45 
2,985.04 
Other 
receivables 
Zhang Sulei 
 
 
1,432.00 
429.60 
Prepayment 
Jiangsu Yuyue Science & Technology 
Development Co., Ltd and its 
subsidiaries 
1,185,072.72 
 
2,074,165.10 
 
Prepayment 
Shanghai Pharmaceuticals Holding 
Co., Ltd and its subsidiaries 
205,957.44 
 
645,917.73 
 
Prepayment 
Qiubei County Wanhe 
Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd 
 
 
72,206.41 
 
Notes 
receivable 
Shanghai Pharmaceuticals Holding 
Co., Ltd and its subsidiaries 
689,199.51 
 
1,212,677.73 
 
Accounts 
receivable 
financing 
Shanghai Pharmaceuticals Holding 
Co., Ltd and its subsidiaries 
8,225,916.72 
 
12,229,069.00 
 
Accounts 
receivable 
financing 
Tibet Jiushi Zhihe Marketing Co., 
Ltd. 
1,544,428.80 
  
10,000,000.00 
  
(2) Payables 
Unit: RMB 
Item name 
Related Party 
Book balance at 
the end of the 
period 
Book balance at the 
beginning of the 
period 
Accounts payable 
Shanghai Pharmaceuticals Holding Co., Ltd and its 
subsidiaries 
60,976,451.66 
76,496,404.37 
Accounts payable 
Yunnan 
Medical 
Investment 
Management 
Group 
Kunming Science and Technology Co., Ltd. 
907,736.56 
 
Accounts payable 
Kunming Yusi Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd. 
196,663.49 
 
Accounts payable 
Teh-Ho Canned Food Company and its subsidiaries 
44,515.35 
1,749,569.64 
Accounts payable 
Yunnan Salt Rixin Co., Ltd. 
42,300.00 
 
Accounts payable 
MB Packaging Limited 
28,682.85 
 
Accounts payable 
Qiubei County Wanhe Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd. 
10,779.90 
 
Accounts payable 
Chuxiong Jiayuan Medicine Co., Ltd. 
3,126.32 
4,762.46 
Accounts payable 
Yunnan Renjiu Technology Co., Ltd. 
0.30 
10,471.90 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
289 
 
Accounts payable 
Beijing Jingji Chenggong Sports Brokerage Co., Ltd. 
 
4,160.00 
Accounts payable 
Yunnan Drug Technology Development Operation Co., 
Ltd. 
 
3,612.01 
Notes payable 
Yunnan Renjiu Technology Co., Ltd. 
 
16,989,446.48 
Notes payable 
Jiangsu Yuyue Science & Technology Development Co., 
Ltd and its subsidiaries 
11,503,853.81 
8,653,145.32 
Notes payable 
Shanghai Pharmaceuticals Holding Co., Ltd and its 
subsidiaries 
1,745,473.86 
2,690,480.00 
Other payables 
Beijing Jingji Chenggong Sports Brokerage Co., Ltd. 
 
798,000.00 
Other payables 
Qiubei County Wanhe Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd. 
 
630,000.00 
Other payables 
Shanghai Pharmaceuticals Holding Co., Ltd and its 
subsidiaries 
 
70,000.00 
Other payables 
Chuxiong Jiayuan Medicine Co., Ltd. 
604.80 
604.80 
Other payables 
Kaiyuan Sanfa Pharmaceutical Trade Co., Ltd. 
12,831.86 
 
Dividend payable 
State-owned Assets Supervision and Administration 
Commission of the People’s Government of Yunnan 
Province, New Huadu Industrial Group Co., Ltd. 
86,490,742.04 
86,490,742.04 
Dividend payable 
Kunming Nuo’an Enterprise Management Co., Ltd. 
 
2,922,741.99 
Contractual liabilities 
Shanghai Pharmaceuticals Holding Co., Ltd and its 
subsidiaries 
50,412,199.36 
48,788,541.50 
Contractual liabilities 
Tibet Jiushi Zhihe Marketing Co., Ltd. 
2,427,757.00 
3,061,507.53 
Contractual liabilities 
Yunnan Baoshan Medicine Co., Ltd. 
567,217.96 
 
Contractual liabilities 
Kunming Jinkuan Commerce & Trade Co., Ltd. 
 
15,714,893.18 
Non-current liabilities 
due within one year 
YEIG Power Assembly Park Development Co., Ltd. 
1,185,189.56 
1,121,472.45 
Non-current liabilities 
due within one year 
Yunnan Baoshan Medicine Co., Ltd. 
2,610,019.14 
 
Non-current liabilities 
due within one year 
Yunnan Tianma Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd. 
761,902.21 
 
Non-current liabilities 
due within one year 
Yunnan Jingxing Pharmaceutical Group Co., Ltd. 
526,744.88 
 
Lease liabilities 
YEIG Power Assembly Park Development Co., Ltd. 
3,889,088.11 
5,022,156.52 
Lease liabilities 
Yunnan Baoshan Medicine Co., Ltd. 
2,714,419.89 
 
 
7. Related party commitments: None. 
8. Others: None. 
XV. Share-based Payment 
1. General information about share-based payment 
□Applicable   ☑Not applicable 
2. Equity-settled share-based payment 
□Applicable   ☑Not applicable 
3. Cash-settled share-based payment 
□Applicable   ☑Not applicable 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
290 
 
4. Share payments during the period  
□Applicable   ☑Not applicable 
5. Amendment and termination of share-based payment: None.  
6. Others: None. 
XVI. Commitment and Contingencies 
1. Significant commitments: None.  
2. Contingencies 
(1) Significant contingencies on the balance sheet date 
Provision of guarantees for Yunnan Yuncheng Hospital Management Co., Ltd. 
In November 2017, the Company issued the Announcement on the Investment and Establishment of PPP 
Project Companies by Wholly-owned Subsidiaries and the Provision of Guarantees for Them. According to the 
announcement, Yunnan Provincial Health and Family Planning Commission was authorized by Yunnan Provincial 
People’s Government to serve as the project implementation agency of the Chenggong Hospital PPP project (Phase 
I project) of the First Affiliated Hospital of Kunming Medical University, and The First Affiliated Hospital of 
Kunming Medical University was authorized to be the representative of the government, to invest and hold shares 
on behalf of the government, and jointly establish Yunnan Yuncheng Hospital Management Co., Ltd (the “Project 
Company”) with social capital. Yunnan Pharma, a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company, and Yunnan Haopy 
Pharmaceutical Sales Co., Ltd, a private capital, formed a consortium to bid for the project, and finally won the bid. 
According to the requirements of the procurement documents, Yunnan Pharma shall invest RMB 100,000 in the 
Project Company in cash, with an equity ratio of 10%. The consortium shall undertake joint and several guarantee 
liability for the PPP project debt of the Project Company for a period of 12 years, and the maximum total guarantee 
amount of the consortium should be RMB 150,000. 
(2) Where the Company had no significant contingencies to disclose, explanation is also required 
The Company had no significant contingencies to disclose. 
3. Others 
None. 
XVII. Events Subsequent to the Balance Sheet Date 
1. Important non-adjusting events: None. 
2. Profit distribution:  
Proposed distribution of dividends per 10 shares 
(RMB) 
20.77 
Proposed distribution of bonus shares per 10 shares 
(quantity of shares) 
0 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
291 
 
Proposed distribution of converted shares per10 shares 
(quantity of shares) 
0 
Declared distribution of dividends per 10 shares after 
consideration and approval (RMB) 
20.77 
Declared distribution of bonus shares per 10 shares 
after consideration and approval (quantity of shares) 
0 
Declared distribution of converted shares per 10 shares 
after consideration and approval (quantity of shares) 
0 
Profit distribution plan 
Based on the total share capital of the Company of 1,796,862,549 shares 
as at the end of 2023 less 12,599,946 shares repurchased by the special 
securities account for share repurchase, i.e., on the basis of 
1,784,262,603 shares, a cash dividend of RMB 20.77 (tax inclusive) for 
every 10 shares will be paid to all shareholders, and no shares will be 
issued by way of conversion of capital reserve. 
3. Sales return: None.  
4. Explanation on other events subsequent to the balance sheet date:  
1) Change in the purpose of repurchased shares and cancellation of such shares 
On February 7, 2024, the Company held the first session of the Tenth Board of Directors and passed the 
Proposal on Changes in the Purpose of Repurchased Shares and Cancellation of Such Shares. In this proposal, the 
Company planned to change the purpose of 12,599,946 shares repurchased by the special securities account for 
share repurchase from “for implementing employee stock ownership plans or equity incentive plans” to “for 
cancellation of such shares to reduce registered capital.” 
XVIII. Other Significant Events 
1. Correction of previous accounting errors 
(1) Retrospective restatement method: None.  
(2) Prospective application method: None.   
2. Debt restructuring: None. 
3. Assets exchange 
(1) Exchange of non-Cash and bank balance: None. 
(2) Exchange of other assets: None. 
4. Annuity plan 
(1) In accordance with the Trial Measures for Enterprise Annuity and Trial Measures for Enterprise Annuity 
Fund Management of the Ministry of Labor and Social Security, as well as the Letter Yun Lao She Han [2006] No. 
267 of Department of Labor and Social Security of Yunnan Province, the Company was approved to establish an 
enterprise annuity. The investment manager of the enterprise annuity fund is Fullgoal Fund Management Co., Ltd., 
and the trustee of the enterprise annuity fund is China Merchants Bank Co., Ltd. The enterprise contribution shall 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
292 
 
be paid annually at 5-8.33% of the total salary of the employees of the Company in the previous year, and the 
individual contribution of the employees shall be paid at 10% of the unit contribution. The individual contribution 
shall be collected and paid by the Company from the employee’s salary.  
(2) According to the replies of Yunnan Provincial Department of Human Resources and Social Security (Yun 
Ren She Letter [2009] No.79) and Kunming Municipal Labor and Social Security Bureau (Kun Lao She Han [2008] 
No.204) on the Enterprise Annuity Implementation Plan of Yunnan Pharma, Yunnan Pharma, a subsidiary of the 
Company, was approved to establish an enterprise annuity. The investment manager of the enterprise annuity fund 
is Ping An Annuity Insurance Company of China, Ltd, and the trustee of the enterprise annuity fund is China 
Merchants Bank Co., Ltd. According to the plan, the enterprise contribution shall be paid annually at no more than 
8.33% of the total salary of the employees of Yunnan Pharma in the previous year, and the individual contribution 
of the employees shall be paid at 10% of the unit contribution. 
(3) According to the replies of Yunnan Provincial Department of Human Resources and Social Security (Yun 
Ren She Letter [2009] No.79) and Kunming Municipal Labor and Social Security Bureau (Kun Ren She Han [2016] 
No.21) on the Enterprise Annuity Implementation Plan of Yunnan Institute of Materia Medica, Yunnan Institute of 
Materia Medica, a subsidiary of the Company, was approved to establish an enterprise annuity. The investment 
manager of the enterprise annuity fund is Ping An Annuity Insurance Company of China, Ltd, and the trustee of the 
enterprise annuity fund is China Construction Bank Corporation. According to the plan, the enterprise contribution 
shall be paid annually at no more than 5% of the total salary of the employees of Yunnan Institute of Materia Medica 
in the previous year, and the individual contribution of the employees shall be paid at 10% of the unit contribution. 
(4) In accordance with the Measures on Enterprise Annuity (Decree No. 36 of Ministry of Human Resources 
and Social Security), Measures on the Management of Enterprise Annuity Fund (Decree No. 11 of Ministry of 
Human Resources and Social Security) and other relevant provisions as well as the Reply on Filing of Enterprise 
Annuity Plan of Yunnan Baiyao Group Wuxi Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd issued by Wuxi Human Resources and Social 
Security Bureau (Xi Ren She Fu [2018] No.27), Yunnan Baiyao Group Wuxi Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd, a subsidiary 
of the Company, was approved to establish an enterprise annuity. The investment manager of the enterprise annuity 
fund is Ping An Annuity Insurance Company of China, Ltd, and the trustee of the enterprise annuity fund is China 
Construction Bank Corporation. According to the plan, the enterprise contribution shall be paid annually at no more 
than 5% of the total salary of the employees of Yunnan Baiyao Group Wuxi Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd in the previous 
year, and the individual contribution of the employees shall be paid at 10% of the unit contribution. 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
293 
 
5. Discontinuation of operation: None. 
6. Segment information 
(1) Determination basis and accounting policy of reporting segments: None. 
(2) Financial information of reporting segments: None. 
(3) If the Company has no reporting segment or the total assets and total liabilities of the reporting segments 
cannot be disclosed, please explain the reason: None. 
(4) Other explanations: None. 
7. Other significant transactions and matters that have an impact on investors’ decision-making 
On April 28, 2023, YNBY International Limited (“YNBY International,” stock code: 00030, formerly known 
as Ban Loong Holdings), a subsidiary of the Company, disclosed an announcement stating that HLB Hodgson 
Impey Cheng Limited (“HLB”) has resigned as the auditor of Ban Loong Holdings with effect from April 25, 2023. 
The Board, with the recommendation of the Audit Committee, resolved to appoint Zhonghui Anda CPA Limited 
(“Zhonghui Anda”) as the auditor of the Company with effect from 28 April 2023 to fill the casual vacancy 
following the resignation of HLB as auditor of the Company, and to hold office until the conclusion of the next 
annual general meeting of Ban Loong Holdings. 
On January 15, 2024, YNBY International published the 2021 Annual Report, the 2022 Interim Report, the 
2022 Annual Report and the 2023 Interim Report. The 2021 Annual Report (from April 1, 2020 to March 31, 2021) 
and the 2022 Annual Report (from April 1, 2021 to March 31, 2022) were audited by Zhonghui Anda, and the type 
of audit comment in the audit report issued was “Disclaimer of Opinion.” Matters that resulted in the audit comment 
of “Disclaimer of Opinion” were businesses that occurred prior to the tender offer of the Company in January 2022, 
for which the Company had made appropriate treatment at the point of acquisition. In addition, after the acquisition, 
the Company actively took over YNBY International in an orderly manner in accordance with the requirements of 
listed companies. Thanks to the efforts of all parties of the Company, the requirements under the Resumption 
Guidelines were fulfilled on January 30, 2024, and the Resumption Guidelines were fully complied with to the 
satisfaction of the HKEX. The trading in YNBY International was resumed on January 31, 2024 with effect from 
9:00 a.m. onwards. 
On March 22, 2024, the Board of Directors of YNBY held a meeting to consider the audited results for the 
financial year ended December 31, 2023 (The period of business results was from April 1, 2023 to December 31, 
2023) and the publication of the relevant results announcement on the websites of The Stock Exchange of Hong 
Kong Limited and YNBY. The type of audit comment in the audit report for the fiscal year ended December 31, 
2023 was qualified, which was mainly due to the fact that the matters leading to disclaimer of opinion still had an 
impact on the financial data at the beginning of the year (the fiscal year ended March 31, 2023). The matters leading 
to qualified opinion did not have a significant impact on the Group’s financial data and results of operations for 
2023. 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
294 
 
8. Others: None.  
XIX. Notes to Major Items of Financial Statements of the Parent Company 
1. Accounts receivable 
(1) Disclosure by aging 
Unit: RMB 
Aging 
Closing balance  
Opening balance  
Within 1 year (inclusive of 1 year)  
614,449,599.26 
320,787,574.10 
1 to 2 years 
85,846,594.74 
22,626,539.08 
2 to 3 years  
5,516,424.89 
277,308,880.56 
Above 3 years 
645,998,164.53 
375,141,861.83 
Total  
1,351,810,783.42 
995,864,855.57 
 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
295 
 
(2) Disclosure by provision for bad debts 
Unit: RMB 
Category  
Closing balance 
Opening balance 
Book balance 
Provision for bad debt 
Book value 
Book balance 
Provision for bad debt 
Book value 
Amount 
Proportion 
Amount 
Provision 
proportion 
Amount 
Proportion 
Amount 
Provision 
proportion 
 
Including:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Account 
receivables with 
provision for bad 
debt on portfolio 
basis  
1,351,810,783.42 
100.00% 
20,902,222.46 
1.55% 
1,330,908,560.96 
995,864,855.57 
100.00% 
18,016,130.77 
1.81% 
977,848,724.80 
Including 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Receivable from 
external customer 
79,297,162.59 
5.87% 
20,902,222.46 
26.36% 
58,394,940.13 
78,444,316.75 
7.88% 
18,016,130.77 
22.97% 
60,428,185.98 
Receivable 
for 
related party 
1,272,513,620.83 
94.13% 
 
 
1,272,513,620.83 
917,420,538.82 
92.12% 
 
 
917,420,538.82 
Total  
1,351,810,783.42 
100.00% 
20,902,222.46 
1.55% 
1,330,908,560.96 
995,864,855.57 
100.00% 
18,016,130.77 
1.81% 
977,848,724.80 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
296 
 
Provision for bad debts made on a portfolio basis: 
Unit: RMB 
 
 
Name 
Closing balance 
Book balance 
Provision for bad debts 
Provision proportion 
Receivables from external customers 
79,297,162.59 
20,902,222.46 
26.36% 
Receivables from related parties 
1,272,513,620.83 
 
 
Total 
1,351,810,783.42 
20,902,222.46 
 
Explanation on the basis for determining the portfolio: None.  
If provision was made for bad debts of accounts receivable in accordance with the general expected credit loss model: 
Applicable 
Not applicable 
(3) Provision for bad debts accrued, recovered or reversed during the period 
None. 
(4) Actual write-off of accounts receivable for the period 
None. 
(5) Top five customers in closing balance of accounts receivable and contractual assets summarized by 
debtor 
Unit: RMB 
Customer name 
Closing balance of 
accounts receivable 
Closing 
balance of 
contractual 
assets 
Closing balance of 
accounts receivable 
and contractual assets 
Percentage of 
total of closing 
balance of 
accounts 
receivable and 
contractual assets 
Closing balance 
of provision for 
bad debts of 
accounts 
receivable and 
provision for 
impairment of 
contractual assets 
Customer A 
555,396,104.81 
 
555,396,104.81 
41.09% 
 
Customer B 
535,754,637.30 
 
535,754,637.30 
39.63% 
 
Customer C 
131,984,872.53 
 
131,984,872.53 
9.76% 
 
Customer D 
23,671,271.87 
 
23,671,271.87 
1.75% 
 
Customer E 
11,030,863.59 
 
11,030,863.59 
0.82% 
 
Total 
1,257,837,750.10 
 
1,257,837,750.10 
93.05% 
 
2. Other receivables 
 
 
 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
297 
 
Unit: RMB 
Item 
Closing balance 
Opening balance 
Dividends receivable 
4,531,100.00 
 
Other receivables 
4,122,557,802.76 
3,123,928,450.54 
Total 
4,127,088,902.76 
3,123,928,450.54 
(1) Interest receivable 
1) Category of interest receivable: None. 
2) Significant overdue interest: None. 
3) Disclosure by provision for bad debts 
Applicable 
Not applicable 
4) Provision for bad debts accrued, recovered or reversed during the period: None. 
5) Actual write-off of dividends receivable during this reporting period: None.  
(2) Dividends receivable 
1) Category of dividends receivable 
Unit: RMB 
Item (or investee) 
Closing balance 
Opening balance 
Jacobson Pharma Corporation Limited 
4,531,100.00 
 
Total 
4,531,100.00 
 
2) Significant dividends receivable aged above 1 year: None. 
3) Disclosure by provision for bad debts 
Applicable 
Not applicable 
4) Provision for bad debts accrued, recovered or reversed during the period: None. 
5) Actual write-off of dividends receivable during this reporting period 
Including actual write-off of significant dividends receivable: None. 
Write-off explanations: None. 
Other explanations: None. 
(3) Other receivables 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
298 
 
1) Other receivables by nature 
Unit: RMB 
Nature 
Book balance at the end of the reporting 
period 
Book balance at the beginning of the 
reporting period 
Amounts from related parties within the 
scope of consolidation 
4,254,011,881.88 
3,258,095,819.76 
Deposits and guarantees 
14,347,777.84 
9,155,501.26 
Petty cash 
7,104,113.05 
9,512,706.51 
Total 
4,275,463,772.77 
3,276,764,027.53 
2) Disclosure by aging 
Unit: RMB 
Aging 
Book balance at the end of the period 
Opening balance at the end of the period 
Within 1 year (inclusive of 1 year) 
1,864,972,976.56 
1,058,335,839.27 
1 to 2 years 
943,970,831.13 
1,004,480,186.88 
2 to 3 years 
677,614,286.73 
143,283,020.32 
Above 3 years 
788,905,678.35 
1,070,664,981.06 
3 to 4 years 
788,905,678.35 
1,070,664,981.06 
Total 
4,275,463,772.77 
3,276,764,027.53 
3) Disclosure by provision for bad debts 
Unit: RMB 
Category 
Closing balance 
Opening balance 
Book balance 
Provision for bad debts 
Book value 
Book balance 
Provision for bad debts 
Book value 
Amount 
Proportion 
Amount 
Provision 
proportion  
Amount 
Proportion 
Amount 
Provision 
proportion 
Including: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Provision for 
bad debts by 
portfolio 
4,275,463,772.77 
100.00% 
152,905,970.01 
35.74% 
4,122,557,802.76 
3,276,764,027.53 
100.00% 
152,835,576.99 
41.17% 
3,276,764,027.53 
Including: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Aging 
portfolio 
21,451,890.89 
0.50% 
6,931,300.47 
32.31% 
14,520,590.42  
18,701,031.75 
0.57% 
6,860,884.49 
36.69% 
18,701,031.75 
Related party 
portfolio 
4,254,011,881.88 
99.50% 
145,974,669.54 
3.43% 
4,108,037,212.34  3,258,062,995.78 
99.43% 
145,974,692.50 
4.48% 
3,258,062,995.78 
Total 
4,275,463,772.77 
100.00% 
152,905,970.01 
35.74% 
4,122,557,802.76 
3,276,764,027.53 
100.00% 
152,835,576.99 
41.17% 
3,276,764,027.53 
Provision was made for bad debts in accordance with the general expected credit loss model: 
Unit: RMB 
Provision for bad debts 
Phase I 
Phase II 
Phase III 
Total 
Expected credit losses 
for the next 12 
Lifetime ECL (not credit-
impaired)  
Lifetime ECL (credit-
impaired)  


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
299 
 
months 
 
 
Balance as of January 1, 2023 
152,835,576.99 
 
 
152,835,576.99 
Balance as of January 1, 2023 in 
the current period 
 
 
 
 
Provision for the period 
70,393.02 
 
 
70,393.02 
Balance as of December 31, 
2023 
152,905,970.01 
 
 
152,905,970.01 
    Division base for each phase and proportion of provision for bad debts: None. 
Changes in book balance with significant changes in loss reserves in the current period 
Applicable 
Not applicable 
4) Provision for bad debts accrued, recovered or reversed during the period 
Provision for bad debts for the period: 
Unit: RMB 
Category 
Opening balance 
Change in the current period 
Closing balance 
Provision 
Recovery or 
reversal 
Transfer or 
write-off 
Other changes 
Aging portfolio 
6,860,884.49 
70,415.98 
 
 
 
6,931,300.47 
Related party 
portfolio 
145,974,692.50 
-22.96 
 
 
 
145,974,669.54 
Total 
152,835,576.99 
70,393.02 
 
 
 
152,905,970.01 
Provision for bad debt with important amount of recovery or reversal during the period: None.  
5) Actual write-off of other receivables during this reporting period: None. 
6) Top five customers in closing balance of other receivables summarized by debtor 
Unit: RMB 
Entity name 
Nature 
Closing balance 
Aging 
Percentage of 
total of closing 
balance of other 
receivables 
Closing balance 
of provision for 
bad debts 
Entity A 
Related party 
transactions 
1,298,160,786.82 
Within 1 year, 1 to 2 
years, 2 to 3 years, above 
3 years 
30.36% 
 
Entity B 
Related party 
transactions 
829,427,236.43 
Within 1 year, 2 to 3 
years 
19.40% 
 
Entity C 
Related party 
transactions 
667,778,834.70 
Within 1 year, 1 to 2 
years, 2 to 3 years 
15.62% 
 
Entity D 
Related party 
transactions 
384,808,049.53 
Within 1 year, 1 to 2 
years 
9.00% 
145,974,669.54 
Entity E 
Related party 
transactions 
295,969,610.07 
Within 1 year, 1 to 2 
years, 2 to 3 years 
6.92% 
 
Total 
 
3,476,144,517.55 
 
81.30% 
145,974,669.54 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
300 
 
7) Reported as other receivables due to centralized fund management: None. 
3. Long-term equity investment 
Unit: RMB 
Item 
Closing balance 
Opening balance 
Book balance 
Impairment 
provision 
Book value 
Book balance 
Impairment 
provision 
Book value 
Investments in 
subsidiaries 
2,573,195,450.92 
244,474,941.95 
2,328,720,508.97 
2,465,095,450.92 
244,474,941.95 
2,220,620,508.97 
Investments in 
associates and 
joint ventures 
11,553,542,823.25 
 
11,553,542,823.25 
11,334,638,735.04 
 
11,334,638,735.04 
Total 
14,126,738,274.17 
244,474,941.95 
13,882,263,332.22 
13,799,734,185.96 
244,474,941.95 
13,555,259,244.01 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
301 
 
(1) Investments in subsidiaries 
Unit: RMB 
Investee 
Opening balance (book 
value) 
Closing 
balance of 
impairment 
provision 
Increase and decrease in the current period 
Closing balance 
(book value) 
Closing balance of 
impairment 
provision 
Additional 
investment 
Decreased 
investment 
Provision for 
impairment 
Others 
Yunnan Baiyao Group Traditional Chinese 
Medicine Resources Co., Ltd 
130,894,518.14 
 
 
 
 
 
130,894,518.14 
 
Yunnan Baiyao Group Medicine E-
commerce Co., Ltd. 
56,059,850.00 
 
 
 
 
 
56,059,850.00 
 
Yunnan Baiyao Group Wuxi 
Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd. 
39,627,253.25 
 
 
 
 
 
39,627,253.25 
 
Yunnan Baiyao Group Dali Pharmaceutical 
Co., Ltd. 
16,489,200.00 
 
 
 
 
 
16,489,200.00 
 
Yunnan Baiyao Group Health Products 
Co., Ltd. 
168,297,661.03 
 
 
 
 
 
168,297,661.03 
 
Yunnan Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd 
765,533,647.30 
 
 
 
 
 
765,533,647.30 
 
Yunnan Institute of Materia Medica 
101,075,329.94 
 
 
 
 
 
101,075,329.94 
 
Yunnan Baiyao Holding Investment Co., 
Ltd. 
193,992,837.67 
 
 
 
 
 
193,992,837.67 
 
Yunnan Baiyao Teayield Co., Ltd. 
3,701,960.00 
20,000,000.00 
 
 
 
 
3,701,960.00 
20,000,000.00 
Yunnan Baiyao Group (Hainan) Co., Ltd. 
457,198,438.74 
 
 
 
 
 
457,198,438.74 
 
Yunnan Baiyao Group Shanghai Co., Ltd. 
11,350,000.00 
 
 
 
 
 
11,350,000.00 
 
Yunnan Baiyao Group Medical 
Technology Hefei Co., Ltd. 
77,600,000.00 
 
8,100,000.00 
 
 
 
85,700,000.00 
 
Shanghai Yunzhen Medical Technology 
Co., Ltd. 
100,572,858.37 
 
100,000,000.00 
 
 
 
200,572,858.37 
 
YNBY International Limited (Formerly 
Ban Loong Holdings Limited)  
98,226,954.53 
224,474,941.95 
 
 
 
 
98,226,954.53 
224,474,941.95 
Total 
2,220,620,508.97 
244,474,941.95 
108,100,000.00 
 
 
 
2,328,720,508.97 
244,474,941.95 
  


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
302 
 
(2) Investments in associates and joint ventures 
Unit: RMB 
Investee 
Opening balance 
(book value)  
Closing 
balance of 
impairment 
provision 
Increase and decrease in the current period 
Closing balance 
(book value)  
Closing balance of 
impairment provision 
Additional 
investment 
Decreased 
investment 
Profit and loss 
on investments 
recognized 
under the equity 
method 
Adjustment of 
other 
comprehensive 
income 
Change in other 
equities 
Cash dividends or 
profit declared to 
be issued 
Provision for 
impairment 
Others 
I. Joint ventures 
II. Associates 
Shanghai 
Pharmaceuticals 
Holding Co., Ltd. 
11,319,745,137.87 
 
 
 
627,159,060.84 
-22,425,249.10 
18,844,632.23 
406,032,345.56 
 
 
11,537,291,236.28 
 
Yunnan Tianzheng 
Testing Co., Ltd. 
14,893,597.17 
 
 
 
1,357,989.80 
 
 
 
 
 
16,251,586.97 
 
Yunnan Baiyao 
Chinese Herbal 
Medicine Technology 
Co., Ltd. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Subtotal 
11,334,638,735.04 
 
 
 
628,517,050.64 
-22,425,249.10 
18,844,632.23 
406,032,345.56 
 
 
11,553,542,823.25 
 
Total 
11,334,638,735.04 
 
 
 
628,517,050.64 
-22,425,249.10 
18,844,632.23 
406,032,345.56 
 
 
11,553,542,823.25 
 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
303 
 
The recoverable amount is determined based on fair value less the disposal expense. 
□Applicable    
Not applicable 
The recoverable amount is determined based on the present value of estimated future cash flows. 
□Applicable  
Not applicable 
Reasons for significant differences between the foregoing information and information used for impairment 
testing in previous years or external information: None.  
Reasons for significant differences between the information used in the Company's impairment tests in 
previous years and the actual situation in the corresponding year: None.  
(3) Other explanations: None.  
 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
 
304 
 
4. Operating revenue and Operating Cost 
Unit: RMB 
Item 
Amount for the current period 
Amount for the previous period 
Income 
Cost 
Income 
Cost 
Main business 
6,762,661,949.46 
3,050,317,137.32 
6,325,677,777.91 
2,889,920,823.10 
Other business 
118,794,971.14 
114,817,635.55 
114,783,648.32 
90,514,753.97 
Total 
6,881,456,920.60 
3,165,134,772.87 
6,440,461,426.23 
2,980,435,577.07 
Breakdown information of operating revenue and operating cost:  
Unit: RMB 
Contract classification 
Drug sales 
TCM resources 
Others 
Total 
Operating revenue 
Operating cost 
Operating revenue 
Operating cost 
Operating revenue 
Operating cost 
Operating revenue 
Operating cost 
Business type 
6,659,619,829.83 
2,957,985,201.82 
103,042,119.63 
92,331,935.50 
118,794,971.14 
114,817,635.55 
6,881,456,920.60 
3,165,134,772.87 
 Including: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Industrial sales income 
6,659,619,829.83 
2,957,985,201.82 
 
 
 
 
6,659,619,829.83 
2,957,985,201.82 
Commercial sales income 
 
 
103,042,119.63 
92,331,935.50 
 
 
103,042,119.63 
92,331,935.50 
Others 
 
 
 
 
118,794,971.14 
114,817,635.55 
118,794,971.14 
114,817,635.55 
By operating areas 
6,659,619,829.83 
2,957,985,201.82 
103,042,119.63 
92,331,935.50 
118,794,971.14 
114,817,635.55 
6,881,456,920.60 
3,165,134,772.87 
 Including: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In Yunnan province 
825,019,070.05 
346,526,894.46 
98,970,898.91 
88,518,376.77 
118,794,971.14 
114,817,635.55 
1,042,784,940.10 
549,862,906.78 
Outside Yunnan province 
(excluding overseas)  
5,832,867,670.97 
2,609,471,404.10 
4,071,220.72 
3,813,558.73 
 
 
5,836,938,891.69 
2,613,284,962.83 
Overseas 
1,733,088.81 
1,986,903.26 
 
 
 
 
1,733,088.81 
1,986,903.26 
Total 
6,659,619,829.83 
2,957,985,201.82 
103,042,119.63 
92,331,935.50 
118,794,971.14 
114,817,635.55 
6,881,456,920.60 
3,165,134,772.87 


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
305 
 
Information about performance obligations: 
Other explanations: None. 
Information related to the transaction price allocated to the remaining performance obligations: At the end of this reporting period, 
the Company recorded an amount of revenue of RMB 0.00 from its performance of obligations set out in the signed contracts to be 
fulfilled or fully fulfilled. 
Significant contractual changes or significant transaction price adjustments: None. 
5. Investment income 
Unit: RMB 
Item 
Amount for the current period 
Amount for the previous 
period 
Long-term equity investment incomes accounted by the cost 
method 
 
617,000,000.00 
Long-term equity investment incomes accounted by the equity 
method 
628,517,050.64 
732,711,091.10 
Investment income generated from disposal of long-term 
equity investment 
 
-81,317,400.00 
Investment income on trading financial assets during holding 
period 
7,606,635.89 
7,577,722.83 
Investment income from disposal of trading financial assets 
10,374,861.89 
204,640,032.15 
Investment income from other non-current financial assets 
during the holding period 
70,844,082.00 
9,931,274.97 
Others 
24,550,357.54 
4,579,237.29 
Total 
741,892,987.96 
1,495,121,958.34 
6. Others: None.  
XX. Supplementary Information 
1. Breakdown of non-recurring profits and losses for the current period 
☑Applicable  
Not applicable  
Unit: RMB 
Item 
Amount 
Description 
Profits and losses from disposal of non-current assets 
110,477,911.97  
Government subsidies included in the current profits and losses (excluding the government 
subsidies closely related to regular businesses of the Company in line with national 
policies and received by a determined standard, with a continuous impact on the 
Company’s profits and losses) 
75,375,220.16  
Profits and losses from changes in fair value of financial assets and liabilities held for trading 
by non-financial enterprises, and from disposal of such financial assets and liabilities, except 
for effective hedging operations related to regular businesses of the Company 
199,779,795.08  
Profits and losses from entrusted investment or asset management 
3,146,335.87  
Non-operating revenue and expenses other than the above 
-1,919,286.26  
Other profits and losses satisfying the definition of non-recurring profits and losses 
41,588,740.24  
Less: Amount affected by the income tax 
69,955,013.92  


       2023 Annual Report of Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
                
306 
 
Amount affected by minority interests (after tax)  
28,316,990.19  
Total 
330,176,712.95 
-- 
Other profits and losses satisfying the definition of non-recurring profits and losses: 
☑Applicable 
 
Not applicable 
     Other profit and loss items that meet the definition of non-recurring profit and loss mainly include other non-recurring profit and 
loss such as interest on time deposits and return of individual income tax fees. 
Note for the definition of non-recurring profits and losses set out in the No.1 Explanatory Announcement on Information 
Disclosure for Companies Offering Their Securities to the Public - Non-recurring Profits and Losses, as recurring profits and losses 
□Applicable 
 
Not applicable 
2. Return on equity and earnings per share 
Profits during the reporting 
period 
Weighted average return on 
equity 
Earnings per share 
Basic earnings per share 
(RMB/share) 
Diluted earnings per share 
(RMB/share) 
Net profits attributable to 
ordinary shareholders of the 
Company 
10.51% 
2.29 
2.29 
Net profits attributable to 
ordinary shareholders of the 
Company after deducting non-
recurring profits and losses 
9.66% 
2.11 
2.10 
 
3. Differences in Accounting Data under Chinese Accounting Standards (CAS) and Overseas Accounting 
Standards 
(1) Differences in the net profits and net assets in financial statements disclosed respectively under 
International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) and CAS 
□Applicable  
Not applicable 
(2) Differences in the net profits and net assets in financial statements disclosed respectively under 
overseas accounting standards and CAS 
□Applicable  
Not applicable 
(3) Explanations of the causes to differences in accounting data under CAS and overseas accounting 
standards; if adjustment is made for data audited by an overseas audit institution, the name of the 
institution shall be provided 
□Applicable  
Not applicable 
4. Others: None. 
 
 
 
Yunnan Baiyao Group Co., Ltd. 
Board of Directors 
March 28, 2024