Abstract 
 
 
Science educators have noted the unique characteristics of science literacy in terms of 
text structure, vocabulary demands, and reliance on abstract concepts (Cervetti, Pearson, Bravo, 
& Barber, 2006; Fang & Schleppegrell, 2008; Pytash, 2013). Furthermore, other scholars have 
defined scientific thinking processes as inextricable from the reading and writing practices used 
to communicate them (Norris & Phillips, 2003).  a collaboration between a literacy educator and 
a science educator provided the foundation to reimagine a content area reading course for middle 
and high school pre-service science teachers and incorporate a focus on the disciplinary literacy 
of science through popular fiction. Without positioning literacy as overly additive, pre-service 
teacher participant illustrated  ways to logistically structure scientific inquiry to include and 
authentically underscore disciplinary literacy. Findings suggest specific practices for how teacher 
educators can best support the disciplinary literacy development of pre-service science teachers.  
 
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to: Dr. Kristin Cook, Bellarmine 
University, 2001 Newburg Road, Louisville, KY 40205 kcook@bellarmine.edu 
 
Key words:  Pre-service teachers, disciplinary literacy, popular fiction, inquiry-based science 
 
 
Introduction 
 
 
Only when we return to a more functional view of the role of language and literacy in 
 
supporting disciplinary learning [in science] can we achieve our goal of an informed 
 
citizenry who can use their literacy skills to think critically and flexibly across many 
 
domains of knowledge and inquiry (Cervetti, Pearson, Bravo, & Barber, 2006, p. 3). 
 
 
 
The dominance of literacy education has been critiqued as being a ‘bully’ rather than a 
‘buddy’ (Pearson, 2010; Greenleaf et al., 2009) in supporting disciplinary content learning in 
science. In the quote above, researchers cal for literacy education that supports rather than 
excludes or undercuts learning in science. Given this focus for repositioning literacy education as 
an ally to science learning, many educators have investigated the ways in which disciplinary 
literacy can be used to emphasize and hone the unique literacy tools needed to participate in 
inquiry-based science. As defined by Shanahan and Shanahan (2008), disciplinary literacy is an 
emphasis on the knowledge and abilities possessed by those who create, communicate, and use 
knowledge within specific disciplines. They posit there are unique literacy skills necessary for 


 
Cook and Dinkins 
           2 
Electronic Journal of Science Education                                                      ejse.southwestern.edu 
engaging in science that are different from engaging in other disciplines and these skills need to 
be explicitly taught to students as they learn and communicate about science.  
 
 
Reform documents have recently called for literacy skills to be embedded in science 
teaching. The Next Generation Science Standards (2013) and the Common Core State Standards 
(2010) have both emphasized the importance of students comprehending and composing 
complex informational texts, integrating knowledge from multiple sources, and using evidence to 
develop arguments focused on disciplinary content. Similarly, the American Association for the 
Advancement of Science (AAAS) has detailed core competencies for the teaching of science that 
have included promoting the need for biology educators to guide students in “practicing the 
communication of science through a variety of formal and informal written, visual, and oral 
methods” (2011, p.15). Underscoring the need for disciplinary literacy in teacher preparation 
programs, the Carnegie Corporation for Advancing of Adolescent Literacy has been funding pre-
service teacher (PST) education projects since 2003 to focus specifically on identifying effective 
practices for teaching adolescent literacy and develop course curricula that will help pre-service 
teachers integrate literacy instruction into their content domains.  
 
 
Calls for improvement in intersections between ELA and science instruction have been 
coming from researchers who investigate ways to best support language development in English 
Language Learners. Lee, Quinn, & Valdés (2013) introduce the concept of ‘language of the 
science classroom’ to explicate the needs for disciplinary literacy in science to underscore the 
aims of the NGSS and CCSS. They propose teacher preparations programs need to respond by 
employing:  
 
(a) a shift away from both content-based language instruction and the sheltered model 
 
to a focus on language-in-use environments and (b) a shift away from “teaching” 
 
discrete language skills to a focus on supporting language development by providing 
 
appropriate contexts and experiences (Lee, Quinn, & Valdés, 2013, p. 228) 
With regard to honing disciplinary literacy skills in science, researchers have begun looking at 
the unique skills necessary for science reading and writing (Shanahan & Shanahan, 2008). 
Exploring the link between literacy skills and scientific inquiry suggests that teachers need to 
incorporate disciplinary literacy (Cervetti et al., 2008) into the teaching of science. Moreover, 
researchers have shown the need for explicit literacy instruction in science (Pytash, 2013). For 
example, it is not adequate to simply assign science writing assignments, but rather science 
educators need to teach the skills necessary for scientific reading and writing. For this reason, it 
is paramount that teacher preparation programs support pre-service teachers with the knowledge 
and skills needed for such instruction. 
 
 
While the standards documents emphasize the comprehension of complex informational 
texts, designing responding pedagogical approaches necessitates recognition of research on the 
types of texts important to learning science. Research has suggested fiction and nonfiction share 
a symbiotic relationship with one influencing the shape of the other (Coombs, 2013). It has also 
suggested students’ out-of-school literacies embrace the complex relationship between these two 
forms as students draw heavily from popular culture texts during their learning of science (Moje, 
2008). Thus, as educators try to develop a disciplinarily literate citizenry and attempt to 
underscore the aims of their discipline-specific curricular standards, they must pay close 


                                           Disciplinary Literacy Through Popular Fiction                   
           3 
Electronic Journal of Science Education                                                      ejse.southwestern.edu 
attention to the intersection of fiction and non-fiction texts within their content area (Fang & 
Schleppegrell, 2008).  
 
 
The overall goal for this study was to discern affordances of using one medium of text 
(i.e. popular fiction) to connect aims of science-specific content and process standards in the 
areas of reading, writing, speaking, listening, and critical thinking. We posit that incorporating 
popular fiction provides a convergence point for addressing multiple components of science 
disciplinary literacy and allows learners to explore the most meaningful and relevant connections 
of content to their lives through topics that require dialogue, discussion, and deliberation. 
Ultimately, we aimed to understand the ways in which teacher educators can utilize popular 
fiction to best support pre-service teachers in their development of disciplinary literacy. This 
exploration was guided by the following research questions: 1) How (the process) and in what 
ways (description of strategies) do pre-service teachers use popular fiction to draw connections 
among curricular standards?; 2) In what ways do pre-service teachers promote disciplinary 
literacy through instructional practices that incorporate popular fiction?  
 
From Content Area Reading to Disciplinary Literacy 
 
Supporting literacy development in all content areas necessitates an informed and 
differentiated understanding of what literacy strategies and skills are most meaningful in the 
various disciplines. Informed by the work of scholars who draw distinctions between content 
area reading and disciplinary literacy (Moje, 2004; Shanahan & Shanahan, 2008), we 
conceptualize disciplinary literacy as the specific practices of reading and writing within one’s 
discipline. While the roots of disciplinary literacy stem from content area reading, disciplinary 
literacy practices draw attention to the differentiated literacy skills necessary for specific content 
areas. Content area reading tends to emphasize the teaching of a generalizable (across content 
areas) set of skills for use in various content-specific classes. Strategies like summarizing, 
questioning, monitoring meaning, etc. are general comprehension strategies that help students 
understand content presented in text. This approach assumes that accessing meaning in one text 
is equivalent to access meaning in a variety of texts. Disciplinary literacy, however, focuses on 
how disciplinary experts approach literacy tasks with an understanding of the unique demands, 
purposes, and uses of literacy (Shanahan & Shanahan, 2012). Teacher educator programs 
traditionally offer content area reading courses to equip pre-service teachers with universal 
strategies or tools to assist students with reading a variety of texts and writing within a variety of 
disciplines. Disciplinary literacy, however, focuses on the knowledge, abilities, and tools experts 
in a particular field use to create and communicate knowledge within their discipline and 
provides a foundation for the unique interpretive skills of reading and meaning making in 
specific disciplines, such as science.  
 
Disciplinary Literacy Framework for Science 
 
The empirical roots of disciplinary literacy stem from cognitive and linguistic research. 
Using expert read-alouds, research on disciplinary literacy in science has concluded that 
scientists read differently than those in other disciplines (Shanahan & Shanahan, 2008). 
Specifically, linguistic analysts have uncovered specific attributes in science text (such as the use 
of passive voice and abstraction of concepts) that are uniquely dominant in scientific written 
forms of communication. Fang & Schleppegrell (2008) posit that in science, vocabulary is used 
to make acts passive so as to attribute them to natural phenomena rather than to social actors—a 


 
Cook and Dinkins 
           4 
Electronic Journal of Science Education                                                      ejse.southwestern.edu 
central premise of scientific objectivity and replicability. Moreover, science texts often use dense 
and specialized vocabularies (van den Broek, 2010).  This high degree of lexical density and 
hierarchical terminology (Zwiers, 2008) calls for the use of Greek and Latin derivatives to help 
students understand the meaning and classification of the words. Furthermore, reading strategies 
in science include an emphasis on credibility of research designs, critical dissection of claims, 
determining ranges of doubt and certainty, and critiquing the sources of knowledge and their 
limitations. 
 
 
Norris and Phillips (2003) argue that historic emphases on scientific literacy have been 
too narrowly focused on science as merely being knowledgeable about facts, concepts, and 
discrete bits of scientific information to the exclusion of the ability to effectively interpret and 
make meaning of scientific texts. This latter aspect of scientific literacy is characterized by an 
understanding of the very nature of science itself and cannot be divorced from the reading and 
writing of science:  
 
Reading and writing are inextricably linked to the very nature and fabric of 
 
science, and, by extension, to learning science. Take them away and there goes science 
 
and proper science learning also, just as surely as removing observation, measurement, 
 
and experiment would destroy science and proper science learning (Norris & Phillips, 
 
2003, p.226) 
 
The inclusion of science-specific literacy skills to undergird both content knowledge (big ideas, 
core concepts, nature of science) as well as scientific habits of mind (ability to read, write, and 
reason with science texts) is key to supporting students’ development of scientific literacy. Pre-
service teachers need opportunities to learn and practice these skills themselves and be able to 
guide their students in the elements that make effective readers and writers in science. Insights 
from disciplinary literacy thus help teachers understand the practices of their own discipline. 
 
Synthesis of Relevant Literature 
 
Research calling for embedding literacy practices in science instruction has: 1) provided a 
foundation for the complementary nature of both inquiry-based instruction and literacy skill 
development; 2) argued for the connecting to students’ funds of knowledge through the use of 
popular media; and 3) emphasized the importance of pre-service teachers’ explicitly learning 
how to embed literacy practices into their teaching of science. Below, is a brief synopsis of 
contemporary research in each of these areas, which played a central role in the design of this 
project.  
 
Inquiry-based Science and Texts 
 
 A theoretical foundation for integration of inquiry-based science and literacy practices 
imply the same sets of cognitive and metacognitive skills: recognizing main ideas and concepts, 
analyzing critically, evaluating information, establishing relationships, formulating conclusions, 
and applying information to other situations. Research in this area has illuminated how process 
skills needed for literacy and inquiry are complementary, and the integration of literacy into the 
science curriculum yields increased learning in both reading and science as well as improved 
attitudes toward science (Pearson, 2010; Greenleaf et al., 2009).  
 


                                           Disciplinary Literacy Through Popular Fiction                   
           5 
Electronic Journal of Science Education                                                      ejse.southwestern.edu 
 
Insights gleaned from Cervetti et al.’s (2006) work further elucidated the shared 
strategies of inquiry-based science and literacy. Both activate prior knowledge and aim to focus 
students on establishing goals, making predictions, drawing inferences or conclusions, making 
connections, and communicating information to the public. Research has found that inquiry-
based science and text are mutually supportive and best approached in tandem (Cervetti et al., 
2006). More specifically, text should be used at the beginning, throughout, and after first-hand 
inquiry-based science experiences. Text provides the context to wonder about science content, 
delivers some of the content connections (some of which is not observable in a classroom 
context), helps build student use of vocabulary, and can model inquiry practices and the nature of 
science—practices that are central to scientific literacy (Yager, 2004). Text can provide data on 
contemporary applications of science content through which the reader is challenged to draw 
conclusions and develop claims, while also helping to focus investigations and set objectives for 
learning science content.  
 
 
Nevertheless, with emphasis on inquiry-based science being experiential in nature, text 
has largely been absent from inquiry-based science or at best taken a backseat to the hands-on 
nature of learning. Critiquing the use of texts in inquiry, Yager (2004) argues “First, science texts 
are more often “declarations of ‘fact’” than real representations of the “heart and soul of the 
scientific enterprise” (p. 95). A related critique is that text can take precedence over scientific 
discovery—encouraging students to be but passive recipients of others’ ideas and taking the 
place of observation, experimentation, and meaning-making (Peacock & Gates, 2000). In 
practice, teachers seem apprehensive about placing too much emphasis on text in the science 
classroom. Furthermore, secondary science teachers perceive teaching of literacy to be outside of 
their domain and feel unequipped to teach science-specific modes of literacy instruction (Pearson 
et al., 2010). Constraints such as adding reading and writing into an “already over packed 
curriculum, developing science teachers’ knowledge of and commitment to reading, providing 
students easy access to quality science literature and motivating them to read it, and coordinating 
between science teachers and reading educators” (Fang et al., 2008, p. 2084) have been noted in 
research.  
 
Scholars who have been focusing on the intersection of inquiry-based science and text 
point to the importance of developing students’ academic language. Drawing from Gee’s (2004) 
notion of the situated meaning students draw from inquiry-based experiences as they adopt new 
language to contextualize their experience, Weinburgh and Silva (2012; 2011) have developed 
an instructional strategy termed the ‘5R’—replace, reveal, repeat, reposition, and reload to guide 
teachers in privileging language development in science classrooms. The 5R model stems from 
their work with English language learners, but can be appropriately applied to science learners 
from all backgrounds in the sense that all students are expected to understand and use language 
consistent with the practices of the scientific community. As these researchers assert, inquiry-
based learning that incorporates text creates a context or situation ripe for engaging students in 
deep thinking about academic language in science.    
 
Use of Popular Fiction as a Context for Inquiry-based Science 
 
The genre of text (i.e. informational text, trade books, video and online resources) 
teachers bring into the science classroom has also been a focal area of research in the bridging of 
literacy and science. Within these discussions, research informing this study has focused on 


 
Cook and Dinkins 
           6 
Electronic Journal of Science Education                                                      ejse.southwestern.edu 
constructing what Moje et al. (2004) has referred to as ‘third space’ (whereby students connect 
their home lives with their lives in the formal classroom) in an effort to develop students’ content 
area literacy through text that is maximally meaningful to students. Investigating the funds of 
knowledge students bring into the science classroom, Moje et al.’s (2004) longitudinal study of 
middle and high school students found students strongly reference popular culture (e.g., movies, 
novels, and television) when drawing personal connections to science content learned in the 
classroom. In their research, popular cultural funds were in fact the most predominant type of 
funds of knowledge; that is, students tended to draw on popular culture as much as, if not more 
than, they did their own experiences when discussing issues related to the science topics under 
study. As such, researchers suggest educators interested in constructing third space ought look to 
the area of popular culture as a means to engage students in science and literacy practices.  
 
 
Few empirical studies have investigated linking popular culture funds to content area 
learning (Moje et al., 2004; Moje, 2008; Alvermann, 2011); however, several science educators 
have noted the importance of written genres that will engage and confer relevance to students. 
Keys (2000) argues that writing genres taught in school science should not only be reflective of 
scientists’ writing, but should also assist students in unpacking scientific meaning contained in 
various forms of writing. Moreover, Hand and Prain (2002) argue that having students write in a 
diverse range of genres will support connections between classroom science and authentic 
science in the public sphere. Norris and Phillips (2003) support the notion that students be 
engaged in writing various forms within the science classroom and assert that popular media 
(newsprint, movies, fictional texts, and magazines) serve as good sources for such lifelong 
practices of science.  
 
 
However, research in the area of embedding popular culture texts into curriculum 
suggests reluctance on the part of teachers to recognize the classroom as a legitimate place for 
popular culture (Marsh, 2005). For example, in a three-year longitudinal study of elementary pre-
service teachers’ perceptions about the use of popular culture in England’s literacy curriculum, 
Marsh found that pre-service teachers did not make use of students’ interests in popular culture 
despite having learned about and expressed approval for the use of popular culture in the literacy 
curriculum. Despite the potential for engagement, teachers tend to not use popular fiction in the 
science classroom for fear of misinformation (Marsh, Butler, & Umanath, 2012) and the 
perception that literature takes away from inquiry-based learning and teaching. Furthermore, 
popular fiction is often viewed as existing purely for enjoyment, not actual learning (Czerneda, 
2006). This omission in the curriculum has potential consequences for students who so heavily 
draw from popular culture for their connections to science learning.  
 
Pre-Service Teacher Preparation for Integrating Literacy and Science 
 
There is a perception of barriers to teachers integrating inquiry-based science with texts 
(i.e. dominance of experiential learning at the exclusion of text-based learning, limited 
proficiency at the secondary level with literacy strategies, and perception that science teachers 
teach science only) (Alvermann, Phelps, & Gillis, 2010), and pre-service teachers’ tend to de-
privilege students’ interests in popular culture in the classroom (Marsh, 2005). We also 
understand that secondary teachers have limited professional development regarding disciplinary 
literacy, and teacher preparation programs often approach disciplinary literacy through the 
teaching of generic reading strategies rather than utilizing a discipline-specific approach 


                                           Disciplinary Literacy Through Popular Fiction                   
           7 
Electronic Journal of Science Education                                                      ejse.southwestern.edu 
(Shanahan & Shanahan, 2008). These findings beg exploration of the ways teacher preparation 
programs support the development of disciplinary literacy in pre-service science teachers. 
 
 
Research has not yet thoroughly investigated the effectiveness of instruction on science-
specific disciplinary literacy despite so many researchers calling for ways to help science 
educators better understand the literacy practices of their own discipline. In one of the Carnegie 
Corporation sponsored projects mentioned above, Shanahan and Shanahan (2008) worked with 
specialists in math, chemistry, and history to identify the content-specific reading skills that 
would better enable students to succeed in these subject areas. Their findings indicated that 
chemistry teachers resonated with text that entailed specific content through which students learn 
chemistry concepts, focused on how information learned in text could be transferred to problem-
solve in other situations, and specified how vocabulary can have different meaning to the public 
than in the field of science. Implications from this study suggested the need for teacher education 
programs to explicitly support pre-service teachers’ recognition of and ability to teach students 
about these discipline-specific literacy strategies.    
 
 
With regard to the teachers’ role in disciplinary literacy, research has called for explicit 
guidance from teachers to help their students conduct writing in science. Pytash (2013) found 
“the reading and deconstruction of texts is an active, meaning-making process to support the 
learning of writing and science concepts” (p.806). Writing cannot just be assigned in the science 
classroom, but must also be taught. Studies of adolescent students’ science writing have found 
writing improvement when teachers show students how to write for different purposes (e.g., to 
describe, to persuade, and inform) and how to use different genres (e.g., research articles, lay 
explanations, patent applications, lab notes) for scientific writing (Hand & Prain, 2002). These 
studies challenge the perception of science-only instruction as well as traditional notions of what 
ought to be included in teacher preparation courses. 
 
 
Research examining disciplinary literacy in science has called for the pairing of texts 
with inquiry-based learning (Cervetti et al., 2006), incorporating popular culture to create a third 
space (Moje et al., 2004), and the explicit teaching of unique science-based literacy practices 
(Shanahan & Shanahan, 2008). As such, we implemented an inquiry project in a content area 
reading course that aimed to account for these calls. The purpose of our inquiry project was to 
help pre-service teachers create learning experiences that leveraged popular texts and embedded 
disciplinary content with disciplinary literacy demands in science. Because literacy is understood 
as an inherently social practice involving the ways in which individuals utilize, interact with, 
make meaning from, and produce spoken and written language, the inquiry project required 
participants to approach literacy from an integrated perspective including reading, writing, 
speaking, and listening. Through this project, we hoped to understand: 1) How and in what ways 
do pre-service teachers use popular fiction to draw connections among science curricular 
standards?; 2) In what ways do pre-service teachers promote science disciplinary literacy through 
instructional practices that incorporate popular fiction?   
 
Methodology 
 
 
Building off the research advocating for the integration of text and inquiry-based learning 
experiences, this project began with two goals in mind: 1) help PSTs develop skills in using text 


 
Cook and Dinkins 
           8 
Electronic Journal of Science Education                                                      ejse.southwestern.edu 
as part of inquiry-based learning; and 2) shift the use of text from passive consumption of facts 
to active engagement of questioning, interpreting, and synthesizing information gleaned from 
multiple texts. Thus, aiming to create a learning experience where text acted as a catalyst for 
inquiry, engaging students in an active thinking process of discovery, evaluation, and 
application. 
 
 
To examine the ways in which PSTs understand how to foster disciplinary literacy and 
draw connections among curricular standards through the use of popular fiction, a case study 
design (Yin, 2014) paired with a teacher as researcher approach to data collection and analysis 
was used. The case consisted of science PSTs participating in a Reading in the Content Areas 
course taught by the second author. Previous iterations of the Reading in the Content Areas 
course utilized an additive approach to literacy instruction by focusing on transferrable reading 
and writing strategies teachers could incorporate into content instruction. The instructor sought 
to subvert this model by foregrounding disciplinary perspectives and helping PSTs cultivate 
science-specific approaches to literacy instruction while also gaining knowledge of reading and 
writing processes. This modified version of the course offered the opportunity to examine PSTs’ 
understanding of and ability to develop lessons incorporating disciplinary literacy and provided a 
bounded system for the case: the semester-long duration of the course and participants’ common 
disciplinary focus on science. As part of the course, participants created an inquiry project for 
use with high school students designed to support understanding of the unique literacy demands 
of science and the showcase the potential of popular texts to leverage content learning. This 
inquiry project acted as the key literacy event in that it provided us with observable activities, 
interactions, and artifacts to capture participants’ thinking throughout their learning. The 
instructional context and role of the inquiry project are discussed in detail below.  
 
Context & Participants  
 
This study focuses on five science education students, three males and two females, 
pursuing secondary certification. All students were enrolled in a Reading in the Content Areas 
course as part of their program requirements, which met for five Saturdays for seven hours each 
session. All five PSTs had already spent extensive time in the field observing a range of science 
classrooms, and one student was currently teaching high school biology through an alternative 
certification program. Table 1 provides a description of these students.  
 
Table 1. Background information on science PSTs 
Participant Science Disciplinary Focus 
Undergraduate Degree 
Teaching Experiences 
Irene 
High School Biology 
BA in biology 
Minor in plant sciences 
Two semesters away from student teaching; Working 
as an alternatively certified biology teacher at a high 
school serving a high percentage of low SES students 
and struggling readers; she was particularly interested 
in how to help struggling students access science texts.  
  
Cassi 
High School Biology 
BS in biology with a minor 
in chemistry (also holds a 
MA in Communication) 
 
Two semesters away from student teaching; Working 
as an administrative assistant in higher education; 
Jerome 
High School Biology 
BS in biology with a minor 
in chemistry 
 
Two semesters away from student teaching 
Vincent 
Middle School Science 
BS in aviation and 
aerospace management 
 
Two semesters away from student teaching  
 
Anton 
High School Chemistry 
BS in chemistry with a 
minor in math 
One semester away from student teaching  
 


                                           Disciplinary Literacy Through Popular Fiction                   
           9 
Electronic Journal of Science Education                                                      ejse.southwestern.edu 
The course was taught by the second author, a literacy professor with expertise in 
adolescent literacy and experience working with secondary teachers to develop disciplinary 
literacy practices. This instructor sought to create a course that frontloaded the role of 
disciplinary thinking. The first author, a science methods professor, was interested how popular 
culture texts could be leveraged to stimulate inquiry-based practice. These two interests provided 
the foundation for informal collaborative discussions and iterative co-planning throughout the 
semester. The goal of the course was to develop PSTs’ understanding of the overall relevance of 
literacy to student learning, emphasize the particular literacy practices of individual disciplines, 
and enable PSTs to create learning experiences that address these unique practices. Each class 
followed a similar framework that included reading discussions, introduction of core concepts, 
models of instructional strategies, and small group learning activities with the last one to two 
hours devoted to students developing their final inquiry projects. Further, students were required 
to bring their own digital device to class to live stream their thinking via online discussion and 
mediums such as TodaysMeet and Padlet. These digital discussions enabled a collaborative 
climate where students supported each other in their work and provided an additional medium 
for formative assessment. 
 
Inquiry Project 
 
The course provided participants with the opportunity to learn science-specific literacy 
strategies and develop materials for teaching students to read, write, and wield academic 
language like scientists. The course culminated in each student designing an inquiry project 
based on a popular text of their choosing that could be implemented in future classrooms. Each 
project design was required to: 1) identify and connect science content standards with a popular 
text; 2) incorporate strategies for teaching reading, writing, and academic language in tandem 
with content; 3) include three to five nonfiction texts; and 4) utilize literacy practices to assess 
students on their new understandings.  
 
 
In guiding PSTs to develop their inquiry projects, each class followed a similar 
framework that included reading discussions, introduction of core concepts, models of 
instructional strategies (see Cook & Dinkins, in press for detailed instructional activities), and 
small group learning activities with the last half of class devoted to PSTs’ development of their 
final inquiry projects. In order to transition from modeling the projects to guided practice and 
thus encouraging a gradual release of responsibility, PSTs debriefed their experiences by 
dissecting the instructor-led model and reflecting on their learning as students and future 
teachers. In the subsequent classes, the instructor shifted responsibility to PSTs by asking them 
to think through ideas for their inquiry project and begin designing it in chunks with peer and 
instructor support. PSTs were required to choose a fictional text that reflected elements of 
popular culture from which they could draw standards-based scientific concepts. They then 
researched the science behind their topic of interest in the popular culture text by reading both 
primary and secondary scientific literature (i.e. non-fiction) over the course of the week and 
began to develop possible inquiry questions and literacy learning goals for their projects. PSTs 
were free to include any instructional activity from course texts, class models and discussions, 
science methods courses, or field experiences.  
 
 
During class two, three, and four, PSTs used online discussion forums to record their 
thinking, provide feedback to each other, and draft ideas for their project. PSTs were also 


 
Cook and Dinkins 
           10 
Electronic Journal of Science Education                                                      ejse.southwestern.edu 
required to bring their own digital device to live stream their thinking during or after class via 
online discussion mediums such as TodaysMeet and Padlet to capture and share their thinking as 
they developed questions, concerns, and thoughts about the course activities. Instructional 
prompts for the online posts included explaining why the text was chosen, identifying core 
disciplinary concepts emerged from the novel, and discussing rationale and challenges for 
selecting nonfiction supplementary texts. This provided PSTs with multiple forums to 
communicate and/or collaborate with others during instruction and enabled us to explore their 
thinking as they developed their projects.   
 
Data Collection & Analysis Techniques 
 
To explore how PSTs used popular fiction to draw connections among curricular 
standards and the instructional practices they used to facilitate disciplinary literacy learning, we 
framed our data collection around two literacy events in the course: 1) the inquiry projects PSTs’ 
designed for future classroom use and 2) the online posts made during their learning process. The 
inquiry projects provided credible data for understanding PSTs’ thinking because the assignment 
required students to anchor instruction in both science and literacy standards; incorporate a 
popular text and a range of nonfiction texts; establish learning goals in reading, writing, and 
academic language; and plan instruction for helping students meet these goals. PSTs’ in-process 
posts to various online media platforms used during class (Padlet, TodaysMeet, and Moodle) 
provided insight into the process of how they constructed their inquiry project at different points 
throughout the course.   
  
 
A deductive and inductive approach to analysis and examined data across type and source 
was used. Deductively, given the focus on inquiry processes and standards alignment, data was 
coded for science content, science literacy strategies, and assessment practices. Throughout the 
process, data was co-coded, employing agreed upon deductive categories before shifting to an 
inductive process and comparing codes until consensus was reached. Collaborative coding 
enabled the authors to bring their content expertise to the analytic process. For initial reduction 
and organization, we grouped data by question, identified the science and literacy standards 
PSTs utilized, and examined the connections drawn among these standards and popular texts. As 
a second step to this process, instructional choices were coded for deductive categories that 
reflected how PSTs planned the central components of classroom instruction: literacy practices 
and assessment. Then these categories and corresponding evidence were inductively examined to 
understand how PSTs fostered disciplinary literacy through the use of popular texts.  
 
Findings 
 
 
Data indicated that PSTs chose similar instructional methods for embedding literacy 
practices into their science teaching. PSTs primarily approached the task of building inquiry 
units by leveraging popular fiction texts to engage students. However, their use of scaffolds to 
help build students’ success varied considerably. Additionally, the ways in which PSTs chose to 
assess and logistically structure the integration of disciplinary literacy into their scientific inquiry 
also varied (see Table 2). Below, strengths and weaknesses in the PST’s final projects are 
highlighted in an attempt to glean insights into how to better support science disciplinary literacy 
skill development.  
 


                                           Disciplinary Literacy Through Popular Fiction                   
           11 
Electronic Journal of Science Education                                                      ejse.southwestern.edu 
 
Table 2. Inquiry projects developed by PSTs. 
                                                          
 
1 Generating Interactions between Schema and Text (Cunningham, 1982): a strategy to help students condense and summarize texts. 
PST 
*pseudonyms 
used 
Central Question 
Popular 
Culture Text 
Disciplinary Content 
Key Literacy Activities 
Vincent 
1) 
How do pathogens spread? 
2) 
How does the spread of a 
pathogen in an ecosystem 
affect a population? 
3) 
How 
do 
populations 
respond 
to 
selective 
pressures like pathogens?  
 
World War Z 
Viruses & Bacteria + act 
as a primer for a unit on 
natural selection 
Answer 
central 
questions 
using 
evidence from texts for support 
*Project takes the form of an online 
quest via padlet 
Jerome 
1) 
How 
does 
group 
and 
individual behavior change 
during catastrophic events?  
2) 
Do 
humans 
show 
"migration" patterns to that 
of other animals during such 
events?  
3) 
What happens when groups 
begin to break down among 
themselves 
during 
these 
events?  
4) 
Should 
humans 
be 
concerned with the group 
survival or the survival of 
themselves? 
World War Z 
Ecology and the study of 
populations 
& 
group 
mentality 
Nature vs. nurture 
Construction of Venn diagram & 
Science journal writing addressing the 
following prompts: 
 
What advantages during times of 
stress and catastrophe do humans 
have versus other animals?  
 
What makes humans more likely 
to survive and or die? 
 
 
Anton 
1) 
What is the relationship 
between human behavior 
and 
the 
affects 
of 
a 
widespread epidemic have 
on the population?  
2) 
Are 
there 
any 
specific 
examples that can be pulled 
from the text to show these 
relationships?  
3) 
What affect (adverse or 
proactive) does it have on 
human activity and the 
environment? 
World War Z 
Ecosystems 
Design, 
evaluate, 
and 
refine 
a 
solution 
for 
reducing the impacts of 
human activities on the 
environment 
and 
biodiversity 
Students 
collaboratively 
select 
an 
environmental issue and utilize outside 
resources to research the topic and 
present it to the class in a formal 
proposal.  
Students will share (like a science fair) 
their proposals and possible solutions to 
their issue, as well as write a 1-2 
paragraph summarizing their findings. 
 
Irene 
1) 
What 
is 
the 
role 
of 
government in regulating 
genetic engineering?   
2) 
What 
is 
the 
role 
of 
companies and governments 
in safeguarding the public 
health?   
3) 
What is the cost of genetic 
engineering? 
Environmental? Monetary?  
Human consumption? 
Hunger Games 
Genetics  
 
Ethics 
of 
genetic 
engineering 
Vocabulary self-awareness chart 
Think-pair-share & GIST1 statements 
Critical Response with 3-5 citations 


 
Cook and Dinkins 
           12 
Electronic Journal of Science Education                                                      ejse.southwestern.edu 
 
 
 
Use of Popular Fiction to Integrate Science and Literacy 
 
All students recognized the potential of popular culture texts to engage students’ out-of-
school interests as part of classroom learning. As Jerome explained, popular culture texts “are 
usually books that are relevant to what students like and the books contain [scientific] messages 
that we as teachers can decipher and use in class. These books can provide a launching point for 
great lessons.”  Anton recognized that popular texts “easily relate to real world context students 
can further explore.”  Specifically, PSTs selected two popular culture texts that began as books 
and were later adapted into movies: The Hunger Games and World War Z, and emphasized the 
power of each text’s cultural relevance. Vincent understood World War Z as indicative of “the 
popularity of the Zombie genre.” Jerome echoed this idea explaining how, “Zombies have 
exploded in our culture over the past few years. From shows on television to books on survival, 
zombies are a sci-fi hit.”  Irene, the only participant actually teaching high school biology during 
this semester, offered a similar but expanded rationale for selecting The Hunger Games:   
 
I chose the book, The Hunger Games, because it is a popular work of fiction that is made 
 
even more popular with students in the high school age range by the movies that are 
 
being released.  The second movie in the series is being released in the next week, 
 
actually, so it is current and relevant to popular culture. Also, this text is written for a 
 
young adult audience, so I know that there will not be any issue with inappropriate 
 
content for my students’ age group.  Finally, I chose this text because it is written where 
 
students at a lower reading level can access the content as well as those at grade level. 
 
Irene’s position as a working classroom teacher enabled her to recognize the accessibility of the 
text as well as its cultural relevance. These findings indicated PSTs’ recognition of the 
importance of building third space by intentionally bridging student interests with science 
concepts explored in the classroom. 
 
 
In addition to engaging students through the popularity of The Hunger Games and 
zombie culture, PSTs unearthed scientific concepts from these texts to create a platform for their 
inquiry units. PSTs working with World War Z all leveraged the zombie phenomenon to explore 
different aspects of viral outbreaks, pathogens, and natural selection. Vincent described how 
“zombie outbreaks are typically explained as viral or bacterial infections” providing an “exciting 
petri dish for students in which their imagination and content assimilation can grow naturally.” 
Jerome explained how World War Z “connects the societies love for zombies and actual 
                                                          
 
2 Who, what, when, where, why, and how: a strategy to help students recall key ideas reported in a text. 
Ca2ssi 
1) 
What 
is 
the 
role 
of 
government in regulating 
genetic engineering?  
2) 
What’s 
the 
role 
of 
companies and governments 
in safeguarding the public? 
3) 
What’s the cost of genetic 
engineering? Environment? 
Human Consumption? 
Hunger Games 
Genetics, 
genetic 
engineering, the ethics, 
benefits, and costs 
KWLH chart 
5 Ws & 1 H2 
GIST statements 
Admit/exit slips 
RAFT perspective writing Final goal: 
Informative science article 


                                           Disciplinary Literacy Through Popular Fiction                   
           13 
Electronic Journal of Science Education                                                      ejse.southwestern.edu 
science.” Two students working with The Hunger Games planned to leverage, as Irene 
explained, “the animals described as muttagens” to introduce students to genetics, genetic 
engineering, and the current debate about genetically modified organisms. Cassi used explicit 
examples to draw connections between the text and today’s world:   
 
…it is a hot topic in regards to ethics in the field of science and medicine today.  Genetic 
 
engineering is taking place all around us from the crops we eat (e.g. corn) to the ethics 
 
and politics of cloning, stem cell research, and reproductive genetics (e.g. from making 
 
the perfect fish to making the perfect baby). Genetic engineering provides a depth and 
 
breadth of research for students to dive into. As well, it is a subject that is both interesting 
 
and relevant to their lives. 
Thus, PSTs used popular texts to not only make science content relevant to students’ lives, but 
also uncovered and aligned the science concepts they found important in the popular texts to the 
science concepts they would be expected to teach in their future classrooms.  
 
 
Drawing from scientific concepts from The Hunger Games (i.e. implications of genetic 
engineering) and World War Z (i.e. pathogens, viral outbreaks, natural selection), PSTs then 
thoughtfully integrated literacy standards to support students’ science explorations. One student, 
Vincent, very intentionally supported students’ reading, writing, thinking throughout the inquiry 
process. In doing so, Vincent integrated the science performance expectation that students 
develop arguments from evidence regarding differential survival and reproduction with the 
literacy standard of drawing evidence from literary or informational texts to support analysis, 
reflection, and research (NGSS, 2013). As such, he created a Padlet (see Figure 1) to guide 
students in gathering evidence from multiple texts before, during, and after instruction in order to 
help them write a final persuasive argument to the World Health Organization (WHO).  
 
Figure 
1. 
PST’s 
padlet 
creation 
to 
guide 
students 
through 
inquiry 
project.


 
Cook and Dinkins 
           14 
Electronic Journal of Science Education                                                      ejse.southwestern.edu 
 
  
 
Vincent’s use of the World War Z text set the context for exploration (as seen in his introductory 
activities), but also provided excerpts for the students to dissect during the project as they read 
non-fiction resources to elucidate and extend the content. Vincent also leveraged the literary 
nature of the text (i.e. its “narrative structure” or structural framework that underlies the order 
and manner in which a narrative is presented) to motivate students and structure their inquiry 
experience. Using the text’s plot and structure, he challenged students to become “infected” with 
academic language, explaining that students must love “gnawledge” like zombies love brains. By 
asking students to create a plea for help to the WHO, he placed students in the position of 
characters and rewarded their success by unlocking the next steps in the assignment. While 
building academic vocabulary and ultimately writing a persuasive plea to the WHO, the project 


                                           Disciplinary Literacy Through Popular Fiction                   
           15 
Electronic Journal of Science Education                                                      ejse.southwestern.edu 
culminated by addressing the disciplinary core idea of a populations’ response to selection 
pressures.  
 
 
Some PSTs, however, attempted to incorporate too many performance expectations in 
their inquiry units, which were not always aligned well with their essential question. For 
example, Irene’s driving question for her inquiry project using The Hunger Games was for 
students to determine the role of government in regulating genetic engineering and safeguarding 
public health—a question directly related to the tension in the text regarding government control. 
The performance expectations she wished to address, however, were those of the specifics of the 
structure and function of DNA, gene expression, and recombinant DNA. Thus, the inquiry 
question did not align with the intended focus on specific disciplinary core ideas. This was 
problematic in that Irene’s choice of supporting non-fiction texts included information on genetic 
modification (i.e. cases of Bt-Corn and genetically engineered fish), but did not provide the 
policy documents or guidelines for policy analysis that would equip students to be able to 
address the driving question of the unit. While Irene’s inquiry unit could have inspired position 
taking based on learning about authentic cases of genetically modified organisms, neither the 
resources she provided nor the learning targets outlined would have adequately addressed her 
essential question.   
 
 
An additional finding regarding the ways in which popular fiction enabled PSTs to 
integrate science and literacy was related to the logistics of how they organized and utilized 
resources to support their units. Specifically, PSTs showcased numerous ways to incorporate 
disciplinary literacy practices into their scientific inquiry with regard to frequency of instruction 
and use of resources. The majority of PSTs utilized a project-based learning approach by having 
students conduct independent research to address a driving or essential question and develop a 
final culminating project. As described above, Vincent incorporated a Padlet technology that 
connected to World War Z at various points throughout the unit to guide students through their 
inquiry project. Two other students (Cassi and Irene) established a “Literacy Friday” during 
which they would revisit the popular culture text and continue with the unit over the course of 
the semester. Irene also employed the use of a literacy specialist to co-teach aspects of the text 
with her students. Her inclination to integrate subject areas was evident in her online posts in 
discussions about developing her inquiry project. Irene wrote, “I think this is something that 
could be taught across disciplines between English and content teachers so the kids get more 
exposure and practice.” Thus, the level of scaffolds to assist students in staying focused 
throughout the long units varied with regard to the types of supports (i.e. use of technology; 
embedding designated literacy time; use of partnering teachers).  
 
PSTs’ Instructional Choices  
 
In drawing connections among science and literacy standards, PSTs made selections 
about which literacy practices and assessment opportunities to employ in their inquiry unit. 
Below, we describe both the common patterns and unique approaches PSTs employed to utilize 
popular fiction as a springboard to connect disciplinary literacy and scientific inquiry. 
 
 
 
 


 
Cook and Dinkins 
           16 
Electronic Journal of Science Education                                                      ejse.southwestern.edu 
 
Science Literacy Practices 
 
From among a wealth of strategies modeled for them during the semester, PSTs chose to 
utilize similar instructional strategies (jigsaws3, KWL charts, think-pair-shares, read alouds, and 
vocabulary building strategies) in designing their inquiry units. While their choices of 
instructional methods often overlapped, the ways in which PSTs used the strategies differed with 
respect to their instructional goals and the scaffolds they provided for students. For example, as 
part of their course assignment, PSTs were required to choose nonfiction sources to explore the 
science in their novels. In doing so, all of them elected to pair these sources with a jigsaw 
strategy designed to promote exploration of the multiple dimensions of the science underscored 
in their popular fiction text. For example, using World War Z as his chosen novel, Jerome used 
the jigsaw as a starting point to hook students’ interest in the topic. His supporting articles 
highlighted how humans as a whole respond to catastrophic situations—serving as a springboard 
for discussion and providing a rationale for his inquiry unit, which focused on group survival 
strategies across the animal kingdom. All other PSTs, however, used the jigsaw to provide 
background and multiple perspectives of the topic. For example, Vincent (also using World War 
Z as his popular fiction text) included a jigsaw of three supporting articles describing recent viral 
outbreaks and human responses to help students develop petitions to the WHO for funding to 
fight the spread of a specific pathogen. In contrast to Jerome, Vincent’s jigsaw provided students 
an opportunity to build their understanding of potential solutions to viral outbreaks by exploring 
case studies of strategies used in the cholera outbreak in Haiti and the smallbox outbreak among 
Native Americans.  
 
 
In terms of differential scaffolds provided for students, several PSTs used read alouds of 
the nonfiction texts to help students learn what information scientists discern as important when 
they read (i.e. determining credibility, plausibility of results, developing vocabulary). Two of the 
PSTs explicitly scaffolded the reading process of students, though again did so in different ways. 
For example, before jigsawing articles with students, Cassi embedded explicit instruction on how 
to do a read aloud—mimicking the kinds of questions scientists ask themselves as they read. In 
her inquiry unit, she states, “I model for them [the students] how to break apart an article/reading 
for the essential information (an example of an ‘I do, we do, you do’)…they may be in a place to 
move right into the first article as part of a jigsaw reading.” In this way, Cassi provided explicit 
instruction on the elements in the articles students ought to be privileging as they read scientific 
text—a skill important for the students to develop before writing their own scientific article for 
their culminating project. Irene, however, chose nonfiction texts that represented multiple 
perspectives on genetic engineering and showcased different reading levels (based on, as she 
stated, “the students’ tested reading levels—this way it is challenging reading while not being 
unobtainable”). She asked the students to identify brick and mortar words4 in their texts and to 
participate in a think-pair-share to discuss the meaning of the text—ultimately creating a GIST 
statement about how the group summarizes and interprets the text. Although not explicitly 
teaching students how scientists read, Irene utilized literacy strategies to scaffold students’ 
meaning making of the texts and attended to differences in reading ability levels.   
                                                          
 
3 A two-level grouping structure in which students are first grouped to read and comprehend a common text and then regrouped as “experts” to 
discuss multiple texts addressing a common theme (Fisher & Frey, 2012). 
 
4 Brick words refers to discipline-specific terms like mitosis and chromosome while mortar words refers to more general words and phrases used 
to connect ideas and facilitate academic discussion like however, in conclusion, and evaluate (Zwiers, 2008). 


                                           Disciplinary Literacy Through Popular Fiction                   
           17 
Electronic Journal of Science Education                                                      ejse.southwestern.edu 
 
 
Aside from Irene, none of the PSTs addressed text complexity or difficulty to ensure all 
students would have reading material appropriate to their reading ability. Irene was the  only PST 
who held a teaching position during the course of the semester (she taught high school biology in 
the local school district), and  it may be that her privileging of differentiated reading material 
was a result of her experience in the classroom working with students of varying reading 
abilities. As such, the other PSTs relied on the assumption that students would have equal access 
to the nonfiction text and therefore did not address issues of complexity in the reading.  
 
 
PSTs did place heavy importance on vocabulary or what they termed in a group online 
post: “the prevalence of brick words4,” as indicated by their use of vocabulary developing 
strategies such as awareness charts, brick and mortar word identification, and word walls. In an 
online post, Vincent recognized “the main literacy challenge is going to be brick words - 
technical vocabulary” and opted to teach words explicitly, while Jerome approached the same 
challenge via whole class discussion of words based on context with the goal of helping students 
“be more critical readers and hopefully be able to re-read texts to find the meaning of words.” 
Despite this, we noted some PSTs themselves had difficult identifying brick and mortar words. 
Figure 2 showcases Vincent’s struggle to identify the brick and mortar words in his texts.  
 
 
Figure 2. PSTs’ identification of brick and mortar words and corresponding instructor 
comments. 
 
 
In employing strategies to expose and reinforce vocabulary, PSTs more frequently asked 
students to anticipate and identify important brick words by creating word walls students could 
develop and reference across the unit. Words walls and vocabulary awareness charts were 
selected strategies to support students in identifying brick words on which they needed to focus.  
The PSTs tended to focus more on the brick words, rather than the mortar words—so that in 
effect, they focused students’ attention on the vocabulary rather than the relationships among 
concepts. 


 
Cook and Dinkins 
           18 
Electronic Journal of Science Education                                                      ejse.southwestern.edu 
 
 
Assessment 
 
PSTs approached the assessment component of their inquiry project by incorporating one 
or more of the literacy goals of reading, writing, or communicating. In their culminating 
activities, PSTs asked students to develop argumentation either by presenting their positioning 
on topics they independently researched, writing a scientific position piece, or identifying the 
central tenets from multiple texts to develop a critical response. For example, in Irene’s 
assessment, she asked students to develop a critical response to their readings by identifying 
vocabulary (i.e. dissecting brick and mortar words in the texts) and by incorporating multiple 
citations to connect their critical responses to the data they have gathered in their jigsawed 
readings. In doing so, Irene had students develop GIST statements as they read multiple texts to 
answer the central question of the governments’ role in genetic engineering. As an additional 
formative support during the unit, students participated in think-pair-shares of their 
understanding of text and complete vocabulary self-awareness charts to determine their level of 
understanding of key terms. Irene’s final assessment, then, incorporated both communication and 
reading aspects of literacy.  
 
 
The PSTs’ inquiry designs for assessment varied with regard to ways in which explicit 
literacy instruction helped support students’ success. In their online discussions during class, 
PSTs asserted writing is important to science meaning making. For example, Anton wrote, “Our 
group agreed that a student could write well in one subject but struggle in another because 
writing in different content areas is very different.” Despite this sentiment, however, he did not 
actively scaffold opportunities for his students to practice scientific writing. In his culminating 
activity, Anton provided a rubric for students’ research presentations on widespread epidemics’ 
effects on human behavior. In the rubric, other than ‘writing mechanics’ (i.e. grammatical 
correctness and organization), no other focus on literacy was included. Consequently, no clear 
focus on what constitutes scientific writing (i.e. determining credibility or identifying/critiquing 
claims and evidence) was present in the unit. 
 
 
In contrast, Cassi supported students’ writing throughout the inquiry unit by providing 
many opportunities for students to both practice writing and critique scientific writing. In her 
inquiry project plans, she wrote: 
 
I plan to include informal writing projects…during the teaching of content and following 
 
all their readings to increase their learning [of scientific literacy skills] before they 
 
embark on writing their article [i.e. culminating project]...it will help scaffold their 
 
reading and writing for the project.   
Cassi’s use of literacy strategies served as an important scaffold to student writing, which she 
believed teachers “don't emphasize enough” in science classrooms. In her online posts during the 
development of her inquiry project, she wrote, “There are many literacy strategies that can serve 
as formative/summative assessments.” Cassi’s intentional focus on developing students’ literacy 
skills and providing multiple opportunities for pre-writing should help to ensure the students’ can 
successfully write their scientific article. The PSTs who, like Cassi, provided a clear set of 
scaffolds to guide their students toward a successful culminating project employed literacy 
strategies prior to, during, and at the end of the multifaceted inquiry project.  
 
 


                                           Disciplinary Literacy Through Popular Fiction                   
           19 
Electronic Journal of Science Education                                                      ejse.southwestern.edu 
Discussion Related to the Teaching & Learning of Science 
 
 In considering the first research question about the ways in which pre-service teachers 
used popular fiction to draw connections among curricular standards, note the potential for text 
to be leveraged throughout the inquiry process. Consistent with Moje (2004; 2008) and others’ 
(Alvermann, 2011; Norris & Phillips, 2003) call for popular culture text to bridge the third space 
between home and school, PSTs readily chose texts in which teens would have strong interest. 
The choice PSTs made to focus on texts associated with film genre (both The Hunger Games and 
World War Z were developed into blockbuster movies) increased accessibility to the popular 
culture third space. Cultural referents such as zombies and ‘muttagens’ served as entry points to 
evoke student engagement into the science inquiry. Consistent with Yager’s (2004) idea about 
text providing the context to wonder about science, PSTs approached the task of building their 
inquiries using the popular culture text to support engagement and build off of students’ 
interests.  PSTs employed popular fiction as a hook by drawing relevance to students’ lives and 
setting the parameters for the inquiry unit (i.e. content to be studied, external resources, 
guiding/essential question, and culminating project). This instructional decision reflected the 
ways in which text could act as a starting point for the inquiry process whereby students actively 
and critically evaluate and develop questions about scientific concepts.  
 
 
In some instances, PSTs went beyond using the popular culture text as merely an 
engagement tool and did what Cervetti et al. (2006) describe as tandem use of text and inquiry 
processes. For example, Vincent’s use of the narrative structure of the text itself enabled him to 
scaffold and assess students’ experiences throughout the inquiry process. Similarly, Cassi and 
Irene use their text to structure an extended exploration of broader socio-scientific issues during 
their Literacy Friday platform in which they revisited the popular text throughout the semester to 
enrich student learning. In these instances, PSTs showcased how textual resources can be used 
before, during, and after inquiry experiences to not only engage students but also provide an 
anchor for instruction and reflection throughout extended units.  
 
 
In terms of literacy instructional practices, PSTs tended to adopt strategies that had been 
discussed or modeled by the instructor. All PSTs relied on the jigsaw structure and central 
questions to provoke a critical argument, both of which were modeled for them. The jigsaw 
structure facilitated the use of multiple texts while the central question set a purpose for 
negotiating a more nuanced understanding of content. Shanahan (2013) asserts that the use of 
multiple texts promotes critical thinking and enables students to mimic the reading behaviors of 
disciplinary experts. These choices indicate that PSTs valued literacy as an authentic process of 
collaborative meaning-making (Barton, Hamilton, & Ivanovic, 2005) and understood how to 
push students to read, think, listen, and speak critically about science concepts across a range of 
texts.  
 
 
In this  investigation of the ways in which pre-service teachers foster disciplinary literacy 
through instructional practices that incorporate popular fiction, several opportunities for teacher 
preparation programs to better support PSTs in honing literacy skills important in science 
teaching were noted. First, while PSTs succeeded in selecting engaging and relevant popular 
fiction texts, they needed more instruction in how to select nonfiction texts that provide adequate 
scaffolds. Some participants  incorporated too many performance expectations that were not 
always well-aligned with the essential question. In these instances, driving question prompts 


 
Cook and Dinkins 
           20 
Electronic Journal of Science Education                                                      ejse.southwestern.edu 
jumped from micro-processes to government control and ethics. It is problematic to propel 
students into higher-level synthesis and evaluation of complex topics such without the proper 
scaffolds (Cook, Buck, & Park Rogers, 2012). The selection of nonfiction sources needed further 
development with PSTs, and they need opportunities to hone the ability to choose texts that best 
underscore educational  aims in the inquiry as well as those that incorporate a range of 
perspectives. Specifically, scaffolds can include selection of supporting materials and 
opportunities to explore multiple data based viewpoints to encourage discussion and debate. As 
indicated above, some PSTs scaffolded their inquiry units well by explicitly referencing the 
popular fiction throughout the unit so that students were exploring the nonfiction sources in the 
context of the essential question. Using a narrative structure, Vincent used the popular fiction as 
a ‘touchstone text5’ to ensure students did not lose the connection to the driving question when 
exploring nonfiction texts.   
 
 
How PSTs selected and taught vocabulary reveals a second implication for teacher 
educators. Science texts have a high level of “lexical density” (Shanahan & Shanahan, 2008, p. 
53), and PSTs recognized this characteristic as inherent to science literacy. Academic language 
includes both brick and mortar words (Zwiers, 2008). Brick words enable students to name key 
concepts, while mortar words enable students to connect ideas and develop academic 
discussions. Mortar words are essential to students’ expressive vocabulary as they put the brick 
words into communicative action. Here, PSTs gravitated to brick words (i.e. pathogen, 
biosphere, mutation) by identifying a significant number of terms to teach as part of their inquiry 
projects. Although PSTs planned to teach these words through explicit instruction, they 
neglected to consider how multiple interactions with words supports student learning. Weinburgh 
and Silva’s (2010; Silva, Weinburgh, Smith, Malloy, & Marshall, 2012) 5R model, provides an 
instructional framework that uses inquiry to teach academic language and offers students rich 
interactions with new terminology. Because this model prioritizes the role of science 
experiences, student learning is anchored in authentic and repeated interactions with scientific 
terminology. Additionally, the fifth R, reload, enables students to leverage their inquiry 
experience to make deeper meaning of each new word (Silva, Weinburgh, & Smith, 2013). This 
‘reloading’ prioritizes student understanding and communicating with academic language in 
science.     
 
PSTs also struggled to identify useful mortar terms when selecting key vocabulary for 
their inquiry projects. The potential effect of this imbalance is an over-emphasis on receptive 
comprehension without fostering students’ ability to communicate about and with the same key 
ideas. This tendency indicates that PSTs need support in identifying appropriate mortar 
vocabulary for scientific texts and strategies for how to teach these terms. Concept mapping with 
a specific emphasis on labeling relationships is important in science vocabulary development. As 
noted in literature on mapping, the existence of the important links on a concept map indicates 
whether the student knows that there are relationships among those concepts (Yin, Vanides, 
Ruiz-Primo, Ayala, & Shavelson, 2005). Some other strategies might include: teacher educators 
modeling text-dissection with an explicit emphasis on the use of mortar words, examining key 
sentences then substituting different prepositions or connecting terms to clarify their function, 
                                                          
 
5 Texts used as models of structure, language, and writing craft (Wood Ray, 1999).  


                                           Disciplinary Literacy Through Popular Fiction                   
           21 
Electronic Journal of Science Education                                                      ejse.southwestern.edu 
and/or focusing PSTs’ thinking about mortar terms by asking them to seek out the mortar terms 
prior to identifying any brick terms.    
 
 
Finally, PSTs’ approaches to writing in science also lacked strategic instruction. All PSTs 
valued writing and found it essential to teaching science; they incorporated writing goals as part 
of their inquiry project and their online discussions acknowledged that science writing posed 
unique challenges for students. This understanding, however, did not translate into effective 
instructional practices for teaching writing. Cassi included scaffolding to support the production 
of a final writing product while all other PSTs assigned writing without preparing students to 
succeed in this task. This finding echoes extant research indicating that PSTs need explicit 
instruction on writing in science through different genres (Pytash, 2013; Hand & Prain, 2002). 
Science writing encompasses explanatory, descriptive, and argumentative purposes in a variety 
of forms (i.e. lab reports, research articles, lay explanations); thus, PSTs need experience 
analyzing and modeling these forms and purposes. Some strategies might include: teacher-
educators modeling use of concept maps as prewriting tools and practicing the use of mortar 
terms in writing, the use of sensory details to create objective descriptions, teaching students how 
to compose cause and effect sequences, and supporting students’ development of scientific 
arguments through use of scaffold such as the claims, evidence, reasoning framework (proposed 
by Zembal-Saul, McNeill, & Hershberger, 2013). 
 
 
Overall, PSTs incorporated a range of literacy practices that attempted to address the 
demands of reading, writing, and communicating in science. PSTs paired popular fiction and 
nonfiction texts to facilitate collaborative practices focused on comprehending and interpreting 
science concepts through reading and discussion. PSTs were less successful in utilizing practices 
to foster written expression of key ideas. Science concepts identified through the popular fiction 
texts offered potentially rich writing opportunities, but PSTs were unsure of how to scaffold and 
explicitly teach scientific writing. In our future research, we will follow students into the field 
(i.e. classroom setting) to investigate the implementation of their developed curricula and 
provide opportunities for practice and refinement of their skills.  
 
 
Without positioning literacy as a bully in the science curriculum or overly additive to the 
science curriculum, PSTs illustrated there are numerous ways to logistically structure scientific 
inquiry to include and authentically underscore science disciplinary literacy. By employing the 
use of technology, partnering teachers, and designated ‘Literacy Fridays,’ PSTs showcased their 
ability to find space to connect literacy and scientific inquiry—an indication there are many 
creative ways to privilege both in the science classroom (Cervetti et al., 2006). Thus, asking 
PSTs to develop inquiries around popular fiction text not only supported their building of 
disciplinary literacy, but also legitimized the place for popular culture text in the formal 
classroom. As noted in previous research (Marsh, 2005), PSTs tend to hesitate bringing popular 
fiction into the formal classroom for fear it will be perceived as too divergent from the official 
curriculum. In this content area reading course, however, popular fiction text took a central role 
in the development of scientific inquiries that aimed to integrate science and literacy content and 
practices. In doing so, literacy practices became a buddy, rather than a bully to support deeper 
engagement with the texts and connections to science content.   
 
 
 


 
Cook and Dinkins 
           22 
Electronic Journal of Science Education                                                      ejse.southwestern.edu 
References 
Almerico, G. (2011). Secondary content area reading: Challenging sell for professors in teacher 
 
education programs. Research in Higher Education Journal,1-16.  
Alvermann, D.E., Phelps, S.F., & Gillis, V.R. (2010). Content reading and literacy: Succeeding 
 
in today’s diverse classrooms (6th edition), Boston: Allyn & Bacon. 
Alvermann, D. E. (2011). Popular culture and literacy practices. In M.L. Kamil, P. D. Pearson, 
 
E. B. Moje, & P. P. Afflerbach (Eds.), Handbook of Reading Research: Volume IV , pp. 
 
541-560. New York: Routledge/Taylor & Francis Group.] 
Cervetti, G., Pearson, P.D., Bravo, M.A., Barber, J. (2006). Reading and writing in the service of 
 
inquiry-based science. In R. Douglas, M. Klentschy, and K. Worth (Eds.), Linking science 
 
and literacy in the K-8 classroom [pp. 221-244]. Arlington, VA: NSTA Press. 
Cook, K. & Dinkins, E. (in press). Using popular text to develop inquiry projects: Supporting 
 
pre-service teachers' knowledge of disciplinary literacy. Journal of College Science 
 
Teaching. 
Cook, K., Buck, G., & Park Rogers, M. (2012). Preparing educators to teach evolution in  
 
a project-based approach. The Science Educator, 21, 44-56.  
Coombs, D. (2013). Fiction and nonfiction: A symbiotic relationship. The ALAN Review, 41, 7- 
 
15.    
Cunningham, J. (1982). Generating interactions between schemata and text. In J. A. Niles & L.  
A. Harris (Eds.), New inquiries in reading research and instruction (pp. 42–47).  
B. Washington, DC: National Reading Conference. 
Czerneda, J. (2006). Science fiction and scientific literacy: Incorporating science fiction reading 
 
into the science classroom. The Science Teacher, 2, 38-42. 
Fang, Z. (2013). Disciplinary literacy in science: Developing science literacy through trade  
 
books. Journal of Adolescent & Adult Literacy, 57, 274-278. 
Fang, Z., Lamme, L., Pringle, R., Patrick, J., Sander, J., Zmach, C., Charbonnet, C., & 
 
Henkel, M. (2008). Integrating reading into middle school science: What we did, found, 
 
and learned. International Journal of Science Education, 30, 15, 2067-2089. 
Fang, Z., & Schleppegrell, M. J. (2008). Reading in secondary content areas. Ann Arbor, MI: 
 
University of Michigan Press. 
Fisher, D. & Frey, N. (2012). Improving Adolescent Literacy: Content Area Strategies at Work  
 
(3rd ed.). Boston, MA: Pearson.  
Gee, J. P (2004). Language in the science classroom: Academic social languages as the heart of  
 
school-based literacy. In E. W. Saul (Ed.), Crossing borders in literacy and science  
 
instruction (pp. 13-32). Arlington, VA: NSTA Press. 
Greenleaf, C., et al., (2009). Integrating literacy and science instruction in high school biology: 
 
Impact on teacher practice, student engagement, and student achievement. Final report to 
 
NSF, Grant #0440379 (2009), available at 
 
 
www.wested.org/sli/downloads/nsf-final-report.pdf. 
Hand, B., & Prain, V. (2002). Influences of writing tasks on students’ answers to recall and 
 
higher-level test questions. Research in Science Education, 32, 19–34. 
Keys, C. (2000). Investigating the thinking processes of eighth grade writers during the 
 
composition of a scientific laboratory report. Journal of Research in Science teaching 37, 
 
7, 676-690. 
Lee, O., Quinn, H., & Valdés, G. (2013). Science and language for English Language 
 
Learners in relation to Next Generation Science Standards and with implications for 


                                           Disciplinary Literacy Through Popular Fiction                   
           23 
Electronic Journal of Science Education                                                      ejse.southwestern.edu 
 
Common Core State Standards for English Language Arts and Mathematics. 
 
Educational Researcher, 42, 4, 223-233. 
Marsh, E., Butler, A., & Umanath, S. (2012). Using fictional sources in the classroom: 
 
Applications from cognitive psychology. Educational Psychological Review, 24, 449–469.  
Marsh, J. (2005). Tightropes, tactics and taboos: Preservice teachers’ beliefs and practices in 
 
relation to popular culture and literacy. In J. Marsh & E. Millard(Eds.), Popular literacies, 
 
childhood and schooling (pp. 179-199). London:RoutledgeFalmer. 
Moje, E. B., Ciechanowski, K. M., Kramer, K., Ellis, L., Carillo, R., & Collazo, T. (2004). 
 
Working toward a third space in content area literacy: An examination of everyday funds 
 
of knowledge and discourse. Reading Research Quarterly, 39, 38-70.  
Moje, E. B. (2008). Youth cultures, literacies, and identities in and out of school. In J.Flood, S. 
 
B. Heath, & D. Lapp (Eds.), Handbook of research on teaching literacythrough the 
 
communicative and visual arts (Vol. II, pp. 207-219). New York:Erlbaum/Taylor & 
 
Francis Group. 
Norris, S. P., & Phillips, L. M. (2003). How literacy in its fundamental sense is central to 
 
scientific literacy. Science Education, 87(2), 224-240.  
Peacock, A. & Gates, S. (2000). Newly qualified primary teachers’ perceptions of the roles of 
 
text materials in teaching science. Research in Science & Technological Education, 18(2), 
 
155-171. 
Pearson, P. (2010). Literacy and science: Each in the service of the other. Science, 328, 450-463. 
Pytash, K. (2013). Secondary preservice teachers’ development of teaching scientific writing. 
 
Journal of Science Teacher Education, 24, 793-810. 
Shanahan, T., & Shanahan, C. (2008). Teaching disciplinary literacy to adolescents: Rethinking 
 
content area literacy. Harvard Education Review, 78, 40–59. 
Shanahan, T., & Shanahan, C. (2012). What is disciplinary literacy and why does it matter?.  
 
Topics in Language Disorders, 32(1), 7-18. 
Shanahan, C. (2013). The why and how of multiple texts in middle and high school classrooms  
 
6-12 [Webinar]. In National Center for Literacy Education Webinar.  
Silva, C., Weinburgh, M. H. & Smith, K. H. (2013). Not just good science teaching: 
 
supporting academic language development. Voices in the Middle, 20, 3, 34-42. 
Silva, C., Weinburgh, M.H., Smith, K., Malloy, R. & Marshall (Nettles), J. (2012). 
 
Toward integration: A model of science and literacy. Childhood Education,  88, 2, 91-95. 
van den Broek, P. (2010). Using texts in science education: Cognitive processes and knowledge 
 
representation. Science, 328, 453-456. 
Weinburgh, M.H & Silva, C. (2012). An Instructional Theory for English Language 
 
Learners: The 5R Model for Enhancing Academic Language Development in 
 
Inquiry-Based Science. In Irby, B.J., Brown, G., Lara-Alecio, R. (Eds.). and J.