2
Asia Paciﬁc    |   Europe   |   North America   |   Middle East         
In response to the national GBA development 
strategy, KWM established the KWM International 
Center in the GBA on 28 April 2018 to better 
serve the clients and continuously promote its 
international development strategy. Backed by 
KWM Shenzhen, Guangzhou, Hong Kong and 
Sanya offices, KWM International Center will 
closely follow the market demand in the GBA, 
connect and release the KWM global network 
resources and focus on the business areas with 
strong market demand including the “Belt and 
Road”/“Going Global”, high-end financial services, 
private equity/venture capital, capital market, 
unicorn, intellectual property protection, and 
cross-border dispute resolution.
KWM Hong Kong office currently has nearly 
240 lawyers and other legal professionals. Many 
partners and lawyers are licensed to practice law 
in multiple jurisdictions and well versed in cross-
border transactions. In addition to provision of 
services under the laws of Hong Kong SAR, 
Australia, the UK, the US and other jurisdictions, 
KWM Hong Kong team deeply understands the 
needs of Chinese enterprises in respect of culture 
and operation/management and is able to leverage 
the extensive international experience to provide 
all-round services in all aspects of banking and 
financing, corporate, private equity, M&A 
and commercial affairs, competition, 
trade and regulation, international fund, 
securities and capital market, dispute 
resolution and litigation/arbitration, 
construction disputes, projects, energy 
and resources, real estate, etc.
KWM has two offices in South China – 
Shenzhen office and Guangzhou office. 
The Shenzhen office was established 
in 1998 and has over 200 lawyers and 
other legal professionals; the Guangzhou 
office was founded in 2002 and gathers 
more than 160 lawyers and other 
legal professionals. These two offices 
provide a full range of legal services 
covering foreign investment, overseas 
investment, M&A and restructuring, 
banking and project financing, listing, 
wealth management and trust, 
international and domestic dispute 
resolution, bankruptcy & liquidation, IP 
and regulatory compliance, etc., and 
have received recognition from the 
market and the industry for their high 
quality and professional legal services. 
KWM Shenzhen and Guangzhou offices 
KWM
International
Center
have advised on numerous 
representative and high-profile 
projects and cases in the GBA 
area and across China, and are 
committed to providing one-
stop and comprehensive legal 
services for clients during the 
implementation of the GBA 
Outline Plan.
As an international law firm 
with over 2,900 lawyers in 29 
locations around the world, KWM 
is able to provide legal services 
covering laws in PRC, the 
UK, the US, Hong Kong SAR, 
Australia, Germany, Italy, etc. 
and our presence and resources 
in the world’s most dynamic 
economies are profound. 
Leveraging exceptional legal 
expertise, KWM is ready to assist 
clients to unleash all their growth 
potentials in Asia and the world 
beyond by advising both Chinese 
and foreign clients on a full 
spectrum of domestic and cross-
border transactions. 


3
Financial Markets
The Hong Kong Monetary Authority Launches the 
Green and Sustainable Finance Grant Scheme
SFC’s Consultation Paper on bookbuilding and 
placing activities in ECM and DCM transactions
Cross-boundary Mortgage under the New GBA Policy
Cross-border asset transfer under the new GBA 
policy
Wealth Management Connect (Southbound) under 
the new GBA policy
Analysis of the Wealth Management Connect 
Framework
Developments for Hong Kong insurance linked 
securities
Merger of two Bond Markets in China? - from a 
foreign perspective
New trend of financial development in Macau SAR: 
highlights from the First Policy Address of the New 
Chief Executive
Macao - a new option for Mainland leasing 
companies to build an overseas presence
Funds
Hong Kong fund industry updates: Carried interest 
tax concession regime and the OFC and REIT Grant 
Scheme
Introduction of the Hong Kong Limited Partnership 
Fund regime
IRD practice note DIPN 61
SFC introduces enhancements to further promote the 
OFC regime
Is Hong Kong SAR ready for its own limited 
partnership fund regime?
Practical guides on orphan SPV repackaging 
transactions for Hong Kong SAR and China Mainland 
clients
Dispute Resolution
Interpretation of the Supreme People’s Court’s 
Opinion on Taking Forward a Pilot Measure in relation 
to the Recognition of and Assistance to Insolvency 
Proceedings in the Hong Kong Special Administrative 
Region
02  
07  
09  
18  
 
22   
  
25   
30  
 
33   
39
41  
 
48
   
51 
  
56  
60  
 
64  
 
71   
78 
  
82  
 
86 
88 
102
   
105
    
111   
116     
122  
 
125  
  
130   
  
137 
   
139     
   
142
    
144   
CONTENTS
Applying for enforcement of Mainland awards in 
Hong Kong SAR under the Arbitration Ordinance 
2021
Another major breakthrough: Mutual assistance in 
cross-border insolvency between China Mainland 
and Hong Kong SAR
IPO & Listing
Chinese domestic enterprises’ path to REIT 
offerings and listings in Hong Kong SAR
HKEx publishes consultation conclusion and 
guidance to amend the Listing Rules on the listing 
of debt securities offered to professional investors
One of the drivers for seeking secondary listing in 
Hong Kong SAR - exemption from the Hong Kong 
Listing Rules 
Analysis of IPOs of biopharma companies in Hong 
Kong SAR (for sponsors)
Analysis of IPOs of biopharma companies in Hong 
Kong SAR (for issuers)
Compliance
ESG Guide in effect: key points of “mandatory 
disclosure”
How should companies report on environmental 
matters under the new ESG reporting regulations 
of the HKEx?
How to carry out anti-monopoly compliance in 
the Asia-Pacific Region? - Comparison between 
Hong Kong SAR’s Competition Ordinance and the 
Mainland’s AML
The first parallel importation case in Guangzhou IP 
Court closed: no trademark infringement; no unfair 
competition
Obligations and issues from an employment law 
perspective in Hong Kong SAR after COVID-19 
outbreak
Investment Frontier
New investment insights: how to set up a company 
in Macau SAR
Developments in the aviation industry in the 
Greater Bay Area
In this publication, any reference to Hong Kong, Macao and Taiwan shall be construed as a reference to the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of the PRC, 
the Macao Special Administrative Region of the PRC and the Taiwan region of the PRC.


6


1
On 18 February 2019, the Central Committee of the Communist Party 
of China and the State Council issued the Outline Development Plan for 
the Guangdong-Hong Kong-Macao Greater Bay Area (the “Outline”). The 
Outline states that “as one of the most open and economically vibrant 
regions in China, the Greater Bay Area (GBA) plays a significant strategic 
role in the overall development of the country. The development of the 
GBA is not only a new attempt to break new ground in pursuing opening 
up on all fronts in a new era, but also a further step in taking forward the 
practice of ‘one country, two systems’.” 
As a leading international law firm headquartered in Asia, we are always 
committed to opening doors and unlocking opportunities for our clients 
as they look to Asian markets to unleash their full potential. As early as 
July 2017, King & Wood Mallesons (KWM) established a GBA execution 
team, and in April 2018, we decided to establish the KWM International 
Center in the GBA. As a strategic move, KWM International Center builds 
on the firm’s offices in Shenzhen, Guangzhou, Hong Kong and in Hainan 
to connect and unleash KWM’s global resources, actively participate in 
the Belt and Road projects, and seize the opportunities presented by the 
development of the GBA and the Hainan Free Trade Port, striving to build 
an important growth pole for KWM’s future development.
Since November 2018, KWM has published the Law and Practice in the 
Greater Bay Area (I) and (II), comprising more than 30 articles on topics 
such as introduction to the GBA, review of the Outline, infrastructure, 
finance, capital markets, corporate compliance, intellectual property, 
dispute resolution, and corporate mergers and acquisitions. We hope 
that the publications can help our clients and partners better understand 
the relevant regulations and policies in the GBA and grasp the market 
opportunities in the area. 
According to the Outline, the GBA is strategically positioned as a vibrant 
world-class city cluster, a globally influential international innovation 
and technology hub, an important support pillar for the Belt and Road 
Initiative, a showcase for in-depth cooperation between the Mainland 
and Hong Kong SAR and Macao SAR, and a quality living circle for living, 
working and travelling. 
We have noticed that, according to the strategic positioning defined in 
the Outline, a transportation circle is taking shape with one-hour access 
between major cities in the GBA, two-hour access from major cities to 
prefecture-level cities in Guangdong Province, and three-hour access 
from major cities to neighboring provincial capital cities.
According to relevant departments, the total operating mileage of 
railways in the GBA has so far exceeded 2,200 km, of which the high-
speed rail and urban rail transit mileage reached 1,200 km and 1,000 
km, respectively. By 2025, the railway networks in operation and under 
construction in the GBA will reach 4,700 km, fully covering the GBA 
central cities, node cities and key metropolitan areas such as Guangzhou 
and Shenzhen. In addition, boundary crossing facilities have been built 
for operation in the GBA, and the “co-location arrangement”, a “joint 
boundary control system” and other innovative customs clearance 
modes have been implemented. As the GBA cities accelerate the 
construction of transportation infrastructure, the efficiency of customs 
clearance has been continuously improved, and the area sees more 
frequent internal exchanges and closer connections.
In terms of science and technology innovation, the Outline of the 14th 
Five-Year Plan for National Economic and Social Development of the 
People's Republic of China and the Long-Range Objectives Through the 
Year 2035 introduced this year proposes to support the formation of an 
international innovation and technology center in the GBA; strengthen the 
coordinated development of industries, academia and research institutes 
in the GBA; improve the “Two Corridors and Two Poles” framework 
system which consists of the Guangzhou-Shenzhen-Hong Kong and 
Guangzhou-Zhuhai-Macao Innovation and Technology Corridors and the 
Shenzhen-Hong Kong Loop and Guangdong-Macao-Hengqin Innovation 
and Technology Poles; promote the construction of an integrated national 
science center, and facilitate the cross-boundary flow of innovation 
factors.
In terms of finance, in May 2020, the People’s Bank of China (PBOC), 
the China Banking and Insurance Regulatory Commission, the China 
Securities Regulatory Commission and the State Administration of 
Foreign Exchange issued the Opinions on Financial Support for the 
Development of the Guangdong-Hong Kong-Macao Greater Bay Area 
(the “Opinions”). The Opinions provides four general principles, namely, 
serving the real economy, promoting cooperation for mutual benefit 
and win-win situation, being market-oriented, and preventing systemic 
financial risks. The Opinions also puts forward relevant opinions and 
specific measures in respect of enhancing the convenience of financing 
in the GBA, expanding the opening up of the financial industry and 
deepening the financial cooperation between the Mainland and Hong 
Kong or Macao, facilitating the interconnection between financial 
markets and financial infrastructure, improving the innovation of financial 
services in the GBA, and preventing cross-boundary financial risks. 
In June 2020, the PBOC, the Hong Kong Monetary Authority and the 
Monetary Authority of Macao issued the Joint Announcement on Launch 
of Cross-boundary Wealth Management Connect Pilot Scheme in 
Guangdong-Hong Kong-Macao Greater Bay Area. The “Cross-boundary 
Wealth Management Connect” (Cross-boundary WMC) allows eligible 
Mainland, Hong Kong and Macao residents in the GBA to make use 
of the channel provided by the scheme to invest in diversified wealth 
management products across the boundary. The Cross-boundary WMC 
is an important initiative to improve the financial cooperation between 
the Mainland, and Hong Kong and Macao. It will help build a quality life 
circle in the GBA and facilitate cross-boundary investment by individual 
residents. It will also promote the opening-up of the Mainland’s financial 
markets as well as the mutual social and economic development of the 
Mainland, and Hong Kong and Macao.
Furthermore, relevant Mainland authorities have also introduced many 
specific initiatives to implement the Outline in areas such as culture 
and tourism, transportation, postal services, taxation, medicine, and 
qualification accreditation of professionals. These initiatives will surely 
provide strong support for interconnection and integration among cities 
in the GBA.
We will continue to focus on the developments of the GBA and help our 
clients and partners seize business opportunities in the GBA and Asia.
Wang Lixin
PREFACE


2
On 4 May 2021, the Hong Kong Monetary Authority (HKMA) announced the details and eligibility criteria for the three-
year Green and Sustainable Finance Grant Scheme (the HK New Scheme). This article seeks to describe the HK New 
Scheme and makes a comparison of the Hong Kong scheme with Singapore’s previously implemented Global-Asia 
Bond Grant (G-ABG) scheme and Sustainable Bonds Grant (SBG) scheme. As these schemes involve the listing of 
bonds on local exchanges, the listing requirements for bonds issued to professional investors in the two exchanges are 
also included here for your reference.
I. The HK New Scheme, the G-ABG scheme and the SBG scheme
The HK New Scheme aims to support the issuance of green and sustainable bonds and loans to further enrich the 
ecology of green and sustainable finance in Hong Kong. The HK New Scheme was created by integrating the Pilot 
Bond Grant Scheme and the Green Bond Grant Scheme, filling the gap left by the expiry of the latter two schemes. 
The HK New Scheme, which lasts for three years, consists of two tracks, covering: (1) half of the eligible expenses (e.g. 
arrangement, legal, audit, and listing fees) per green and sustainable bond issuance (capped at HKD 2.5 million and 
HKD 1.25 million), respectively, where the bond, its issuer or its guarantor(s) possess a credit rating; and (2) the grant 
amount for external review fees is capped at HKD 800,000 per bond issuance.
The Monetary Authority of Singapore (MAS) started to implement the G-ABG in 2020. The G-ABG scheme is a 
continuation and extension of Singapore’s previously implemented Asian Bond Grant Scheme (ABG) after its expiry. 
Compared with the first part of the HK New Scheme, the G-ABG scheme is not limited to green and sustainable bonds. 
In addition, the Sustainable Bond Grant Scheme (SBG) was launched in February 2019 and later extended and renewed 
in November 2020. Qualifying issuers may receive grant under both the G-ABG and SBG schemes, or apply for grant 
under either one of them.
By comparison, the first part of the HK New Scheme is more similar to the G-ABG scheme in terms of grants for bond 
issuance expenses, while the second part of the HK New Scheme is similar to the SBG scheme. We have prepared a 
summary comparison of the two accordingly for your consideration.
The Hong Kong Monetary Authority Launches 
the Green and Sustainable Finance Grant 
Scheme
KWM Hong Kong DCM team
FINANCIAL MARKETS


3
Grant for bond issue under the Green and 
Sustainable Finance Grant Scheme
 (Track 1 of the HK New Scheme)
Global-Asia Bond Grant 
(G-ABG)
Eligible issuers
First-time green and sustainable bond issuers 
are issuers
1 that have not issued green and 
sustainable bonds in Hong Kong in the rolling 
five-year period prior to the bond’s pricing date
2.
First-time
3 companies and non-bank financial 
institutions with an Asian Nexus
4
Qualifying criteria
Having procured pre-issuance external review 
services related to the bond issue that is provided 
by a HKMA-recognised external reviewer
N/A (need not be green or sustainable bonds)
Number of grants
Each issuer can apply for a grant for at most two 
green and sustainable bond issuances.
Each issuer may obtain a grant for each issuance of 
bonds with an initial principal amount of either less 
than or more than USD 1 billion (or its equivalent in 
another currency) on a one-time basis
Grant amount
50% of the eligible expenses (including fees to or 
in relation to Hong Kong-based arrangers, Hong 
Kong based legal advisors, Hong Kong-based 
auditors and accountants, Hong Kong-based 
rating agencies, SEHK listing and CMU lodging 
and clearing), up to the following limits:
•	HKD 2.5 million where the bond, its issuer or 
its guarantor(s) possess a credit rating by a 
rating agency recognised by the HKMA; or 
•	HKD 1.25 million where none of the bond, its 
issuer or its guarantor(s) possess a credit rating 
by a rating agency recognised by the HKMA
50% of the eligible expenses (referring to business 
spending made to Singapore-based providers, 
including fees to or relating to arrangers, auditors, 
credit ratings, legal  listing agent, and listing)
5, up to 
the following limits:
•	SGD 800,000 where the initial principal amount 
issued is at least USD1 billion (or its equivalent in 
another currency) where the qualifying issuance 
is rated by a credit rating agency regulated by 
the MAS; or SGD 400,000 where the qualifying 
issuance is unrated
•	SGD 400,000 for all other issuances where they 
are rated by a credit rating agency regulated by 
the MAS; or SGD 200,000 for all other issuances 
where they are unrated
Maturity
N/A
At least 1 year
Qualifying issuance 
size
Having an issuance size of at least HKD 1.5 
billion (or the equivalent in foreign currency)
The initial principal amount issued is at least SGD 
200 million (or its equivalent in another currency) 
6
Qualifying 
currencies
N/A
Refer to all Asia local currencies
7 and the G3 
currencies (USD/EUR/JPY)
Arrangers and 
relevant expense 
allocation 
requirements 
Issued in Hong Kong: A bond is considered 
issued in Hong Kong if half or more of the 
involved lead arranger(s) are recognised 
arrangers.
More than half of the gross revenue from arranging 
the issue is attributable to Financial Sector Incentive 
(FSI) companies in Singapore
Listing as well 
as lodging and 
clearing criteria
Being lodged with and cleared by the Central 
Moneymarkets Unit (CMU) operated by the 
HKMA in its entirety, or being listed on the Stock 
Exchange of Hong Kong Limited (SEHK)
Being listed on the Singapore Exchange (SGX)
1In the HK New Scheme, the term “issuer” denotes the entity issuing a bond and the entity’s associate(s). The term “associate” refers to (i) a person/corporation over 
which the issuer has control; (ii) a person/corporation which has control over the issuer; or (iii) a person/corporation that is under the control of the same person/
corporation as the issuer.
2Issuers who have issued only non-green and sustainable bonds during the five-year period will still be eligible.
3This includes issuers who have not filed a Return on Debt Securities (RoDS) in the five calendar years from 2012 to 2016. 
4This include issuers (i) with global headquarters in Asia; (ii) with business operations or projects in Asia; or (iii) who are issuing in any Asian local currency, etc.
5In the case of a SGD-denominated issuance, credit rating fees shall be funded at a level of 100%.
6Or where the grant applicant will qualify for the SGB, a programme size of at least SGD 200 million with an initial principal amount issued of at least SGD 20 million (or 
its equivalent in another currency).
7This refers to local currencies of Asian countries including ASEAN, China, India, South Korea, Japan, Australia and New Zealand.


4
Grant for external review costs under the 
Green and Sustainable Finance Grant 
Scheme 
(Track II of the HK New Scheme)
Sustainable Bond Grant Scheme
(SBG)
Eligible issuers
Green and sustainable bond issuers and loan 
borrowers, including first-time and repeat issuers 
and borrowers
A company or financial institution based onshore or 
offshore, excluding sovereign issuers
Qualifying criteria
Having procured pre-issuance external review 
services related to the bond issue that is 
provided by a recognised external reviewer
Having a pre-issuance external review or rating done 
which demonstrated alignment with any internationally-
recognised green, social, sustainability and 
sustainability-linked bond principles or standards
8 
Where the issuance is a sustainability-linked bond (SLB), 
the SLB issuer has committed to undertake the post 
issuance external review or reporting annually for the 
first 3 years or up to the tenure of the SLB, whichever 
is earlier
Number of grants
No limits
No limits
Grant amount
100% of eligible expenses (pre-issuance external 
review (including, for example, certification, 
second-party opinions, verification, ESG scoring/
rating, assurance, consultation to develop the 
green and sustainable bond/loan framework, 
and post-issuance external review or reporting), 
capped at HKD 800,000 per bond issuance/
loan.
100% of eligible expenses (including the costs 
incurred in  respect of pre-issuance external review or 
rating done which demonstrated alignment with any 
internationally-recognised green, social, sustainability 
and sustainability-linked bond principles or standards, 
and post-issuance external review or reporting for 
allocation and impact done annually for the first 3 years 
or up to the tenure of the bond, whichever is earlier), 
capped at SGD 100,000 (or its equivalent in another 
currency)
Maturity
N/A
At  least 1 year
Qualifying issuance 
size
Having an issuance size of at least HK$200 
million (or the equivalent in foreign currency)
Having either an initial principal amount issued of at 
least SGD 200 million (or its equivalent in another 
currency) or a programme size of at least SGD 200 
million with an initial principal amount issued of at least 
SGD 20 million (or its equivalent in another currency)
8This includes International Capital Market Association’s Green/Social/Sustainability-Linked Bond Principles and their Sustainability Bond Guidelines, the ASEAN 
Green/Social/Sustainability Bond Standards as well as Climate Bonds Standard, but excludes national green/social/sustainability/sustainability-linked bond guidelines 
or standards.
FINANCIAL MARKETS
Grant for bond issue under the Green and 
Sustainable Finance Grant Scheme
 (Track 1 of the HK New Scheme)
Global-Asia Bond Grant 
(G-ABG)
Other major criteria
Being, at issuance, issued in Hong Kong to (i) 10 
or more persons or (ii) less than 10 persons none 
of whom is an associate of the issuer.
The bond issued is declared as a Qualifying Debt 
Security (QDS), requiring that the debt securities 
must meet the “substantially arranged in Singapore” 
conditions.
It is rated by a credit rating agency regulated by the 
MAS if the currency of the issuance is SGD.
Valid period 
3 years (starting from 10 May 2021)
5 years (from 1 January 2020 to 31 December 2024) 


5
II. Comparison of bond listing locations
The two Singapore schemes and the HK New scheme all have requirements on listing locations. For the convenience of 
readers, we have outlined the listing rules of the SEHK and SGX below.
SEHK amended its bond listing rules in 2020, which came into effect on 1 November 2020, including the following key 
changes:
•	 The definition of “Professional Investor” was amended to include high net worth investors and other professional 
investors, while a professional investor waiver application would no longer be required;
•	 Raising issuers’ (excluding State Corporations and guarantors) minimum net assets requirement from HKD 100 million 
to HKD 1 billion;
•	 Narrowing the definition of “State corporation” to exclude regional and local state-owned enterprises;
•	 Introducing a minimum issuance size of HKD 100 million (not applicable to tap issuance);
•	 Requiring publication of listing documents on the Exchange’s website on the listing date (e.g. offering circular and 
pricing supplement);
•	 Requiring that the front cover of a listing document must contain a statement on the intended investor market in Hong 
Kong (i.e. Professional Investors only);
•	 Establishing new continuing obligations rules that require issuers and guarantors to disclose events of default, 
insolvency and winding-up petitions and to publish quarterly announcements of the developments after trading in their 
listed debt securities has been suspended.
The following table sets forth a comparison of the amended SEHK listing rules and the main SGX listing requirements:
Grant for external review costs under the 
Green and Sustainable Finance Grant 
Scheme 
(Track II of the HK New Scheme)
Sustainable Bond Grant Scheme
(SBG)
Qualifying 
currencies
N/A
N/A
Arrangers and 
relevant expense 
allocation 
requirements 
Issued in Hong Kong: A bond is considered 
issued in Hong Kong if half or more of the 
involved lead arranger(s) are recognised 
arrangers.
More than half of the gross revenue from arranging 
the issue is attributable to Financial Sector Incentive 
(“FSI”) companies in Singapore.
Listing as well 
as lodging and 
clearing criteria
Being listed on The Stock Exchange of Hong 
Kong Limited (SEHK); or being lodged with 
and cleared by the Central Moneymarkets Unit 
(CMU) operated by the HKMA in its entirety
Being listed on the SGX
Other major criteria
Being, at issuance, issued in Hong Kong to (i) 
10 or more persons or (ii) less than 10 persons 
none of whom is an associate of the issuer.
The bond issued is declared as a QDS, requiring 
that the debt securities must meet the “substantially 
arranged in Singapore” conditions.
More than half of the gross revenue from the pre-
issuance external review or rating as well as the post-
issuance external review or report done, as the case 
may be, is attributable to Singapore-based service 
providers. The issuance has part of the sustainability 
advisory and assessment work performed by financial 
institutions done in Singapore where applicable.
Valid period
3 years (starting from 10 May 2021) 
From 24 November 2020 to 31 May 2023


6
FINANCIAL MARKETS
Thanks to Zhou Jiayang for his contribution to this article.
SEHK
SGX
General listing rules
An issuer must have net assets of HKD 1 billion, and 
must have produced audited accounts for the two 
years before the listing application made up to a date at 
most 15 months before the intended date of the listing 
document, unless the issuer is any company which 
is directly or indirectly controlled or more than 50% of 
whose issued equity share capital is beneficially owned 
by, and/or by any one or more agencies of, a State 
(which does not include any regional or local authority)  
or its shares are listed on the SEHK or another stock 
exchange or it meets other specific conditions.
If the issuer fails to meet such conditions, the guarantor 
shall satisfy the above requirements. The issuer shall be 
a wholly-owned subsidiary held directly or indirectly by 
the Guarantor.
Listed debts securities are sold to professional investors 
only.
A smaller scope of review for debt securities 
offered to institutional and qualified investors
Disclosing 
criteria of listing 
documents
An offering circular should disclose information that is 
customarily expected by the intended investors and, in 
the case of bonds with special product features, how 
such features differ from those of ordinary bonds and 
the impact of other terms on investors’ rights.
Such disclosure must include a prominent and legible 
disclaimer statement required by the SEHK.
Companies should disclose information 
that is generally expected to be available to 
institutional investors.
An offering circular shall contain a disclaimer 
statement and several other statements.
Major continuing 
disclosure 
requirements
Issuers are required to disclose inside information, 
material information about debt securities, replacement 
of trustees, amendments to trust deeds, and redemption 
and cancellation of debt securities that are required 
to be disclosed under the rules of the SEHK; issuers 
are required to disclose events of default, insolvency 
and winding-up petitions, and to publish quarterly 
announcements of the developments after trading in 
their listed debt securities has been suspended; issuers 
are required to respond to or make announcements 
clarifying the SEHK’s inquiries about unusual price 
and volume fluctuations or possible  fraudulent market 
transactions.
The issuer shall submit to the SEHK financial reports of 
the issuer or the guarantor (if any) for each financial year 
and for the first half of each financial year.
The issuer shall disclose any information that 
may materially affect the price or value of the 
debt securities or the investor’s investment 
and transaction decisions, and shall make 
public announcements on the redemption, 
cancellation, interest payment and 
replacement of trustee of the debt securities 
in a timely manner.
Listing fees
9
Listing fees: HKD 10,000 to HKD 90,000 payable 
upon the application of the listing of the debt securities 
depending on the issuance size and the term of such 
debt securities.
HKD 24,000 payable to the Securities and Futures 
Commission (SFC) for application of waivers.
Issuers do not need to pay an annual fee after listing.
Listing agency fee: approximately USD 10,000.
Listing fees: SGD 25,000 (including the 
handling fee of SGD 10,000 and the listing 
fee of SGD 15,000) payable upon the 
application of the listing of the debt securities.
Issuers do not need to pay an annual fee 
after listing.
Listing agency fee: approximately SGD 
10,000.
Whether listing 
documents need to 
be published
Yes
Yes
9Supposed to be issued in a single tranche.


7
On 8 February 2021, the Securities and Futures 
Commission of Hong Kong (the “SFC”) issued a 
consultation paper
1 (the “Consultation Paper”) which, if 
enacted as proposed, would have a far-reaching impact 
on the way in which public offerings of equity and debt 
securities are made in Hong Kong. Comments to the 
Consultation Paper was open through 7 May 2021. The 
Consultation Paper was issued exactly one week after 
the end of the consultation period (1 February 2021) for a 
consultation paper by The Stock Exchange of Hong Kong 
Limited (the “SEHK”) that dealt with increasing the profit 
requirement for the Main Board.
2 That earlier consultation 
paper by the SEHK generated much debate from certain 
market participants and we expect that the Consultation 
Paper will likewise invite significant discussion in the 
industry.
Unless otherwise specified in this alert, the proposals in 
the Consultation Paper apply both to equity capital market 
(“ECM”) and debt capital market (“DCM”) transactions.
I. Background
The Consultation Paper seeks to address specific 
inadequacies identified by the SFC in bookbuilding and 
placing activities, including, among other things:
•	 The lack of a transparent and robust price discovery 
process through bookbuilding by intermediaries, e.g., 
inflated or opaque demand caused, in part, by the 
actions of intermediaries;
•	 The lack of alignment between the sponsors’ incentives 
and liabilities, particularly in the case of large IPOs, 
leading, in some cases, to compromised due diligence 
enquiries;
•	 The lack of specific requirements governing the conduct 
of bookbuilding or placing activities, whether in ECM or 
DCM. The SFC recognized the need to be consistent 
with global standards befitting Hong Kong’s stature as 
one of the world’s largest capital raising centers. In that 
SFC’s Consultation Paper on bookbuilding 
and placing activities in ECM and DCM 
transactions
Hong Kong capital markets team
regard, the Consultation Paper was prepared in light of 
recently-issued reports by the International Organization 
of Commissions (“IOSCO”),
3  and incorporates certain 
IOSCO principles.
II. The proposals
Under the Consultation Paper, the SFC has formulated 
a new paragraph 21 (the “Proposed Code”) in the Code 
of Conduct for Persons Licensed by or Registered with 
the Securities and Futures Commission (the “Code of 
Conduct”) that would apply to intermediaries conducting 
bookbuilding and placing activities in Hong Kong. The 
SFC also proposed, in the ECM context, a “coupling” 
of the role of the syndicate head and the sponsor of an 
offering (“Sponsor Coupling”).
The key proposals
4 under the Proposed Code include the 
following:
•	 Defining intermediaries as capital market intermediaries 
(“CMIs”) and further defining the head of syndicate to 
be the overall coordinator (the “OC”). The role of the 
OC is determined by the activities conducted by the 
OC and not its specific title. For example, in the case 
of debt offerings, an OC is a syndicate CMI that, solely 
or jointly, conducts the overall management of the 
debt offering, coordinates the bookbuilding or placing 
activities conducted by other CMIs, exercises control 
over bookbuilding activities and makes pricing or 
allocation recommendations to the issuer;
•	 CMIs will be expected to adhere to standards of 
conduct covering a wide spectrum of activities, 
including bookbuilding, allocation and placing, to 
address issues including inflated or opaque demand, 
preferential treatment and rebates, misleading “book 
messages”, proprietary orders which may negatively 
impact on the price discovery process and orders which 
conceal the identities of the investors;
•	 The coverage of the bookbuilding process under the 
1https://apps.sfc.hk/edistributionWeb/api/consultation/openFile?lang=EN&refNo=21CP1
2https://www.hkex.com.hk/-/media/HKEX-Market/News/Market-Consultations/2016-Present/November-2020-MB-Profit-Requirement/Consultation-Paper/cp202011.pdf
3IOSCO issued a report in September 2018 on conflicts of interest and associated conduct risk in the equity capital raising process, and issued a further report in 
September 2020 on the debt capital market.
4Please note that the proposals summarized in this alert are by no means exhaustive. You are advised to read the Consultation Paper in its entirety for a comprehensive 
understanding of the Proposed Code.


8
5https://www.sfc.hk/-/media/EN/assets/components/codes/files-current/web/guideline-to-sponsors-underwriters-and-placing-agents-involved-in-the-listing-and-placing-
of-gem/guidelinetosponsorsunderwritersandplacingagentsinvolvedinthelistingandplacingofgem.pdf
6https://www.hkex.com.hk/Listing/Rules-and-Guidance/Listing-Rules-Contingency/Main-Board-Listing-Rules/Main-Board-Listing-Rules?sc_lang=en
7https://www.hkex.com.hk/Listing/Rules-and-Guidance/Listing-Rules-Contingency/GEM-Listing-Rules/GEM-Listing-Rules?sc_lang=en
Proposed Code is wide. For ECM activities, it would 
also cover (i) units or interests listed or to be listed 
under the REIT Code and (ii) placing and top-up placing 
of shares by existing shareholder in listed issuers as 
the issuer and the shareholder together are responsible 
for appointing a CMI to assist them in the placing. 
For DCM activities, the Proposed Code would cover 
all types of debt offerings, provided that the offering 
involves bookbuilding or placing activities conducted by 
intermediaries in Hong Kong;
•	 The DCM practice of booking “X-orders”, where the 
identity of investors is concealed, will be expressly 
prohibited. Under the Proposed Code, the identities of 
all investors shall be disclosed in the order book, except 
for orders placed on an omnibus basis;
•	 Syndicate membership and fee arrangements 
(including the fixed fee, the discretionary fee and fee 
payment schedule) must be determined at an early 
stage, through formal written agreements, to enhance 
accountability among syndicate CMIs and discourage 
undesirable behaviour. An earlier determination of 
roles also diminishes the likelihood of brokers without 
mandates “swarming” order books at the last minute 
and bringing in large price-insensitive orders;
•	 Specifically, in respect of IPOs, composition of the 
syndicate members (CMIs), total fee arrangement on 
the public offer tranche and the international tranche, 
the ratio between fixed fee and discretionary bonus, 
allocation of any fixed fee by the listing applicant to the 
CMIs shall be submitted four clear business days before 
listing committee hearing and any material changes 
shall notify the SFC as soon as they have been agreed;
•	 In DCM transactions, some issuers offer rebates to 
private banks to incentivise them to sell debt securities 
to their clients and, in some cases, the private banks 
pass on these rebates to clients. Under the Proposed 
Code, a CMI shall not offer any rebates to its investor 
clients or pass on any rebates provided by the issuer. 
Moreover, a CMI shall not enter into any arrangement 
that may result in investor clients paying different prices 
for the debt securities allocated;
•	 Proprietary orders may present conflicts of interest 
for CMIs. Under the Proposed Code, a CMI should (i) 
establish and implement policies to identify, manage 
and disclose potential conflicts of interest; (ii) establish 
and implement policies to govern the process of 
generating and making allocations for proprietary 
orders; (iii) give priority to investor clients’ orders over 
the CMI’s proprietary orders; and (iv) only be a “price 
taker” in relation to proprietary orders;
•	 Proper record keeping system and new policies and 
procedures including allocation policy shall be in place 
to document the bookbuilding process for not less 
than seven years on (i) assessments of the issuer client, 
share or debt offering and investor clients; (ii) audit 
trails from the receipt of orders through to the final 
order allocation; (iii) all key communications between, 
and among, the OCs, other CMIs or investor clients, 
including order book status; (iv) the intended basis 
of allocation for all orders with justifications and any 
material deviations from its allocation policy; (v) all key 
communications with the issuer client; (vi) rebates 
offered; (vii) any other preferential treatment offered; and 
(viii) information forming the basis of all submissions 
made to SEHK and the SFC.
The Sponsor Coupling proposals are designed to mitigate 
the incentive on the part of sponsors to compromise their 
due diligence enquiries to win the OC role, particularly 
when sponsors face fierce competition from non-sponsors 
who also covet the OC role. A key element in the Sponsor 
Coupling rules is that, in IPOs, at least one OC must also 
act as a sponsor. This sponsor must be independent of 
the issuer. In addition, other OCs must not be appointed 
later than two weeks after submission of the listing 
application.
In light of the introduction of the Proposed Code and 
to avoid duplicating requirements, the SFC proposes 
to make corresponding changes to the GEM Placing 
Guidelines.
5 Furthermore, to facilitate implementation 
of the Proposed Code, subject to the responses to the 
Consultation Paper, the SFC and SEHK will work together 
to implement changes to the Main Board Listing Rules
6 
and GEM Listing Rules.
7
III. Views Being Sought
The SFC is seeking views on the Consultation Paper, 
including whether the proposed measures are appropriate 
and proper to address the concerns identified by the 
SFC, and we intend to prepare a formal written response 
to the SFC accordingly. We understand that many of the 
suggestions under the Proposed Code will be a major 
departure from current practices. 
Jason Kuo and Tony Jacobsen contributed to the preparation of this 
alert.
FINANCIAL MARKETS


9
The Outline Development Plan for the Guangdong-Hong Kong-Macao Greater Bay Area 
(the “Outline”) released on 18 February 2019 defines the overall strategy and scope of the 
development in the GBA. Section 6 of the Outline requires “to explore and procure that Hong 
Kong and Macao residents who are working and living in Guangdong enjoy the same treatment 
as that for Mainland residents in areas of livelihood such as education, medical care, elderly 
care, housing and transport”. To implement the policy, the GBA Construction Leading Group 
discussed 16 measures at a meeting in November 2019, one of which is “to facilitate house 
purchases by Hong Kong residents in Mainland cities in the GBA”. According to this measure, 
Hong Kong residents who purchase houses in such Mainland cities will be exempted from 
the required proof of years of residence, study or working, as well as payment of personal 
income tax and social security, so that Hong Kong residents will enjoy the same treatment as 
local residents. This measure facilitates Hong Kong residents to study, work and enjoy their 
retirement in the Mainland.
On 28 July 2020, the Guangdong Financial Supervisory Authority, the Guangzhou Branch of the 
People’s Bank of China, the Guangdong Office of the China Banking and Insurance Regulatory 
Commission and other departments jointly issued the Plan for Implementing Financial 
Support to the Construction of the Guangdong-Hong Kong-Macao Greater Bay Area (the “80 
Implementation Measures”), requiring nine municipal governments in the Pearl River Delta to 
“support Mainland cities in the GBA in cross-boundary mortgage registration of real estate, and 
allow Hong Kong and Macao residents to mortgage their self-occupied homes purchased in 
such cities to overseas banks, so as to facilitate Hong Kong and Macao residents to purchase 
houses in such cities”. Following the introduction of the 80 Implementation Measures, real 
estate purchases by Hong Kong and Macao residents in Mainland GBA cities soon became 
a hot topic. Not only do Hong Kong and Macao residents put the plan high on their agenda, 
but Hong Kong and Macao banks also see it as a new orientation for their cross-boundary 
business expansion in the GBA. In this article, we will analyse the breakthroughs that have been 
brought about by the new GBA policy and the problems that await further clarification from the 
perspective of Hong Kong and Macao banks, so as to contribute to the future integration of the 
GBA financial services.
Cross-boundary Mortgage under the New 
GBA Policy
Zhao Xianlong, Peng Fu, David Mu, Xiong Mei
Zhao Xianlong
Peng Fu
David Mu


10
I. Past cross-boundary mortgage business
Before the introduction of the 80 Implementation Measures, Hong Kong and Macao residents 
purchasing houses
1 in the GBA were generally applying for a mortgage loan with banks in China 
Mainland
2 (including branches or parent (head) banks of Hong Kong and Macao banks in the 
Mainland). The release of loans and the related security measures (usually involving Mainland 
developers’ staged guarantee/security and Hong Kong and Macao purchasers’ real estate mortgage) 
both take place in the Mainland.
As the picture shows, the loans offered by Mainland banks to Hong Kong and Macao residents are 
usually based on the staged guarantee provided by Mainland developers and/or Mainland real estate 
mortgage. Moreover, after years of development of the Mainland housing mortgage model, Mainland 
banks are quite familiar with these credit enhancement methods and their legal mechanisms, 
especially the mortgage registration procedures and default disposal mechanisms.
In contrast, Hong Kong and Macao banks have not long been active participants in cross-boundary 
housing mortgage. On one hand, Hong Kong and Macao banks lack relevant knowledge of and 
control over Mainland credit enhancement measures, especially Mainland real estate mortgage. 
On the other hand, the legal requirements and practice for establishing real estate mortgage in the 
Mainland are also inconvenient for Hong Kong and Macao banks. For example, in the case where the 
mortgagee is a Hong Kong/Macao bank, in addition to submitting the materials required for general 
real estate mortgage (e.g., application form for real estate registration, loan contract, and mortgage 
contract), the bank’s qualification documents that have been notarized and sent by the notary office 
are also required. Another qualification document that must be submitted is the approval document 
and certificate for the bank to set up the branch or representative office in China Mainland, or the 
“Financial Permit” or the certificate for qualification to carry out the housing loan business. These 
requirements actually make it more difficult for Hong Kong and Macao banks to obtain mortgages for 
general real estate in China Mainland.
II. Present cross-boundary mortgage business
(I) What improvements has the new policy made?
FINANCIAL MARKETS
1For ease of expression, unless otherwise specified, the terms “property”, “residence” and “house” all refer to ordinary residential properties, 
excluding commercial service properties (e.g. apartments) and any other special types of properties (e.g. houses with limited property rights, 
and foreclosure houses). In addition, this article does not cover the real estate purchase restriction policies in any of the nine cities in the Pearl 
River Delta in the GBA. If relevant discussion involves the local real estate purchase restriction policies, such local policies shall prevail.
2Given the differences between jurisdictions and for ease of expression, unless otherwise specified, the terms “China Mainland” and “China”  in 
this article both refer to the Mainland of China, excluding Hong Kong SAR, Macao SAR and the Taiwan Region.


11
For the first time at the policy level, the 80 Implementation Measures explicitly supports Hong 
Kong and Macao residents to mortgage their properties purchased in the GBA to overseas banks 
(including Hong Kong and Macao banks), creating a new opportunity for Hong Kong and Macao 
banks to carry out cross-boundary mortgage business.
Some cities in the Pearl River Delta (e.g. Guangzhou, Dongguan, and Zhaoqing, etc.) actively 
responded to this policy and issued documents in the second half of 2020 to encourage Hong 
Kong and Macao residents to mortgage their residential property purchased within these cities 
to Hong Kong and Macao banks. On 4 August 2020, the Department of Natural Resources of 
Guangdong Province also issued the Notice on Clarifying Matters Related to Real Estate Mortgage 
Registration by Hong Kong and Macao Banks in Nine Mainland Cities in the GBA (the “Notice 
on Mortgage Registration in Nine GBA Cities”), further clarifying and simplifying the material 
requirements of Hong Kong and Macao banks in applying for real estate mortgage registration – 
“Simplifying the qualification materials required for mortgage registration by Hong Kong and Macao 
banks - starting from 1 September 2020, when applying for real estate mortgage registration at all 
levels of real estate registration agencies under the jurisdiction of the nine Mainland cities, Hong 
Kong and Macao banks shall only submit notarised and transmitted incorporation documents 
or registration certificates as the entity identification documents. The approval documents and 
registration certificates for the establishment of branches or representative offices in the Mainland 
and the Financial Permit will no longer be required. When it is not the first time for a Hong Kong/
Macao bank to register real estate mortgage, it is not required to submit the above materials again.”
The Notice on Mortgage Registration in Nine GBA Cities specifies the materials required for Hong 
Kong and Macao banks to apply for real estate mortgage registration in China Mainland from 
a policy perspective, thus solving the problem that some Hong Kong and Macao banks were 
unable to apply for mortgage registration due to lack of required qualification documents when 
trying to obtain the mortgage right of general real estate in China Mainland. Nevertheless, given 
that the Notice on Mortgage Registration in Nine GBA Cities was only recently implemented, and 
that the real estate registration authorities in the nine cities have not yet issued specific guidelines 
and material lists for cross-boundary mortgage registration, in case of cross-boundary mortgage 
registration with properties in nine cities in the Pearl River Delta in the GBA as collateral, it is 
recommended to enquire with the local real estate registration authority in advance to minimise the 
risk of failure in mortgage registration due to the lack of qualification certificates.
(II) Who are eligible clients among Hong Kong and Macao residents?
The term “Hong Kong and Macao residents” as used in the new policy is short in form but rich in 
connotation. It is worth our in-depth analysis from the perspective of laws and policies.
Take “Hong Kong residents” as an example. In general, people holding a Hong Kong Identity Card 
are deemed as Hong Kong residents, who can be roughly divided into the following categories:


12
Whether non-Chinese Hong Kong residents (those in grey font in the above picture, including non-
Chinese permanent residents and non-Chinese non-permanent residents) can be involved in the 
cross-boundary mortgage business under the new GBA policy has yet to be clarified by Mainland 
regulators; whether the Chinese non-permanent residents who have not cancelled their Mainland 
Hukou (those in red font in the above picture) can be part of this program is also subject to further 
discussion - in the Mainland GBA cities where there are restrictions on house purchases, if the 
resident has already used his/her Mainland Hukou to hold real estate, he/she should be supposed 
not to take advantage of his/her identify as a “Hong Kong resident” to purchase local real estate 
beyond policy limit; if the resident has not used his/her Mainland Hukou to hold real estate, he/she is 
supposed to be able to purchase local real estate as a “Hong Kong resident”.
According to our consultation with the real estate registration authorities and/or the housing 
authorities of the nine Mainland cities, “Hong Kong residents” refer to “Hong Kong permanent 
residents” or Hong Kong residents holding “Mainland Travel Permit for Hong Kong and Macao 
Residents” (Home Return Permit). Hong Kong residents holding Home Return Permits include those 
with permanent residence of Chinese nationality and non-permanent residence of Chinese nationality 
who have their Mainland Hukou cancelled (i.e. those who hold one-way permits).
In addition, who can be recognized as eligible Hong Kong and Macao house-purchasers is still 
subject to different house-purchase restriction policies implemented by the nine Mainland cities. To 
avoid verbosity and since the focus here is on the feasibility of banks’ mortgage business, we will not 
go further on this issue.
(III) How do loans flow across boundaries? 
As China Mainland implements foreign exchange control, property purchases by Hong Kong or 
Macao residents in the GBA is a business in relation to individuals’ foreign exchange capital account 
item. Inbound house-purchase funds are subject to the relevant foreign exchange regulations of the 
Mainland.
1. In whose name should house-purchase funds be remitted to China?
In accordance with the laws of China Mainland, of all the basic legal relations in a cross-boundary 
mortgage, a Hong Kong or Macao bank and a Hong Kong or Macao resident (the “Borrower” or 
“Property Buyer”) form a debtor-creditor legal relationship;  the Hong Kong or Macao resident and 
a developer/second-hand property owner in China Mainland form a property sale and purchase 
relationship. From the above legal relationships, the person who is obligated to pay for the house 
is the Hong Kong or Macao resident. When it comes to remitting house-purchase funds into the 
Mainland, i.e. the Hong Kong or Macao bank remits in the name of the Hong Kong or Macao 
resident, the bank in this regard is the entrusted payer, rather than the obligated payer. Therefore, 
the property purchase in China Mainland by Hong Kong or Macao residents falls under the business 
of non-resident individuals purchasing properties under the Guidelines for the Foreign Exchange 
Business under the Capital Account Item. In accordance with existing regulations, house-purchase 
funds should be remitted to China Mainland in the name of individual Hong Kong or Macao residents 
rather than in the name of Hong Kong and Macao banks.
2. Who are going to receive the house-purchase funds?
Article 3 of the Circular of the State Administration of Foreign Exchange and Ministry of Construction 
on Relevant Issues concerning Regulating the Administration of Foreign Exchange in Real Estate 
Market and Article 6.10 of the Guidelines for the Foreign Exchange Business under the Capital 
Account Item stipulate respectively that: (i) The foreign exchange current account of a real estate 
development enterprise shall not keep any house-purchase funds remitted from aboard; (ii) banks 
shall convert the foreign exchange funds into RMB and directly remit the same into the RMB account 
of real estate developers/property owners (as the sellers), and shall not conduct foreign currency 
remittance within China Mainland for Hong Kong or Macao residents purchasing the property in 
China Mainland. Based on the above regulations, the house-purchase funds remitted by Hong 
Kong or Macao residents shall be credited to an account after conversion of foreign exchange, 
and shall not be directly remitted to the account of developers/property owners in the Mainland. In 
this regard, according to our recent consultation with the foreign exchange administrations of nine 
Mainland cities in the GBA and several commercial banks in Shenzhen, even after the introduction 
FINANCIAL MARKETS


13
of the 80 Implementation Measures, the remittance of house-purchase funds by Hong Kong or 
Macao residents still follows the principle of settling foreign exchange before transferring into the 
seller’s account. The house-purchase funds cannot be directly remitted to the account of developers/
property owners in China Mainland in the form of foreign exchange. Instead, the bank will convert 
the foreign exchange into RMB and directly remit the same into the real estate developer/property 
owner’s RMB account. Under such circumstance, whose bank account should be used to receive 
the house-purchase funds in foreign currencies before foreign exchange conversion? According to 
the preliminary research so far, the said foreign exchange administrations and commercial banks 
have proposed that (personal or co-managed) bank accounts (which have to be able to accept 
foreign currency) opened by Hong Kong or Macao residents in China Mainland or intermediate bank 
accounts be used to receive foreign exchange first. It’s recommended that the details be determined 
in consultation with the bank that will be handling the business.
For example, after a borrower opens a Non-Resident Account (NRA) under the same name with a 
receiving bank in China Mainland, the foreign exchange will be first remitted to the NRA account. 
After foreign exchange conversion is completed in accordance with the law, the RMB funds will then 
be remitted to the domestic RMB account of the developer or the second-hand property owner. 
That’s because it is difficult to remit foreign exchange directly to the domestic bank account.
3. Cross-border RMB or foreign exchange?
The feasibility of remitting mortgage loans into China Mainland in the form of cross-border RMB 
is mainly regulated by the Notice of the People's Bank of China on Relevant Issues concerning 
the Individual RMB Business between Mainland Banks and Hong Kong and Macao Banks, the 
Supplementary Notice of the People's Bank of China on Relevant Issues concerning the RMB 
Business between Mainland Banks and Hong Kong and Macao Banks, and the Notice by the 
People's Bank of China, the National Development and Reform Commission, the Ministry of 
Commerce, the State-owned Assets Supervision and Administration Commission under the State 
Council, the China Banking and Insurance Regulatory Commission, and the State Administration of 
Foreign Exchange of Further Optimizing the Cross-border RMB Policies to Support the Stability of 
Foreign Trade and Foreign Investment. The regulations and restrictions are as follows: (i) Hong Kong 
or Macao residents may remit RMB through clearing banks (subject to a daily cap of RMB 80,000 per 
person); (ii) the aforementioned remittance is limited to the remittance to accounts under the same 
name in China Mainland; and (iii) the remitted funds may only be used for nonproductive expenditure 
in China Mainland and may not be used to purchase financial products such as marketable 
securities, financial derivatives and asset management products. According to the aforementioned 
provisions, the remittance of house-purchase funds to China Mainland in the form of cross-border 


14
RMB is subject to restrictions on the use of funds and single-day remittance limit, making it difficult 
to meet the demand of remitting a large amount of house-purchase funds for property acquisition in 
China Mainland at one time.
Therefore, according to existing foreign exchange and cross-border RMB policies, at present, it is 
feasible for Hong Kong or Macao residents to purchase houses in China Mainland through foreign 
exchange remittance. However, it is important to note that Property Buyers may face exchange rate 
risks in domestic foreign exchange conversion. It is recommended that banks in Hong Kong SAR 
and Macao SAR consider providing necessary hedging by locking in an exchange rate for Hong 
Kong or Macao residents, so as to avoid the risk of RMB funds after exchange conversion in China 
Mainland falling short of the purchase price.
4. What is the limits of inbound and outbound remittance?
According to the basic principles of China’s foreign exchange control, under a legitimate house 
purchase relationship, a Property Buyer may apply for remitting house-purchase funds based on 
a genuine house purchase contract up to the housing price shown in the contract, and use the 
money to pay for the house under the contract. In this regard, we consulted the foreign exchange 
administrations of nine Mainland cities in the GBA, and their responses are consistent: Hong Kong or 
Macao residents’ house-purchase remittance after foreign exchange conversion to China Mainland 
should not exceed the amount shown in the purchase contract; if exceeds, the excess will be 
returned by the bank handling the conversion to where it comes from.
In addition, if Hong Kong and Macao residents wish to transfer their purchased domestic property 
in the future, in accordance with Article 6.10 of the current Guidelines for the Foreign Exchange 
Business under the Capital Account Item, the proceeds derived from such transfer can be remitted 
in a lump sum, and the maximum amount to be remitted is the balance of the transfer price of 
the property less relevant taxes caused by this transfer. Such RMB funds could be remitted after 
converting into the foreign exchange.
FINANCIAL MARKETS
(IV) What other factors need to be considered for the creation of a mortgage?
Subject to the nature of properties purchased in China Mainland, the practice of creating a mortgage 
on them differs. This is particularly reflected in the sale of the built and sold properties (and where the 
previous owner needs to redeem the property) and in the pre-sale of the property under construction 
(i.e., uncompleted property or forward delivery properties). Taking the latter for example:


15
Mortgage registration of a priority notice vs. Formal mortgage registration: When pre-selling the 
property under constuction, registration of a priority notice could be applied for in accordance with 
Article 221 of the Civil Code of the People’s Republic of China. For such pre-sale, it is unable to 
create the formal mortgage right in favor of the lender during the period from the date of mortgage 
registration of a priority notice to the completion of the property title registration as well as the 
mortgage registration of the property. In addition, since properties may face other risks such as 
seizure/pre-seizure in practice, domestic lenders usually require the developer to provide a staged 
guarantee as a security measure. The staged guarantee will not be released until the mortgage is 
formally created with registration.
3Article 36 of the Law of the People's Republic of China on the Application of Laws to Foreign-related Civil Relations: For the property rights of 
immovable assets, the laws of the place in which the assets are located shall apply.
Registration of offshore loans under onshore guarantee: For legal practitioners engaging in cross-
border financing, the above diagram shows a common topic, i.e. as the creditor and debtor are Hong 
Kong or Macao residents, and the guarantor is in China Mainland, the staged guarantee provided 
by the domestic developer as the guarantor constitutes “offshore loans under onshore guarantee”. 
In this case, cross-border guarantee should be registered with the foreign exchange authorities after 
signing the contract. Failure to register may lead the guarantor’s performance funds unable to be 
transferred out of the country to repay the claims of Hong Kong and Macao banks.
In terms of the registration procedures for offshore loans under onshore guarantee arising from 
“staged guarantee” in the cross-boundary mortgage structure of the GBA, the feasibility of the above 
business model depends on further confirmation and clarification of whether offshore loans under 
onshore guarantee can be registered when the debtor is an individual Hong Kong or Macao resident.
Choice of applicable law and dispute resolution mechanism: The legal documents of loans and 
the property mortgage are contracts with foreign-related elements, and in principle, the parties can 
choose the law applicable to such kind of contracts. However, in accordance with Article 36 of the 
Law of the People's Republic of China on the Application of Laws to Foreign-related Civil Relations
3, 
based on the territoriality principle of the real right of immovable property and the fact that mortgage 
on immovable property has the attribute of security rights legally, it is recommended that mortgage 
on immovable property apply the law of China Mainland. If the subordinate contract (mortgage 
contract) takes the laws of China Mainland as the governing laws and chooses the Mainland dispute 
resolution mechanism (e.g. settling disputes through court proceedings in China Mainland), the main 
contract (loan contract), though only involves Hong Kong and Macao banks and residents, may also 
need to further consider whether it will continue to apply Hong Kong or Macao laws and dispute 
resolution mechanisms or turn to the laws and resolution mechanism of China Mainland.


16
(V) How to dispose of domestic mortgaged properties in case of default?
As the mortgaged property is located in China Mainland, in a loan default, Hong Kong and Macao 
banks, as creditors, need to familiarize themselves in advance with the ways to execute the 
mortgaged property and collect disposal proceeds. According to the law of the location of the 
mortgaged property (the law of China Mainland), in general, the disposal of the mortgaged property 
can be generally divided into: disposal by consensus of the parties (self-remedy) and judicial disposal.
In terms of self-remedy, if the parties agree to auction or sell the mortgaged property
4, they may 
consider remitting the proceeds from the disposal of the mortgaged property after completing tax 
declaration and immovable asset title transfer registration through the route specified in “repatriation 
of funds from the transfer of domestic property” under Article 6.10 of the Guidelines for the Foreign 
Exchange Business under the Capital Account Item.
It is necessary to discuss judicial disposal in combination with the dispute resolution mechanism 
chosen in the relevant cross-boundary mortgage legal documents. In a relatively simple case where a 
judgment or arbitral award in force in China Mainland is obtained, the creditor may apply to the court 
where the immovable property is located for enforcement; in the case where a judgment or arbitral 
award in force in Hong Kong SAR or Macao SAR is obtained, their recognition and enforcement in 
China Mainland also need to be considered. In the case of Hong Kong SAR:
In accordance with the Arrangements of the Supreme People's Court on the Reciprocal Enforcement 
of Arbitration Awards by China Mainland and the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, the 
Supplementary Arrangements of Supreme People's Court on Reciprocal Enforcement of Arbitration 
Awards between the Mainland and the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region and the Civil 
Procedure Law of the People’s Republic of China, for an arbitral award made under the Hong Kong 
Arbitration Ordinance, if a party fails to perform the arbitral award, the other party may apply for 
enforcement to an intermediate people’s court in China Mainland where the respondent is domiciled 
or where the property is located. In addition, according to the Arrangement of the Supreme People's 
Court on Mutual Assistance in Preservation in Arbitration Proceedings between the Courts of the 
Mainland and the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, there is a bilateral arrangement between 
Hong Kong SAR and China Mainland on mutual assistance in preservation in arbitration proceedings. 
If the parties choose to resolve loan disputes by arbitration in Hong Kong SAR, the creditor may 
apply to the courts in China Mainland for preservation (i.e. judicial seizure/freezing/attachment) of the 
property purchased by the Property Buyer and his other properties in China Mainland (if any) before 
the arbitration award is made in Hong Kong SAR.
Nevertheless, things are different for obtaining a valid judgment in a Hong Kong court. In accordance 
with the Arrangement on Reciprocal Recognition and Enforcement of Judgments in Civil and 
Commercial Matters by the Courts of the Mainland and of the Hong Kong Special Administrative 
Region Pursuant to Choice of Court Agreements between Parties Concerned Interpretation 
and Article 281 of the Civil Procedure Law of the People’s Republic of China, an application for 
recognition and enforcement of a final judgment rendered by a Hong Kong court may be made to 
an intermediate people’s court with jurisdiction in China Mainland if the following conditions are met: 
(i) the parties have agreed to the exclusive jurisdiction of the Hong Kong court; (ii) the Hong Kong 
judgment is about payment of a monetary sum.
Although the Arrangement of the Supreme People’s Court and the Government of the Hong Kong 
Special Administrative Region on Reciprocal Recognition and Enforcement of Judgments in Civil and 
FINANCIAL MARKETS
4In accordance with the Opinions of the Ministry of Construction, the Ministry of Commerce, National Development and Reform Commission, 
the People's Bank of China, the State Administration for Industry of Commerce and the State Administration of Foreign Exchange on 
Regulating the Access to and Administration of Foreign Investment in the Real Estate Market (No. 171 [2006] of the Ministry of Construction) 
and the Notice of the Ministry of Housing and Urban-Rural Development, the Ministry of Commerce, the National Development and Reform 
Commission, the People's Bank of China, the State Administration for Industry and Commerce and the State Administration of Foreign 
Exchange on Adjusting the Policies on the Market Access and Administration of Foreign Investment in the Real Estate Market (No. 122 [2015] 
of the Ministry of Housing and Urban-Rural Development on August 19, 2015): A branch, sub-branch or representative office of an overseas 
institution in China (except for an enterprise that has been approved to engage in real estate operation) or a foreigner that has worked or 
studied in China for more than 1 year may purchase a property for self-use or self-accommodation. Subject to the aforementioned provisions, 
in the event that the mortgaged property needs to be disposed of, the Hong Kong and Macao banks may not be able to dispose of it by 
agreeing with the Property Buyer to discount its value and transfer it to the name of the Hong Kong and Macao banks. Due to the limitation of 
space, we will not discuss the disposal of the mortgaged property at a discounted price in this article.


17
Commercial Matters by the Courts of the Mainland and of the Hong Kong Special Administrative 
Region (issued on 18 January 2019) removes the restrictions for applying for recognition and 
enforcement by courts in China Mainland under the aforementioned arrangements, this arrangement 
has not yet come into force. It remains to be seen whether this arrangement will then be able to 
better support the cross-boundary mortgage business described in this article when it comes into 
effect.
It should be noted in particular that there is no arrangement concerning mutual assistance in interim 
measures in aid of judicial proceedings between Hong Kong SAR and China Mainland. If the parties 
chose to resolve loan disputes by filing lawsuits with a Hong Kong court, the creditor will then 
NOT be able to apply to the courts in China Mainland for preservation (i.e. judicial seizure/freezing/
attachment) of the property purchased by the Property Buyer and his other properties in China 
Mainland (if any) before the commencement of, or during the litigation in the Hong Kong court.
In addition, according to the Provisions on the Foreign Exchange Administration of Cross-border 
Guarantees and the Provisions on Foreign Exchange Control for Cross-border Guarantees, such 
mortgaged property arrangement in favor of offshore banks is one of other forms of cross-border 
guarantees. Therefore, upon completion of judicial disposal, the guarantor or creditor may apply 
directly to the relevant bank in China for remitting such disposal proceeds from judicial enforcement 
outbound. After the bank examines the authenticity and compliance of the guarantee performance 
and retains necessary materials, the guarantor or creditor can handle the relevant foreign exchange 
purchase, conversion and cross-border payments.
III. Future cross-boundary mortgage business
Hong Kong and Macao banks’ cross-boundary mortgage services are part of an important initiative 
by China to support the development of the GBA, with the following advantages:
(i)	 Hong Kong and Macao Property Buyers will be able to enjoy more favorable financing costs. 
Since the introduction of the Loan Prime Rate (LPR) in China Mainland, most Mainland banks 
have converted the pricing benchmark of individual property loans to LPR. According to the 
recent data released by the People’s Bank of China, the 1-year LPR is 3.85%. In comparison, 
the interest rate of Hong Kong dollar mortgage is generally less than 3%, which has certain 
competitive advantages, and Hong Kong and Macao residents are stickier to Hong Kong and 
Macao banks.
(ii)	 Cross-boundary mortgage is a new business for Hong Kong and Macao banks. Banks there 
can use it to broaden their business areas and obtain more interest income from loans and other 
cross-boundary value-added business opportunities.
(iii)	 Cross-boundary mortgage helps developers in China Mainland to expand their customer base 
and to attract Hong Kong and Macao residents to purchase residential property in the nine 
Mainland cities in the GBA.
We understand that as of January 2021, a small number of Hong Kong banks have provided cross-
boundary mortgage services for Hong Kong and Macao residents to purchase properties in the GBA. 
By contrast, the majority of Hong Kong and Macao banks have not yet launched such business as 
their business models are still in the stage of legal research and projection.
Despite many questions to be clarified, we believe that the cross-boundary mortgage business in 
the GBA has a very bright future. King & Wood Mallesons has already advised a number of Hong 
Kong and Macao banks and provided research services on cross-boundary mortgage business, as 
well as updated the format of loan documents and immovable asset mortgage documents for Hong 
Kong and Macao banks, in order to prepare for the future development of cross-boundary mortgage 
business in the GBA. We look forward to working with you to promote the final implementation of this 
beneficial policy.


18
The external transfer of domestic debt assets refers to the transfer of debt assets 
held by domestic creditors to foreign investors. Such debt assets can be divided 
by the nature of debt into debt assets of banks, debt assets of non-bank financial 
institutions and debt assets between entities or individuals. They can also be 
differentiated into performing debt and non-performing debt. The cross-border 
asset transfer has long been strictly subject to the foreign debt management 
system of China. On 30 March 2020, however, the Notice on Foreign Exchange 
Management to Support the Development of the Guangdong-Hong Kong-
Macao Greater Bay Area and the Shenzhen Pilot Demonstration Zone (“Document 
No. 15”) was issued by the branches of the State Administration of Foreign 
Exchange (“SAFE”) in Guangdong province and Shenzhen city. Document 
No. 15 clearly states that pilot institutions in the GBA are permitted to transfer 
their non-performing loans of banks (“NPLs”) and bank trade finance to foreign 
investors under the principles of controllable risk and prudent management. In 
addition, Document No. 15 also provides the supporting operational guidelines.
Document No. 15 can be seen as a further extension of the Notice on Matters 
Relating to the Pilot Services for Cross-Border Transfer of Non-Performing 
Assets of Banks in the Jurisdiction of the Shenzhen Branch issued by SAFE in 
2017 and its approval for the renewal of the pilot term in 2018, the Operational 
Guidelines on the Provision of Pilot Services for Cross-Border Transfer of Non-
Performing Assets of Banks in Shenzhen issued by the Shenzhen SAFE branch 
in 2018 and the SAFE’s approval for Guangdong Financial Assets Exchange to 
conduct pilot cross-border business of non-performing assets (“NPAs”) in 2018. 
The Opinions on Financial Support for the Development of the Guangdong-Hong 
Kong-Macao Greater Bay Area (the “new GBA policy”) issued by the PBOC, 
CBIRC, CSRC and SAFE on 24 April 2020 further proposes to steadily expand 
the pilot services for cross-border asset transfer and explore more categories of 
assets available for cross-border transfers. This is also what the market is looking 
forward to. Compared to Document No. 15, all of the issuing authorities of the 
new GBA policy have escalated to the national level. We would like to take a look 
at whether the new pilot services for cross-border asset transfer can resolve the 
Cross-border asset transfer 
under the new GBA policy
Yang Xiaoquan, Zhong Xin, Zhou Jie, David Mu, Du Rui
Yang Xiaoquan
Zhong Xin
Zhou Jie
David Mu
FINANCIAL MARKETS


19
current dilemma and bring a new breakthrough.
I. NPAs - more permitted primary trading market 
participants for specific categories of banks’ 
NPAs
If the new GBA policy allows Chinese banks to transfer 
their NPAs directly to foreign investors, it is necessary to 
make an institutional breakthrough to address the two-tier 
trading market issue in the disposal of banks’ NPAs.
The NPAs of Chinese banks are transferred in the 
primary and secondary trading markets. As required 
by the Administrative Measures for Bulk Transfer of 
Non-Performing Assets of Financial Enterprises (the 
“Administrative Measures”), Chinese financial institutions, 
especially state-owned banks, must transfer their NPAs 
in bulk to financial asset management companies (the 
“AMCs”, including the national and local AMCs), forming 
a primary trading market. The AMCs then dispose of 
the NPAs to domestic and foreign investors, forming 
a secondary trading market. One of the institutional 
reasons for the formation of the two-tier markets is that 
the acquisition of NPAs from Chinese financial institutions 
is a licensed financial transaction at the regulatory level 
in which institutions other than AMCs are ineligible to 
participate directly.
With the further opening-up of China’s financial market, 
foreign asset management firms or investors (“foreign 
investors”) have been allowed to invest in the primary 
market by establishing foreign-funded AMCs in China. 
But they are still not permitted to bid for or buy NPAs of 
Chinese banks directly in the primary market.
For certain categories of domestic NPAs, however, due to 
their particularity, the new GBA policy is expected to bring 
about some institutional breakthroughs. For example:
(i)	 Overseas NPLs converted from the loans granted by 
Chinese banks in accordance with the commercial 
lending principles (“foreign-related NPAs”, including 
those in which the borrower and security assets 
are located outside China, or in which the borrower 
and core security assets are located outside China 
but there is a domestic guarantor): As the borrower 
and assets involved in foreign-related NPAs are 
both located abroad, foreign investors will be more 
interested in and capable of acquiring and managing 
foreign-related NPAs than AMCs. If the new GBA 
policy explicitly expands the participants in the primary 
trading market for foreign-related NPAs to include 
foreign investors, it will facilitate the external disposal 
of foreign-related NPAs of Chinese banks in Shenzhen 
and beyond through the agency regime of the local 
banks or exchanges under Document No. 15. Thus, 
it will enhance the efficiency of the divestment and 
disposal of foreign-related NPAs. In the long run, the 
new GBA policy will also help Chinese banks and 
AMCs to expand their international business and form 
a closed loop for cross-border financing business.
(ii)	 NPLs converted from proprietary foreign exchange 
loans granted by Chinese banks in China (“domestic 
foreign-currency NPAs”): Under such assets, it is 
difficult for the lending bank to eventually receive 
foreign exchange funds from the borrower. It is more 
likely to recover RMB funds from the borrower and 
then apply to the relevant SAFE office for balancing 
the accounts in a foreign currency. Even if an AMC 
intends to acquire a bank’s domestic foreign-currency 
NPAs, its direct payment of the purchase price in a 
foreign currency is currently not allowed in China. If 
payment is made in RMB, the transferring bank will 
also face an institutional breakthrough to be made for 
balancing the accounts of the transfer consideration in 
a foreign currency. We note that the current policy has 
already allowed banks to transfer certain categories of 
performing trade loans across borders. Considering 
that the vast majority of domestic foreign-currency 
NPAs evolved from performing trade loans, it is 
unnecessary to treat the transferees differently simply 
because the same category of loans bears differently 
classified risks.
In addition, we also note that the regulators are issuing 
to the relevant institutions the Opinions on the Pilot 
Programme for Transfer of Non-Performing Loans and the 
Implementation Plan of the Pilot Programme for Transfer 
of Non-Performing Loans of Banks (the “new NPA 
policies”). Although the new NPA policies allow banks to 
transfer corporate NPLs in a single account and individual 
NPLs in bulk, the policies are still tending to limit the 
transferees of single-account corporate NPLs to AMCs. 
If the new GBA policy not only relaxes the restrictions on 
the direct transfer of the above two categories of NPAs to 
foreign investors, but also does not limit the number of the 
accounts, it will be more conducive to the market-based 
disposal of such NPAs. In particular, it will help facilitate the 
disposal of foreign-related NPAs with complex structure 
and involving multiple jurisdictions as well as address the 
business needs of foreign investors to purchase from a 
single account in general.
II. NPAs - more permitted categories of NPAs and 
institutions
The new GBA policy will provide a stronger impetus to the 
market if, in addition to Chinese banks and AMCs, more 
domestic financial institutions, such as trust companies, 
and factoring companies, financial leasing companies, 
guarantee companies and micro-loan companies actually 
under the local financial regulatory system, are allowed to 
transfer NPAs to foreign investors.
The Administrative Measures also recognise trust 
companies as the permitted transferors. The credit assets 
of Chinese banks are state-owned financial assets. The 
trust NPLs generated under the pooled (single) fund trust 


20
schemes of trust companies, however, are trust property. 
It is inappropriate to restrict the transfer of trust NPLs as 
long as the principal or beneficiary under the trust contract 
agrees on such transfer. The attitude of the regulators, of 
course, is crucial to the recognition of trust companies as 
participants in the external transfers.
Banks and trust companies are explicitly governed by 
the Administrative Measures issued by the Ministry of 
Finance and China Banking Regulatory Commission 
while factoring companies, financial leasing companies, 
guarantee companies and micro-loan companies are 
substantially regulated by local authorities. In comparison, 
it is theoretically less difficult to make a breakthrough in 
the policy concerning the locally regulated companies than 
the above two nationally regulated categories of entities. 
Whether permissions may be given to local financial 
entities, and if yes, to what categories of such entities 
and to which regions, under the new GBA policy depend 
to a considerable extent on the attitude of local financial 
regulators in the GBA. At present, factoring companies 
and financial leasing companies in the Shenzhen market 
are already transferring their performing factoring and 
financial leasing assets to foreign investors. Accordingly, 
we believe that there is a greater possibility that these two 
categories of entities will be permitted to transfer their 
NPAs to foreign investors. It is expected that micro-loan 
companies and guarantee companies are allowed under 
the new GBA policy to transfer their NPAs across borders.
Apart from the breakthrough of the existing policies, 
the subsequent scale of foreign debt is to be further 
considered by the regulators. This practical issue will 
be addressed through macro-prudent management in 
accordance with Document No. 15 and other applicable 
instruments. In accordance with the similar existing 
regimes, we expect that a certain categories of permitted 
financial entities or all those in a certain region will be 
allowed to transfer their NPAs across borders within the 
quota, not foreign debt quota, granted based on their 
business data and certain macro-prudential factors.
III. NPAs - filing of foreign debt quota with the 
National Development and Reform Commission 
(“NDRC”)
The external transfer of NPAs is not only subject to the 
foreign debt management of the SAFE, but also relates to 
the application of the Notice of the National Development 
and Reform Commission on Accelerating Reform on the 
Administration of Filing and Registration of Foreign Debts 
Issued by Enterprises (“Document No. 2044”).
The external transfer of NPAs by AMCs has become much 
easier in terms of the acquisition of foreign exchange 
income and the subsequent clearing and remittance after 
the introduction of the Measures for the Administration 
of Foreign Debt Registration and the Notice on Issues 
Relating to Foreign Exchange Management in Disposal of 
Non-Performing Assets to Foreign Investors by Financial 
Asset Management Companies, as part of the initiatives in 
foreign exchange management to facilitate such external 
transfer. Furthermore, Document No. 15 has further 
simplified the relevant foreign exchange procedures by 
allowing a third-party agency to be in the picture.
However, there has been no breakthrough on the filing 
of foreign debt quota in the Document No. 2044. In 
accordance with the Notice of the National Development 
and Reform Commission on Effectively Conducting the 
Reform of Foreign Debts Management in the Transfer of 
Debts to Foreign Investors, Document No. 2044 shall 
apply to the transfer of non-performing debts by domestic 
financial institutions to foreign investors, which gives rise to 
their external liabilities. Domestic financial institutions may 
not apply to the competent foreign exchange authorities 
for registration of foreign debts and the transfer of funds 
until receipt of the registration certificate from the NDRC. 
If it is intended to include other financial institutions as 
the permitted transferors under the new GBA policy, 
consideration will have to be given on how to meet the 
filing requirements as set out in Document No. 2044. To 
that end, is it possible that NDRC grants the Shenzhen 
NDRC branch a separate annual foreign debt quota for 
the NPAs in the GBA to facilitate the relevant filing by 
the domestic entities transferring their NPAs to foreign 
investors under the new GBA policy?
IV. Performing assets - external transfer of 
domestic performing debt assets
If domestic performing debt assets become externally 
transferable under the new GBA policy, it will be a major 
breakthrough from the perspective of capital account 
management. 
The permitted domestic performing debt assets are limited 
to bank debts in trade finance under the current policies. 
There are also external transfers of performing assets of 
factoring companies and financial leasing companies in 
the Shenzhen market. 
In respect of bank debts in trade finance, the Shenzhen 
Self-regulatory Mechanism for Foreign Exchange 
and Cross-Border RMB Business issued the Interim 
Administrative Requirements for Services for Cross-Border 
RMB Asset Transfer. Domestic banks are thus allowed 
to transfer their accepted bills assets and RMB forfaiting 
assets to overseas banks on the premise of effectively 
fulfilling the three principles for business development: 
understanding your clients, understanding your services 
and due diligence. As the Mechanism is guided by the 
Shenzhen Central Sub-branch of the PBOC, those 
prescribed requirements reflect to a certain extent the 
attitude of the PBOC. Additionally, under the guidance 
of the PBOC Shanghai Head Office, the Cross-border 
Financial Services Professional Committee of the Shanghai 
Finance Society formulated the Operational Guidelines for 
FINANCIAL MARKETS


21
Cross-border Transfer of Domestic Trade Finance Assets 
in the Lin-Gang Special Area (for Trial Implementation) 
in March this year, which initially allows the transfer of 
forfaiting and risk based on domestic letters of credit 
trade settlement, and will also gradually make available 
the external transfer of other asset categories in trade 
finance in the future. In contrast, Document No. 15 only 
provides that the pilot institutions in the GBA are allowed 
to transfer bank trade finance to foreign investors without 
specifying categories of business. Can it be interpreted 
that the GBA will permit the transfer of all categories of 
bank trade finance assets across borders at once or 
in the short term? We do not see the filing procedures 
and macro-prudential management standards for cross-
border transfer of trade finance assets in the Operational 
Guidelines for the Pilot Business of External Transfer of 
Domestic Credit Assets, one of the annexes to Document 
No. 15. It will take some time for the specific rules to be 
implemented. From the related statements in Document 
No. 15, however, it should at least be assumed that the 
GBA has put the cross-border transfer of all categories of 
bank trade finance assets on its agenda.
For other performing debt assets, we understand that 
the change in the management of foreign debt makes 
the permitted external transfer of domestic performing 
debt assets possible. The foreign debt quota for domestic 
institutions under the current foreign debt management 
regulations has been unified, i.e., 2.5 times the audited net 
assets. In Shenzhen, the registration of foreign debt has 
also been changed from a one-by-one registration to a 
one-off registration for all foreign debt quota. Theoretically, 
as long as the amount of foreign debt transferred does 
not exceed the foreign debt quota available for domestic 
borrowers, a lenient approach can be adopted.
The external transfer of performing debt assets, if 
moderately permitted, under the new GBA policy may be 
dealt with in the following ways:
Firstly, to reduce the pressure of administrative filings 
under Document No. 2044, the term of the debt may not 
exceed one year.
Secondly, the transferors may be limited to local financial 
enterprises. Domestic borrowers will be possibly allowed 
to make repayments to foreign investors only in the original 
currency of the debt, in accordance with the principle of 
"the same currency of withdrawal and repayment" under 
the foreign debt management system.
Thirdly, the domestic borrower should be an institution 
that adopts a one-time foreign debt quota registration to 
facilitate the management of foreign exchange.
Conclusion 
Under the new GBA policy, regardless of the innovation 
and breakthrough for cross-border asset transfers, it 
is unlikely that there will be any change to the subject 
prohibited to borrow foreign debts under the current 
foreign debt management regulations and the non-
permitted categories of NPAs of Chinese financial 
institutions pursuant to the Administrative Measures. 
Private non-performing debts between enterprises may 
currently be acquired and transferred to foreign investors 
by AMCs. Nor will such debts be unlikely to become 
permitted. In terms of the mechanism, it is likely that the 
authenticity review and “anti-money laundering, anti-
terrorist financing, anti-tax evasion” obligations will be 
placed on the AMCs. 
The restrictions on single-account transfers of corporate 
NPLs and bulk transfers of individual NPLs have already 
showed a sign of relaxation under the new NPA policies. 
The institutional arrangements for external transfers of 
cross-border assets under the new GBA policy come at 
an opportune time. Perhaps the institutional breakthroughs 
and innovations for external transfers of cross-border 
assets under the new GBA policy will go far beyond our 
understanding and expectations in this article. This is also 
what the market is looking forward to.    


22
Wealth Management Connect 
(Southbound) under the new GBA policy
Yang Xiaoquan, Zhong Xin, Du Rui
The Outline Development Plan for the Guangdong-Hong Kong-Macao Greater Bay Area (the 
“Outline”), a fundamental document guiding the development of the GBA, was officially released on 
18 February 2019. The Outline defines the scope of the GBA, pointing out the connectivity systems 
applicable to the three places as well as their respective key areas of development. On 14 May 
2020, the People's Bank of China (PBOC), China Banking and Insurance Regulatory Commission 
(CBIRC), China Securities Regulatory Commission (CSRC) and State Administration of Foreign 
Exchange (SAFE) jointly issued the Opinions on Financial Support for the Construction of the 
Guangdong-Hong Kong-Macao Greater Bay Area Yin Fa [2020] No. 95 (the “Opinions”), proposing 
26 measures in five aspects to promote the implementation of the Outline financially. 
The cross-boundary wealth management connect scheme (Wealth Management Connect) is not a 
new measure proposed by the Opinions, since the Outline already put forward “cross distribution of 
wealth management products” in 2019. “Mainland residents can open accounts in Hong Kong via 
Mainland banks, and account holders can use renminbi to directly invest in or use foreign exchange 
to invest in overseas financial products, including stocks, bonds and paper gold. Following the 
completion of investment, conversion and remittance can only be made in renminbi, and domestic 
funds can only be withdrawn domestically,” said early reports, citing a source. Cross-boundary 
fund flow management will refer to the practice of Stock Connect, where funds are managed in 
a closed loop. The Opinions further clarifies that, residents of the Mainland cities in the GBA can 
invest in eligible investment products distributed by banks in Hong Kong and Macao by opening 
designated investment accounts with these banks (Southbound Wealth Management Connect), 
and residents of Hong Kong and Macao can invest in eligible wealth management products 
distributed by Mainland banks in the GBA by opening designated investment accounts with these 
banks (Northbound Wealth Management Connect). This points out where the scheme should head 
for at the beginning.
For Mainland residents, the annual quota of collection and settlement of foreign exchange is 
capped at USD 50,000. There are exemptions, however. Individuals in new business forms such 
as cross-border e-commerce and cross-border procurement (under current account) and those 
investing in stocks, funds, bonds and other financial products in overseas secondary markets (under 
capital account) through the Qualified Domestic Institutional Investor (QDII) mechanism are not 
subject to such quota. Around 2015, the Chinese government wished to allow residents of six pilot 
cities to invest directly in offshore assets within an annual quota of RMB 1,000,000 under a new 
QDII2 program, which failed to be implemented for various reasons.
Although the Wealth Management Connect does not mean all restrictions on the direct investment 
of GBA residents in products offered in overseas secondary markets are completed lifted, it is 
still an important complement to Mainland residents’ investment in overseas secondary markets 
via the QDII mechanism. Unlike QDII, Wealth Management Connect customers will receive direct 
wealth management services from banks in Hong Kong and Macao, rather than making overseas 
investment indirectly by buying the capital management products/wealth management products 
developed by Mainland QDII institutions. This will undoubtedly provide GBA residents with more 
options for investment and financial management as well as asset allocation in both local and 
foreign currencies. The policy surely has a positive impact, but it takes time to have it implemented. 
This article focuses on Southbound Wealth Management Connect, discussing and identifying its 
highlights of innovation and potential obstacles.
I. Qualifications of investment entities for Southbound Wealth Management Connect
As a regional financial development initiative, Wealth Management Connect should focus on 
Yang Xiaoquan
Zhong Xin
FINANCIAL MARKETS


23
bringing benefits to GBA residents.
We expect that regulators will set criteria for what 
constitutes a GBA resident by referring to factors such as 
household registration, social security contributions, and 
living and residency records in the GBA.
What comes next, following the identification of GBA 
residents, is how to define a qualified investor. We discuss 
it in the next section since it is related to the types of wealth 
management products. 
In addition, residents inside and outside the GBA are 
subject to different policies and treatment, and Wealth 
Management Connect products are designed to be sold to 
individual residents of the nine Mainland cities in the GBA. 
It will be difficult to prevent residents outside the nine cities 
from purchasing such products through borrowed quota, 
channels and accounts. The potential civil disputes as a 
result also call for early attention from relevant authorities.
II. Whether product standards will be set
The Guiding Opinions on Regulating the Asset Management 
Business of Financial Institutions (the “Guiding Opinions”), 
the Measures for the Supervision and Administration of the 
Wealth Management Business of Commercial Banks and 
the Measures for the Administration of Wealth Management 
Subsidiaries of Commercial Banks have fully regulated 
wealth management products offered by domestic banks 
in terms of fund-raising methods, product classification and 
targeted markets, leverage ratio of products, criteria for 
qualified investors, and sales modes.
The rules and standards for wealth management products 
distributed by banks in Hong Kong and Macao are different 
from those of the Mainland. The question is whether it is 
necessary to set standards for GBA residents to subscribe 
to wealth management products distributed by banks in 
Hong Kong and Macao, or whether it is possible to entirely 
rely on the regulation and product rules of Hong Kong and 
Macao financial regulators on those wealth management 
products. (For instance, the Hong Kong Securities and 
Futures Commission, the competent regulatory authority 
for investment products in the Hong Kong market, and the 
Hong Kong Monetary Authority, the competent regulatory 
authority for deposit business, both have imposed very 
specific authorisation or registration, product classification, 
suitability assessment, information disclosure and other 
regulatory requirements on different products). If we refer 
to the basic principles of financial connectivity mechanisms 
such as Shanghai-Shenzhen/Shanghai-Hong Kong Stock 
Connect and Bond Connect, Mainland residents in the 
GBA should also follow the rules introduced by Hong Kong 
and Macao financial regulators when subscribing for and 
investing in Hong Kong and Macao wealth management 
products and managing their investment positions in 
Southbound Wealth Management Connect. We also expect 
that Chinese regulators will put forward relevant provisions 
on the range and standards for Southbound Wealth 
Management Connect products from the perspectives of 
foreign exchange management scale, consumer protection 
and stability.
In this regard, we understand that in order to implement 
Southbound Wealth Management Connect as soon as 
possible, the scheme may focus on wealth management 
products publicly offered by banks in Hong Kong and 
Macao in the early stage. Such products may be those 
that have no investment threshold or complex product 
structure, or those whose underlying or associated assets 
are standardised products, including financial instruments 
such as funds, bonds and investment products with low 
risk ratings, and RMB and foreign currency deposits. The 
reasons are:
(i)	 Publicly offered products target standardised assets, 
meeting the investment preferences of the vast majority 
of individual investors; and
(ii)	 There is no excessive purchase threshold for publicly 
offered products, so personal use of foreign exchange 
can be controlled.
We believe it is not likely that privately offered wealth 
management products will be made available in the 
short term. Apart from consumer protection and other 
considerations, another important reason is that new 
GBA policy still focuses on promoting Qualified Domestic 
Limited Partner (QDLP) and Qualified Domestic Investment 
Enterprise (QDIE), which tend to find outbound investment 
possibilities for non-standard assets such as overseas 
private equity funds and unlisted equity investments. We 
would be happy if there could be more Southbound Wealth 
Management Connect products available.
III. Sales and funding pathways of wealth 
management products distributed by banks in 
Hong Kong and Macao
The subscription, investment, transfer, sale, liquidation, 
repatriation of funds of Southbound Wealth Management 
Connect products and management of positions of 
other products are not possible without the support of 
bank accounts and banking services. In February 2019 
when Wealth Management Connect was first introduced, 
the Outline confirmed the proposal of “closed-loop 
management of funds”. And there are two possible ways of 
its implementation:
(1) Referring to the “cross distribution of wealth 
management products” proposed in the Outline, which 
relies mainly on the account management system of 
banks in the nine cities to provide services such as 
product promotion, sales and fund clearing. Such 
banks act as agents for banks in Hong Kong and 
Macao (issuers) to lead business operations. In this way, 
Mainland regulations on capital inflow and outflow and 
territorial protection of Mainland investors will also be more 


24
effective, and Mainland bank accounts are where cash flow 
takes place. This is a more convenient approach in terms 
of account opening and account management. However, 
when selling Hong Kong and Macao wealth management 
products on a commission basis, banks in the nine cities 
have higher requirements on whether they should comply 
with the sales requirements of both the Mainland and Hong 
Kong and Macao and on how to divide responsibilities.
(2) Relying on the practices of offshore banks to provide 
complete Southbound Wealth Management Connect 
services. The advantage of this approach is that banks in 
Hong Kong and Macao can complete relevant promotion, 
sales, disclosure, and management procedures under 
the local regulatory framework, provided that Mainland 
residents in the GBA open bank accounts with Hong Kong 
and Macao banks in advance. Under the current regulatory 
framework, however, it is difficult to open an account 
remotely in practice.
On the one hand, theoretically, remote account opening 
by Hong Kong and Macao banks with the help of the 
attestation services provided by their Mainland branches or 
affiliates (“Account Opening Attestation Banks”) is, to some 
extent, likely to be taken as illegal cross-boundary financial 
service. Wealth Management Connect, if implemented in 
this way, may be regarded as a formal permit for Hong 
Kong and Macao banks to provide cross-boundary financial 
services for Mainland residents. On the other hand, Account 
Opening Attestation Banks can only open accounts in 
Hong Kong and Macao for Mainland residents holding 
long-term visas. This regulatory requirement is awkward 
in a sense. That is especially the case when the one-hour 
living circle in the GBA has already taken shape. Mainland 
residents who hold long-term visas can directly open 
accounts in Hong Kong and Macao without going through 
the attestation procedure of Account Opening Attestation 
Banks. The requirement is contrary to the original intention 
of the Opinions and the Outline to provide convenience and 
benefit to the people.
Therefore, we expect that Southbound Wealth Management 
Connect will consider the pros and cons of the above two 
approaches from the perspectives of product sales, capital 
flow and account management. The regulatory and banking 
cooperation of the three places will thus be strengthened.
From the perspective of sales, regulators need to be 
more tolerant of cross-boundary business of each other’s 
financial institutions (Mainland regulators should not easily 
deem Hong Kong and Macao banks’ financial services to 
Mainland customers illegal, and Hong Kong and Macao 
regulators should take an inclusive approach to the sales 
promotions of Mainland agency banks. Together they strive 
to promote business development by seeking common 
ground). Banks must emphasize business cooperation and 
information sharing (banks in Hong Kong and Macao in 
particular, should provide more business training for their 
Mainland agency banks, and endeavor to ensure maximum 
efficiency of compliance risk control by keeping their 
respective differences).
From the perspective of account opening, regulators 
should reassess risk factors in cross-boundary business 
(including asset safety and foreign exchange regulation), 
relax the conditions for Mainland residents in the GBA 
to open accounts in Hong Kong and Macao through a 
Mainland attestation bank, and make full use of virtual 
banking, e-banking and other new technologies to deal 
with and prevent traditional risks. On this basis, as far as 
subscription funds and proceeds remittance are concerned, 
it is necessary to strengthen business cooperation between 
Mainland banks and Hong Kong and Macao banks to 
ensure that onshore and offshore accounts under the same 
name are relevant in a closed loop, thus satisfying the 
requirement of “closed-end operation”.
IV. Foreign exchange purchase quota of Mainland 
GBA residents for cross-boundary wealth 
management products 
In our opinion, whether the cross-boundary wealth 
management connect scheme will continue the USD 
50,000 annual quota is related to the types of wealth 
management products initially available. If Mainland 
GBA residents are allowed to buy publicly offered wealth 
management products from banks in Hong Kong and 
Macao as we anticipated, there are chances that they may 
use the above-mentioned foreign exchange quota directly 
or be provided with a separate quota of USD 50,000, which 
is more in line with the actual income of most Mainland 
residents in the GBA. Another option is to set two-way 
net inflow/outflow quotas with corresponding closed-end 
capital operations and macro control, with reference to the 
management mode of the previous Shanghai-Hong Kong 
Stock Connect/Shenzhen-Hong Kong Stock Connect or 
Mutual Recognition of Funds.
Conclusion
Despite restrictions in its early implementation, Southbound 
Wealth Management Connect will undoubtedly expand 
Mainland residents' direct access to services of Hong Kong 
and Macao financial institutions, without having to invest in 
Hong Kong financial products indirectly through QDIIs. For 
the same reason, allowing GBA residents to invest in these 
different financial markets puts forward higher requirements 
on the way to improve the financial risk management 
system, strengthen financial regulation cooperation and 
consumer protection in the three places.
As long as risks are under control, we believe that GBA 
financial markets will gradually establish smooth passages, 
allowing more Southbound Wealth Management Connect 
products to be available to Mainland residents in the GBA.
FINANCIAL MARKETS


25
I. Background
Cross-boundary Wealth Management Connect (“Wealth Management Connect”) will 
soon operate across the GBA.
The Hong Kong Monetary Authority (“HKMA”), the People’s Bank of China (“PBOC”) 
and the Monetary Authority of Macao have unveiled the framework (“Joint Framework”) 
in June 2020 for the Wealth Management Connect pilot scheme
1. Later in February 
2021, the PBOC, HKMA and other institutions signed a Memorandum of Understanding 
to clarify the scope of responsibility of relevant institutions regarding the supervision 
and cooperation of the GBA Wealth Management Connect. Recently in May 2021, the 
Guangzhou Branch of PBOC, Shenzhen Central Sub-branch of PBOC, China Banking 
and Insurance Regulatory Commission (“CBIRC”) and other Chinese regulatory institutions 
have issued the draft “Implementation Arrangements for the Cross-boundary Wealth 
Management Connect Pilot Scheme in the Guangdong-Hong Kong-Macao Greater Bay 
Area (Draft for Solicitation of Comments)” (“Implementation Rules”)
2.
The wealth management market has longed for the individual investor version of the 
qualified foreign institutional investor and the qualified domestic institutional investor 
schemes since 2015
3. As mentioned in our Greater Bay Area publication issued in June 
2020
4, the GBA Wealth Management Connect was initially proposed by the Central 
People’s Government of the People’s Republic of China in November 2019
5, and then 
supported by a joint opinion issued by the PBOC, CBIRC, China Securities Regulatory 
Commission (“CSRC”) and State Administration of Foreign Exchange (“SAFE”) in May 
2020
6. Following the successful launch of the Stock Connect in 2014 and the Bond 
Connect in 2017, the Wealth Management Connect is the latest access channel to the 
suite of Connect schemes linking the capital markets in China Mainland and Hong Kong 
SAR.
This article synthesises important information about the Wealth Management Connect in 
the Joint Framework and the Implementation Rules.
Analysis of the Wealth Management Connect 
Framework
Minny Siu, Richard Mazzochi, Cindy Shek, Yu Leimin, Agnes Chan
1HKMA, “Joint Announcement of the People’s Bank of China, the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, and the Monetary Authority 
of Macao on the Launch of the Cross-boundary Wealth Management Connect Pilot Scheme in the Guangdong-Hong 
Kong-Macao Greater Bay Area” (dated 29 June 2020), available at https://www.hkma.gov.hk/eng/news-and-media/press-
releases/2020/06/20200629-4/.
2Implementation Arrangements for the Cross-boundary Wealth Management Connect Pilot Scheme in the Guangdong-
Hong Kong-Macao Greater Bay Area (Draft for Solicitation of Comments) (《关于< 粤港澳大湾区“跨境理财通”业务试点
实施细则（征求意见稿）> 公开征求意见的通知》) (dated 6 May 2021), available at http://guangzhou.pbc.gov.cn/guangzh
ou/129142/129156/3833128/4243943/index.html (Chinese only).
3For more details, please refer to our publication entitled “KWM Connect - China Stock Connect and Mutual Recognition of 
Funds” (June 2015), available at https://www.kwm.com/en/hk/knowledge/downloads/kwm-connect-crossborder-investment-
hk-china-20150630.
4King & Wood Mallesons, “Something for everyone: New plans to support the development of the Greater Bay Area 
unveiled” (dated 8 June 2020), available at https://www.kwm.com/en/hk/knowledge/downloads/new-plans-to-support-gba-
unveiled-20200608.
5Press release of the HKSAR Government entitled “CE attends meeting of Leading Group for Development of Guangdong-
Hong Kong-Macao Greater Bay Area (with photos/videos)” (dated 6 November 2019), available at  https://www.info.gov.hk/gia/
general/201911/06/P2019110600764.htm?fontSize=1.
6Opinions on Financial Support for the Development of the Guangdong-Hong Kong-Macao Greater Bay Area jointly issued 
by the PBOC, CBIRC, CSRC and SAFE (“ 中国人民银行 中国银行保险监督管理委员会 中国证券监督管理委员会 国家外
汇管理局关于金融支持粤港澳大湾区建设的意见”) (dated 14 May 2020), available at http://www.pbc.gov.cn/goutongjiaol
iu/113456/113469/4023428/index.html (Chinese only).
Minny Siu
Richard Mazzochi
Cindy Shek
Agnes Chan
Yu Leimin


26
What is "Wealth Management Connect"?
It is an arrangement under which eligible individual residents in the GBA carry out 
cross-boundary investment in wealth management products distributed by banks in 
GBA. This is established through a closed-loop funds flow channel of the regional 
banking system, including:
(a) Southbound route - for individual residents of the Mainland cities in the GBA to access 
offshore wealth investment products distributed by banks in Hong Kong (and Macao) 
(i.e. Mainland investors investing in Hong Kong/Macao); and
(b) Northbound route - for individual residents of Hong Kong and Macao to access 
onshore PRC wealth investment products distributed by banks in the GBA (i.e. offshore 
investors investing in Mainland China). 
II. Wealth Management Connect – Southbound and Northbound
According to the Implementation Rules, the Wealth Management Connect is defined as follows:
 The diagram below illustrates the southbound and the northbound investment flows contemplated 
under the Wealth Management Connect.
 
III. Key features
Key features of the Wealth Management Connect are highlighted below:
FINANCIAL MARKETS


27
(I) Scope of eligible investors – residents in the GBA
Eligible individuals in China Mainland and Hong Kong SAR can personally (and not in joint names) 
make cross-boundary investments through the Wealth Management Connect.
Southbound route
Eligible Mainland investors must fulfil at least four requirements as illustrated below.
According to the Implementation Rules, eligible Mainland investors must meet the following 
requirements:
1)  having full capacity for civil conduct;
2)	 having the household registration of the 9 Mainland cities in the GBA or having paid continuous 
social security or personal income tax in the 9 Mainland cities in the GBA for at least 5 years;
3)	 having more than 2 years of investment experience and having a household financial net asset 
end-of-month balance of not less than Renminbi 1 million in the last 3 months, or having a 
household financial asset end-of-month balance of not less than Renminbi 2 million in the last 
three months; and
4)	 using their own funds to purchase investment products.
Northbound route
Eligible Hong Kong investors must meet the relevant requirements set by the Hong Kong financial 
regulators. At present, the Hong Kong financial regulators have not yet announced the relevant rules. 
We expect that all Hong Kong resident identity card holders will be eligible Hong Kong investors. 
(II) Eligible investment products – simple and low risk products
Southbound route
The scope of the investment products in the southbound route is regulated by the Hong Kong 
financial regulators. At present, the Hong Kong financial regulators have not yet announced the 
relevant rules. We expect that during the initial stage of the Wealth Management Connect, low-risk 
wealth management products with a simple structure (such as mutual funds) are more likely to be 
included as eligible investment products under the southbound route, whereas high-risk products 
with a complex structure may only be included for trading at a later stage.
Northbound route
According to the Implementation Rules, the scope of investment products under the northbound 
route (i.e. onshore Chinese wealth management investment products available for Hong Kong 
residents to invest) include: 
1)	 Non-guaranteed net worth wealth management products (except cash management financial 
products) issued by Mainland Chinese financial companies (including wealth management 
subsidiaries of banks and joint venture wealth management companies controlled by foreign 
companies), and assessed by the issuer and the Mainland agency bank
7 to be of “level 1” to “level 
3” risk; 
7“Mainland agency banks” refer to the Mainland banking financial institutions in the GBA that sell investment products under the northbound 
route as agents.


28
2)	 Publicly offered securities investment funds assessed by the Mainland public fund manager and 
the Mainland agency bank with a risk rating of “R1” to “R3”.
(III) Account opening and bundling – one-to-one bundling of the remittance and investment 
accounts
Investors must open a new local account or use an existing local account as the dedicated remittance 
account. After a local commercial bank has reviewed the requisite application documents, investors 
may open a dedicated investment account with a designated bank in Hong Kong SAR or China 
Mainland (as the case may be). As illustrated below, the dedicated investment account should be 
bundled with the dedicated remittance account with a bank in Hong Kong SAR or China Mainland (as 
the case may be).
(IV) Closed-loop mechanism of cross-boundary funds flow
The Joint Framework and the Implementation Rules provide that the cross-boundary flow of funds 
between China Mainland and Hong Kong SAR will be implemented through the one-to-one bundling 
of the dedicated investment account and the dedicated remittance account subject to closed-loop 
mechanism and quota management.
According to the Implementation Rules, all cross-boundary remittances of the Wealth Management 
Connect should be conducted in Renminbi, and any FX/CNY currency conversion must be conducted 
in the offshore market. The following diagram shows the closed-loop mechanism of cross-boundary 
funds flow through the Renminbi Cross-border Interbank Payment System (“CIPS”).
FINANCIAL MARKETS


29
“
”
8Net inflow of funds for northbound route = cumulative inflow of funds for northbound route – cumulative outflow of funds for northbound route; 
Net outflow of funds for southbound route = cumulative outflow of funds for southbound route – cumulative inflow of funds for southbound route.
9Net personal funds inward remittance for northbound route = cumulative inward remittance for northbound route – cumulative outward 
remittance for northbound route; Net personal funds outward remittance for southbound route = cumulative outward remittance for southbound 
funds– cumulative inward remittance for southbound route.
10South China Morning Post, “Hong Kong wealth managers can’t wait for new Connect programme, with Singapore ready to pounce on city’s 
troubles” (dated 22 June 2020), available at https://www.scmp.com/business/banking-finance/article/3089974/hong-kong-wealth-managers-
cant-wait-new-connect-programme.
11HKMA, inSight “Wealth Management Connect Scheme in the Greater Bay Area” (dated 29 June 2020), available at https://www.hkma.gov.hk/
eng/news-and-media/insight/2020/06/20200629/.
 We summarise the relevant Implementation Rules as follows:
1)	 Investors may use Renminbi for cross-boundary remittances subject to the aggregate and 
individual investor quotas prescribed by the regulators from time to time; 
2)	 Funds deposited in the dedicated investment account can only be used to purchase eligible 
investment products. If the wealth management product is denominated in Hong Kong dollar or 
other foreign currencies, Renminbi will be converted into an appropriate currency in the offshore 
market;
3)	 Investors cannot withdraw money from the dedicated investment account; and
4)	 Realised investment proceeds will be converted into Renminbi and remitted through the CIPS for 
cross-boundary remittance.  
Currently, the relevant Hong Kong financial regulators have not yet announced the relevant cross-
boundary remittance rules. We expect that the rules of the Hong Kong financial regulators will be 
consistent with the Implementation Rules. 
(V) Quota restriction
The cross-boundary fund flows under the northbound and southbound Wealth Management Connect 
are subject to aggregate and individual investor quotas prescribed by the regulators from time to 
time. In accordance with Articles 41 and 46 of the Implementation Rules, the current aggregate and 
individual investor quota are tentatively set at 150 billion yuan
8 and 1 million yuan respectively
9.
Conclusion
The fund industry has anticipated that the number of HK fund customers will increase 10-fold due to 
the Wealth Management Connect
10. The Wealth Management Connect will foster financial integration 
and create greater connectivity between Hong Kong SAR and China Mainland. It will “further 
consolidate Hong Kong’s role as an international financial centre and the world’s offshore Renminbi 
business hub”. Eddie Yue, the Chief Executive of the HKMA, pointed out that
11:
[the] WMC will create a much greater customer base and generous room for growth for Hong Kong’s 
financial services industry. …. it will drive the development of the entire financial services value chain, 
encompassing product development, distribution, asset management and related professional and 
support services, …. expand the catchment area of our wealth management industry, providing 
greater incentives for global financial institutions to set up and expand their presence in Hong Kong to 
serve Mainland investors.


30
The Hong Kong Government has introduced legislative amendments to facilitate 
the issuance of insurance linked securities (ILS) in Hong Kong SAR. The Insurance 
(Amendment) Ordinance 2020
1 (Ordinance) and the Insurance (Special Purpose Business) 
Rules
2 (Cap. 41P of the Laws of Hong Kong) (together, the Amendments) provides the 
legal framework for the issuance of ILS in Hong Kong, and has come into force on 29 
March 2021. Further, to attract issuers and sponsors of onshore and offshore institutions 
to issue ILS in Hong Kong, the Hong Kong government announced a two-year Pilot 
Insurance‑linked Securities Grant Scheme followed by more details regarding that scheme 
on 3 May 2021 released by the Insurance Authority (IA).
With privileged access to the China Mainland market and the “Belt & Road”
3, “Greater 
Bay Area”
4 and “Wealth Management Connect”
5 initiatives as broader policy drives, 
Hong Kong SAR is well-positioned to tap into the growing opportunities in  China 
Mainland’s reinsurance market where Mainland Chinese insurance companies are likely 
to take advantage of the newly proposed regime to issue ILS in Hong Kong. This is also 
supported by the 16 policy measures introduced by the Mainland Government after 
the third meeting of the Leading Group for the Development of the GBA
6, one of which 
explicitly provides the support for Mainland insurers to issue catastrophe bonds in Hong 
Kong and Macao SAR.
This article examines the newly introduced ILS regulatory regime in Hong Kong.
I. What is an ILS?
ILS is a financial instrument that allows protection buyers (who are usually insurers or 
reinsurers who are commonly known as sponsors) to transfer their insured risk to the 
capital markets investors through securitisation.
Developments for Hong Kong insurance linked 
securities
Minny Siu, Angus Sip, Cindy Shek
 Angus Sip
1https://www.legco.gov.hk/yr19-20/english/ord/2020ord017-e.pdf
2https://www.elegislation.gov.hk/hk/cap41P
3https://www.kwm.com/en/hk/knowledge/insights/chinas-belt-and-road-overview-20170522
4https://www.kwm.com/en/hk/knowledge/hubs/greater-bay-area 
5https://www.kwm.com/en/hk/knowledge/insights/gba-series-wealth-management-connect-20200706
6https://www.info.gov.hk/gia/general/201911/06/P2019110600764.htm
Minny Siu
Cindy Shek
FINANCIAL MARKETS


31
7The Artemis Catastrophe Bond & Insurance-Linked Securities Deal Directory.
8LC Paper No. CB(1)175/19-20(07) dated November 2019 entitled “The Government’s Initiatives to Promote the Development of the Insurance Industry in Hong Kong”.
How does ILS work?
1.	In a typical ILS transaction, a sponsor (typically an insurer) will arrange for the establishment of a special purpose 
vehicle (SPV) for ILS issuance.
2.	The sponsor will then transfer its insurance risk to the SPV through a reinsurance agreement between them.
3.	The SPV then issues ILS (for example in the form of a catastrophe bond) to investors in the capital market to finance 
the full amount of the risk assumed by the SPV under the reinsurance agreement.
4.	Repayment or return to the investors is linked to the underlying insurance risk – any claims made by the SPV to the 
sponsor triggered under the reinsurance agreement will be subsumed in the payout to the investors.
II. Why are ILS attractive?
Given the increase in climate change-related catastrophic events, there has been an increasing demand in catastrophe 
bonds, one of the most popular forms of ILS. Global issuance of ILS has grown substantially in recent years, reaching 
approximately US$11 billion in 2019
7.
ILS are attractive to insurers and institutional investors alike for a number of reasons:
III. What are the Amendments about?
In a Legislative Council discussion paper in relation to its initiatives to promote the development of the insurance industry 
in Hong Kong
8, the Hong Kong Government noted that the purpose and nature of ILS business, which is essentially the 
transfer of insurance risks to the capital markets, were very different from the conventional insurance and reinsurance 
businesses regulated under the Insurance Ordinance (Cap. 41) (IO) before the Amendments came into force.
In particular, applying the previous stringent regulatory requirements under the IO (such as the capital and solvency 
requirements, reporting requirement, corporate governance requirement, etc.) to ILS business makes issuance of ILS 
in Hong Kong extremely costly and cumbersome, if not impractical. Accordingly, the Hong Kong Government has 
recognised the need to create a unique regulatory regime under the IO for ILS.
IV. “Special purpose insurer”
Against this backdrop, the Amendments seek to provide for the regulation of “special purpose insurer” (SPI), a new type 
of authorised insurer which is set up solely for the purpose of carrying out a new class of insurance business, namely the 
“special purpose business”.
What is a “special purpose business”?
It is designed for the SPI to acquire insurance risk from another insurer/ reinsurer under a reinsurance 
agreement and then issuing ILS to investors to fully collateralise the risk acquired. 


32
Authorisation as a SPI is subject to the following requirements:
Under the Amendments, the IA is empowered to specify the form in which an SPI submits information to the IA, and 
modify or vary the reporting or corporate governance requirements under the IO in relation to an SPI. Due to the 
Amendments, the regulatory requirements under the IO have been relaxed with respect to a SPI such that a light touch 
regulatory regime has been introduced to promote Hong Kong as an attractive domicile for issuing ILS.
V. Restrictions on the sale of ILS 
Under the Amendments, the IA will also be empowered to formulate rules to restrict the sale of ILS, such as prescribing 
requirements relating to the financial condition, solvency and sophistication of ILS investors. Given the nature of the 
underlying risks of investing in ILS and the potential losses that may arise upon the occurrence of a designated trigger 
event, it is intended that ILS should only be allowed to be sold to certain qualified institutional investors (such as 
Mandatory Provident Fund Schemes, occupational retirement schemes and authorised retail funds) and not ordinary 
retail investors.
VI. What’s next?
The new ILS regime came into effect on 29 March 2021 and brought about significant business opportunities emerging 
in Asia’s insurance market. The IA has subsequently issued the “Guideline on Application for authorisation to carry on 
Special Purpose Business” (GL-33)
9 which took effect on 30 June 2021, so as to provide further granular details and 
requirements on how a prospective SPI can apply with the IA for authorisation to carry on special purpose business. 
Together with the recent GBA initiatives to facilitate cross-border insurance investments, the new ILS initiatives will 
facilitate further connections and integration of market players in China Mainland and Hong Kong, leveraging off their 
respective expertise and knowledge.
9https://www.ia.org.hk/en/legislative_framework/files/GL33EN.pdf
FINANCIAL MARKETS


33
The People’s Bank of China (“PBOC”) and the China Securities Regulatory Commission 
(“CSRC”) published a joint announcement
1 and a press release
2 on 19 July 2020 with the 
aim to build up an Onshore Infrastructure Connect between the China Interbank Bond 
Market (“CIBM”) and the Exchange-traded Bond Market (“ETBM”), which is viewed as an 
important step to merge the two markets into “one” unified onshore bond market. 
While the offshore investors are exploring the potential opportunities and waiting to see the 
detailed rules to implement the joint announcement, a consultation paper (the “Consultation 
Paper”)
3 published by the PBOC, the CSRC and the State Administration of Foreign 
Exchange (“SAFE”) on 2 September 2020 proposes an even brighter future for the foreign 
market participants. Another consultation paper
4 was released by the PBOC and the SAFE 
on 21 September 2020 to come up with regulations supporting the abovementioned 
Consultation Paper from the perspective of cross-border fund management. 
This paper seeks to provide a high-level introduction to the above joint announcement and 
the Consultation Paper, and we hope to join hands with our offshore clients in becoming 
part of the reforms.
I. Two bond markets in China
It may be a long story that how the two markets were formed and developed but the 
summary table below may help you understand what they are.
Merger of two Bond Markets in China?
- from a foreign perspective
Stanley Zhou, Minny Siu, Stella Wang, David Mu
Stanley Zhou
Stella Wang
1http://www.pbc.gov.cn/goutongjiaoliu/113456/113469/4058970/index.html
2http://www.pbc.gov.cn/goutongjiaoliu/113456/113469/4058966/index.html
3http://www.pbc.gov.cn/goutongjiaoliu/113456/113469/4080874/index.html
4http://www.pbc.gov.cn/tiaofasi/144941/144979/3941920/4100044/index.html
Minny Siu
David Mu


34
5Only the Chinese version is available at http://www.court.gov.cn/fabu-xiangqing-241671.html.
CIBM
ETBM
Key regulators
PBOC/NAFMII
CSRC
Market share
Above 90%
Less than 10%
Trading platform
CFETS
Shanghai Stock 
Exchange
Shenzhen Stock 
Exchange
Trading model
•	Bilateral negotiation: akin to block trading;
•	RfQ: investor to ask market maker;
•	Click: investor to click on existing quotes of 
market maker;
•	X-bonds*: akin to matching system
•	Order matching system;
•	Block trading;
•	RfQ
Depository / clearing house
CCDC
SHCH
ChinaClear (aka CSDCC)
Investors
Wholesale: institutional investors
Retail: institutional + individual investors
Foreign access channels
•	QFII/RQFII;
•	Bond Connect;
•	CIBM Direct
•	QFII/RQFII
Key PRC law
PRC PBOC Law
PRC Securities Law
*Not available for all foreign access channels below.
II. Possible reasons for the “merger”
There could be a wide range of reasons behind the initiative to “unify” two bond markets, and we just list out some core 
background factors driving this reform.
(I) Serving the real economy
Chinese financial markets are required to spur and serve the real economy in recent years, to which the ETBM is 
believed to be closer for that purpose because of a larger base of non-financial issuers. 
Traditionally, onshore banks (acting for proprietary business or wealth management products (“WMP”)) can only access 
the CIBM.
Onshore banks have been allowed to invest int the ETBM bonds for WMPs since August 2019, and a bigger ETBM is 
expected.
(II) Creating a level playing field
In the past, two markets were subject to two different sets of laws and rules in respect of bond issuance, registration 
and depository, settlement and clearing, etc. This gave rise to different standards to be applied in dispute resolutions 
and other controversial topics, such as whether CIBM bonds are securities under the PRC Securities Law.
In 2018, the PBOC, the CSRC and the National Development and Reform Commission (“NDRC”) once published a joint 
opinion with the attempt to have the CSRC exercise unified enforcement powers in the CIBM and the ETBM.
The Supreme People’s Court published the meeting minutes on the adjudication of bond disputes (“Bond Dispute 
Minutes”
5) on 15 July 2020, which are meant to set forth unified principles, standards and guidelines for bond disputes 
in both the CIBM and the ETBM.
The joint announcement tries to create a level playing filed for bonds in both markets which enables courts to apply 
unified principles, standards and guidelines more easily and naturally.
FINANCIAL MARKETS


35
(III) Forming a unified “price discovery” mechanism
The press release relating to the joint announcement indicated that a “unified” market can grow only after capital 
moves between the two bond markets freely. This will help to establish a better “price discovery” mechanism by taking 
advantages of all types of pricing mechanisms and trading models across the CIBM and the ETBM and increase the 
efficiency the monetary policies and macroeconomic regulation measures to influence the real economy.
III. What does the “merger” look like?
This section lists out below the key take-aways of the joint announcement for the purpose of understanding its potential 
impacts on foreign participants.
(I) Trading Connect and Clearing Connect
As can be seen in the summary table in paragraph 1 above, the CIBM and the ETBM operate in complex trading and 
clearing systems, pillared by different financial infrastructures.
The key to the “merger” is “Onshore Infrastructure Connect” as contemplated in the joint announcement, comprising:
•	 Trading Connect: refers to joint efforts to be made by the trading platforms of the CIBM and the ETBM for offering 
“unified” bond trading services.
•	 Clearing Connect: refers to joint efforts to be made by depository and clearing houses of the CIBM and the ETBM for 
offering various services relating to bond issuance, registration, clearing and settlement, payments, etc. 
CCDC
SHCH
ChinaClear
CFET
SSE
SZSE
(II) Nominee account structure in Clearing Connect
In respect of the joint clearing and settlement services among different depository and clearing houses in the Clearing 
Connect, a nominee account structure is contemplated in the joint announcement. 


36
CIBM
ETBM
Issuers include:
IFC, ADB, BOCHK, HSBC, SCB, South Korea, 
Province of BC, etc.
Yuexiu Transport Infrastructure, China 
Merchants Group, GLP
, ChinaGas 
Holdings, BEWG, RUSAL, etc.
6SDR denominated bonds issued by World Bank in China are called Mulan Bonds.
This is innovative in the onshore markets but not new if you are familiar with the Mainland – HK Bond Connect / Stock 
Connect regimes.
In particular, we expect that any one among the CCDC, SHCH and ChinaClear will open a nominee account with other 
two joint clearing and settlement services: 
•	 CCDC will open nominee accounts with SHCH and ChinaClear;
•	 SHCH will open nominee accounts with CCDC and ChinaClear; 
•	 ChinaClear will open nominee accounts with CCDC and SHCH.
Booking records of each infrastructure (CCDC / SHCH / ChinaClear) will be valid proof of the bond holdings of beneficial 
investors behind the scene.
We will further discuss this exciting reform trend later.
(III) How can onshore banks access the ETBM after the “merger”? 
Onshore banks (except onshore rural commercial banks) can choose either of the followings to access the ETBM:
•	 existing approach: through their bond accounts opened with ChinaClear directly; or 
•	 new approach: leveraging the CCDC / SHCH nominee accounts opened with ChinaClear through the Onshore 
Infrastructure Connect. 
IV. Possible impact on foreigners? – more than meets the eye 
The joint announcement and the Consultation Paper will surely bring long-term impact to the onshore bond markets and 
its participants. Considering the types of overseas clients that may be interested in this topic, we are looking into the 
potential impacts from three different angles. 
(I) From foreign issuers’ perspective 
There have been Panda Bonds issued on both the CIBM and ETBM. The following table lists out the major Panda Bond 
/ Mulan Bond
6 issuers.
The NAMFII published the guidelines (trial) for issuing Panda Bonds in the CIBM in January 2019 while the issuance of 
Panda Bonds in the ETBM still follows a set of rules originally applicable to domestic bond issuers. We envisage that 
different rules for Panda Bond issuance may be aligned in the future.
(II) From foreign-invested trustees’ perspective
Unlike international bond market, bond trustee is not a widely accepted or established concept for all onshore bonds.
One of the key and encouraging messages from the SPC’s Bond Dispute Minutes is that bond trustees will be the major 
plaintiffs in bond disputes. This is expected to become the mainstream of the lawsuits, compared with past cases where 
bondholders sued individually.
This reform could change the landscape of the bond trustee business in China. Class actions filed by trustees in some 
recent cases (such as PKU Founder’ default) outplayed traditional actions filed by individual investors. New guidelines 
have been published by the NAFMII to eliminate the gap between the enforcement practices in two markets. 
International professional trustees should be looking into this opportunity.
FINANCIAL MARKETS


37
(III) From foreign investors’ perspective
1. Expanded types of eligible overseas institutional investors
Compared with the previous PBOC notice approving the CIBM Direct channel in 2016, the Consultation Paper expressly 
proposes to allow more type of overseas institutional investors, including foreign futures companies and trust companies.
This could be an exciting point to explore as many offshore issuers (including orphan SPV issuers for off-balance sheet 
notes) are interested in offering repackaging notes underlied by onshore assets (including bonds in the CIBM and the 
ETBM). Whether the expanded scope of the eligible investors will include those repackaging note-issuers or the arranger 
banks of the repackaging notes, is still unknown. 
It is worth noting that overseas institutional investors acting for and on behalf of overseas products under their 
management are no longer required to file with the PBOC.
2. Using existing CIBM access channel to access ETBM 
There were fewer programmes for foreign investors to access the ETBM before the Consultation Paper is published.
The Consultation Paper conceives of a combined structure for foreign investors to access the ETBM by leveraging off the 
existing Bond Connect / CIBM Direct and the Onshore Infrastructure Connect contemplated in the joint announcement, 
without creating another cross-border access channel.


38
We believe that a foreign investor which has already filed with the PBOC for investing in the CIBM can leverage off the 
nominee accounts opened by the CCDC / SCH with the ChinaClear so as to have the ETBM trade cleared and settled.
3. Internationally accepted custodian structure 
One of the key changes in the Consultation Paper is to propose, in addition to the current settlement agent role of 
onshore banks, a custodian bank role, which is believed to be more acceptable to foreign investors.
Moreover, the Consultation Paper suggested that CIBM bonds purchased by overseas institutional investors through 
onshore custodian banks will be held in those custodian banks’ omnibus accounts. Overseas institutional investors will 
be recorded as beneficiary owners by means of book entry and on the basis of “segregation”.
This could be a ground-breaking reform measure because traditionally CIBM bonds were held in bond accounts opened 
directly with the CCDC and/or SCH in the name of the investors through the settlement agent. This new proposal could 
pave the way to a multi-layer settlement regime in the CIBM market that could be promoted in the future to align with the 
international practice. Of course, it could also bring challenges to the existing legal regime in relation to the settlement, 
registration (for both transfer and security).
V. Next step?
The FTSE announced on 25 September 2020 the inclusion of Chinese bonds in its flagship World Government Bond 
Index (WGBI) as scheduled, which will come into force on 1 October 2021. By far, Chinese bonds have been included 
in all three major bond indices, indicating the recognition of world index providers and overseas investors for China’s 
endeavors to open the domestic bond market.
FINANCIAL MARKETS
Current programmes
CIBM
ETBM
Foreign access channels
•	 QFII/RQFII;
•	 Bond Connect;
•	 CIBM Direct
•	 QFII/RQFII
After
CIBM
ETBM
Foreign access channels
•	 QFII/RQFII;
•	 Bond Connect;
•	 CIBM Direct
•	 QFII/RQFII;
•	 Bond Connect + Onshore Infrastructure 
Connect;
•	 CIBM Direct + Onshore Infrastructure 
Connect


39
On 20 April 2020, Ho lat Seng, the new Chief Executive of the Macau Special 
Administrative Region (Macau SAR), delivered his first Policy Address for the Fiscal Year 
2020 (Policy Address) entitled “Forging Ahead Towards New Horizons” at the Legislative 
Assembly. 
Ho lat Seng put forward the administrative priorities in 2020: “Fighting the pandemic, 
safeguarding employment, stabilising economy, caring for people’s livelihoods, 
implementing reform, and facilitating development”. In particular, Macau SAR will speed up 
development of financial software and hardware infrastructure, develop a modern financial 
services industry, and establish Macau as a financial services platform between China and 
Portuguese-speaking countries.
First, perfect the supporting systems for financial services 
The development of financial services industry necessitates well-established supporting 
systems. In his Policy Address, Chief Executive Ho announced efforts to review and 
amend the existing laws and regulations governing the financial sector and promote 
the legislative progress in areas such as the Trust Law; follow up the feasibility study of 
establishing a RMB-denominated securities market in Macau SAR; establish and put into 
operation a “Guangdong-Macau cross-border electronic direct payment system”;  and 
carry out technical research and preparation for the data center and financial infrastructure 
facilities, and the Central Security Depository (CSD) system that will link Macau to the 
international financial market. 
Macau’s financial sector, though representing a relatively small proportion of the overall 
GDP
, has long term been regarded as a pillar industry. Restricted by its small market 
scale, however, Macau’s financial market lags behind that of other mature economies, far 
from satisfying the demand of market players at a higher level. With the optimisation of the 
system and the improvement of software and hardware infrastructure, Macau’s financial 
industry is expected to level up, attracting more market participants. 
Second, promoting diversification of financial services industry 
In recent years, the pace of development has accelerated in Macau's financial services 
industry, in particular its bond market. In 2018, Nam Kwong (Group) Company Limited 
launched the first financial asset trading platform Chongwa (Macau) Financial Asset 
Exchange Co., Ltd (MOX) in Macau SAR, which has successfully issued overseas bonds 
for many domestic institutions. 
In the Policy Address, Ho lat Seng put forward new requirements for promoting 
diversification of financial services, and identified financial lease, wealth management and 
bond market as the main strands. The Policy Address explicitly stated that Macau SAR 
will strive to attract more qualified financial lease companies, endeavor to implement the 
Cross-boundary Wealth Management Connect Scheme to facilitate cross-border sales 
of wealth management and financial products, lay out financial infrastructure of the bond 
New trend of financial development in Macau 
SAR: highlights from the First Policy Address 
of the New Chief Executive
James Zeng, Zhang Zhujun
James Zeng


40
market, and strengthen cooperation with China Securities Regulatory Commission in supervision system, personnel 
training and exchange, etc. 
An active bond market will not only attract more mainland enterprises, especially those in the GBA, to issue bonds in 
Macau SAR, but also provide a new financing channel and business platform for domestic financial institutions engaged 
in bond business in the country. 
Third, Macau will be constructed as RMB Offshore Financial Center.
Chief Executive Ho stressed in his Policy Address that the Macau SAR would set up a cross-border RMB clearing 
center, promote financial institutions to expand RMB financial products, promote the use of RMB in Portuguese-
speaking countries and strive for more policies and measures that support building Macau into a RMB clearing center for 
Portuguese-speaking countries. 
Although the specific policy is still awaited, this is undoubtedly an important measure to promote RMB internationalization 
and Guangdong-Macau regional cooperation. Multinational enterprises can use the cross-border RMB clearing center 
to carry out centralised operation and management of RMB and foreign currency funds, avoid exchange rate risks and 
save expenses. Financial institutions and enterprises in Guangdong and Macau can rely on financial markets at home 
and abroad to efficiently allocate and use financial resources to promote Macau’s financial services industry. 
As more and more loan projects involving Portuguese-speaking countries are selected to perform in Macau, the 
establishment of a RMB clearing center between China and Portuguese-speaking countries will not only facilitate 
free flow of capital between Chinese enterprises and Portuguese-speaking countries via Macau, but also bring 
more opportunities for market entities in Macau’s financial industry to expand their business in Portuguese-speaking 
countries spanning Europe, Africa and Latin America. Under the background of the state's efforts to promote the 
internationalization of RMB and Macau’s role as a China-Portugal financial services platform, speeding up the 
construction of a RMB clearing center for Portuguese-speaking countries will further develop Macau into an offshore 
RMB financial center. 
In order to support Macau’s development of featured finance, the Central People’s Government has also issued a series 
of important policies, which will undoubtedly boost Macau's financial services industry. With the deepening of the 
financial development and cooperation in the GBA, the growing willingness of Macau to promote its financial services 
industry, and the continuous optimisation of supporting systems, Macau’s financial services industry will surely enter a 
brand-new stage. 
FINANCIAL MARKETS


41
Introduction
Macao Special Administrative Region of China (“Macao”), as one of the four central cities 
in the development and construction of the Guangdong-Hong Kong-Macao Greater Bay 
Area, has a unique geographical advantage and plays an important role in the “Belt and 
Road” construction.
At the end of 2018, the National Development and Reform Commission (the “NDRC”) 
signed the Arrangements between the National Development and Reform Commission 
and the Government of Macao Special Administrative Region for Supporting Macao in 
Fully Participating in and Contributing to the Belt and Road Initiative (the “Arrangements”) 
with Macao with the approval of the State Council. The Arrangements support Macao in 
developing financial leasing and other special financial services. On 8 April 2019, Macao 
issued the Legal Regime for Financial Leasing Companies (the “Regime”) and the Tax 
Concession Regime for Financial Leasing to promote the development of financial leasing 
business in Macao and attract financial leasing companies to settle in Macao and carry out 
business. On 20 December 2019, China Banking and Insurance Regulatory Commission 
(the “CBIRC”) also promulgated the Policies and Measures to Support Macao’s Economic 
Development Implemented by the CBIRC, supporting “the establishment of financial 
leasing subsidiaries in Macao by Mainland financial leasing enterprises to develop Macao’s 
special finance”. 
Based on the promulgation and implementation of the Arrangements, relevant laws 
and policies, etc., along with the development of international financial leasing business 
in Macao, Macao will become a new option for Mainland leasing companies to set up 
overseas leasing platform companies for outbound investment following Ireland, Hong 
Kong SAR and other locations.
As early as 2017, King & Wood Mallesons (“KWM”) successfully assisted our client in 
setting up the first financial leasing subsidiary of a Mainland finance leasing company 
in Macao. As the leading counsel in the project, KWM played an important role in the 
successful establishment of the client’s Macao subsidiary and accumulated rich practical 
experience.
As many Mainland leasing companies have recently shown interest in setting up leasing 
platforms in Macao, we preliminarily introduce the legal issues related to the establishment 
of financial leasing companies in Macao by Mainland leasing companies in this article.
Macao - a new option for Mainland leasing 
companies to build an overseas presence
Wang Ning, José Lupi, Chen Jie, Li Yueyang
Wang Ning
José Lupi


42
Financial leasing company
A financial institution that specializes in financial leasing business
Subsidiary for financial 
leasing project
A financial institution wholly owned by a bank or financial leasing company licensed to 
conduct business in Macao for the purpose of holding and managing a single financial leasing 
project
I. Introduction to the legal regimes of Macao concerning financial leasing companies
(I) Applicable core regulations
•	 On 8 April 2019, Macao introduced the No. 6/2019 Law (i.e. the Regime), which establishes a new legal regime for 
financial leasing companies in Macao and is also the core legal regulation applicable to the establishment of financial 
leasing companies in Macao. In addition, Macao also introduced the No. 7/2019 Law (i.e. the Tax Concession Regime 
for Financial Leasing), which provides the relevant tax concession for financial leasing (including tax concession in 
respect of stamp duty and income supplemental tax).
•	 The above two regulations apply to financial leasing companies and subsidiaries for financial leasing projects 
established in Macao. These two types of entities are “financial institutions” in nature, and are defined as follows:
With regard to the licensing of financial leasing companies, such companies are redefined as financial institutions which 
are not credit institutions. Thus, the provisions of the No. 32/93/M Macao Decree – the regime on credit institutions do 
not apply to the financial leasing companies, such as the restrictions on capital adequacy ratio and risk exposure to a 
single client.
•	 Two major highlights of the applicable core regulations:
 (1) Lowering the threshold for setting up financial leasing companies in Macao; and
 (2) Relaxing the regulatory requirements for financial leasing companies by the Macao Government.
We will further introduce the thresholds for the establishment of financial leasing companies in Macao and the related 
regulatory requirements in the following paragraphs.
(II) Requirements for the establishment of financial leasing companies
A financial leasing company shall be established in the form of a limited liability company (LLC) or a joint stock company 
(JSC), and the requirements for the specific company form, capital and shareholders are as follows:
Organizational form 
JSC
LLC
Corporate capital
The minimum capital is MOP 10 million
Corporate capital 
contribution/maintenance 
requirements
The corporate capital shall be paid in full in cash at the time of the company’s establishment and 
shall not be less than MOP 10 million during the establishment and existence of the company
Number of shareholders
Not less than 3 shareholders
Not less than 1 shareholder
1 and not more 
than 30 shareholders
Board of directors
A JSC’s board of directors shall consist of at 
least three members
A LLC may have no board of directors
Company’s management 
personnel
There shall be at least one management personnel permanently resident in Macao and he/she shall 
have the actual authority to manage the company’s business
1A one-person company can be established with the company’s name bearing the words “one-person company”.
The introduction of the Regime has lowered the threshold for setting up financial leasing companies in Macao, which is 
mainly reflected in the following two aspects:
FINANCIAL MARKETS


43
(1) The organizational form of the company is extended from the JSC to JSC or LLC. In accordance with Macao’s local 
laws, a JSC shall have at least three shareholders, while a LLC shall have at least one shareholder. Such an adjustment 
leaves more flexibilities for Mainland leasing companies to deal with equity relationship and corporate organizational 
structure in their subsequent establishment of financial leasing companies in Macao.
(2) The capital requirement for financial leasing companies has been further reduced from MOP 30 million to MOP 10 
million.
(III) Approval and licensing mechanism
The licensing mechanisms applicable to financial leasing companies and subsidiaries for financial leasing projects are 
different. Please refer to the following table for details:
Permitted business
Prohibited business
1.	Financial leasing business
No business other than those listed in the permitted business 
may be conducted and, in particular, no deposits or other 
reimbursable sums may be accepted from the public.
2.	Transfer and acquisition of leased property
3.	Management of leased property
4.	Foreign exchange, interest rate swap and currency swap 
transactions required for business operations
5.	Other businesses approved by the AMCM
Type of company
Licensing mechanism
Financial leasing company
1.	Filing an application to the  Monetary Authority of Macao (“AMCM”);
2.	Obtaining prior permission given by an Executive Order of the Chief Executive after hearing the 
opinion of the AMCM, and the Chief Executive may set specific conditions to be observed by the 
financial leasing company in the executive order.
Subsidiary for financial leasing 
project 
1.	The bank or financial leasing company established in Macao should make a prior written notice 
to the AMCM, accompanied by a resolution of the company’s administrative authority and a letter 
of understanding that the proposed subsidiary for financial leasing project will conduct business 
in accordance with the law.
2.	Within one month after the establishment of the subsidiary for financial leasing project, the bank 
or financial leasing company established in Macao should report to the AMCM the relevant 
information of the subsidiary.
It should be noted that if the relevant party fails to establish a financial leasing company or commence its business within 
18 months of obtaining the above-mentioned license, the license will be revoked unless there is a reasonable ground 
and a prior application is made to the AMCM for an extension of the licensing period.
(IV) Business scope of financial leasing companies and subsidiaries for financial leasing project
The local laws of Macao enumerate the permitted business scope of financial leasing companies and subsidiaries for 
financial leasing project, and further provide that, unless approved by the AMCM, no business other than those listed in 
the Regime may be conducted. The specific business scope can be found in the table below:


44
For the avoidance of doubt, the above registration is a special registration requirement of the AMCM for financial leasing 
companies, and such registration does not affect other registrations that financial leasing companies are required to 
make under the local laws of Macao (for example, company registration in the Macao Commercial and Movable Property 
Registry (CRCBM)).
II. Approval and requirements for Mainland leasing companies to set up financial leasing companies in 
Macao
We briefly introduced Macao’s legal system for the establishment of financial leasing companies in Macao above. We 
will then analyse and introduce the main requirements for the approval or filing for the establishment of financial leasing 
companies in Macao by Mainland leasing companies (mainly including finance lease companies and financial leasing 
companies) from the perspective of “outbound investment”.
(I) Filing requirements of the NDRC
According to the Measures for the Administration of Overseas Investment of Enterprises (“the Measures”), the Measures 
shall apply to outbound investments made by domestic enterprises through enterprises in Hong Kong, Macao or Taiwan 
under their control. According to the Measures, the NDRC currently adopts two mechanisms for outbound investments 
by domestic enterprises: the approval system for sensitive project and the filing system for non-sensitive project. 
Meanwhile, under the Measures and the List of Sensitive Sectors for Outbound Investment, financial leasing is not 
included in such list.
A Mainland leasing company that intends to establish a financial leasing company in Macao is only required to go 
through the outbound investment reporting formalities through the NDRC’s online system before launching the project. 
The specific requirements on the reporting subject and the examination and approval authority are as follows:
Investor and amount
Reporting authority
The investor is a centrally administered enterprise (including a 
centrally administered financial enterprise or an enterprise directly 
subordinate to the administration by the State Council or its 
subordinate organ, the same below)
NDRC
The investor is a local enterprise and the amount of Chinese 
investment is USD 300 million or above
NDRC
The investor is a local enterprise and the amount of Chinese 
investment is less than USD 300 million
The provincial development and reform commission at the place 
where the investor is registered
Macao’s local laws further provide that no person or entity shall engage in financial leasing business without the 
permission of the AMCM, nor shall such person or entity use the words “financial leasing” in the company name or 
expressly or implicitly state that the business of the company includes financial leasing.
(V) Registration requirements for financial leasing companies
Financial leasing companies must comply with the following special registration requirements, and may not conduct 
business without completing the special registration.
Special registration
Registration of changes
Special registration with the AMCM is required within three 
months after the establishment of a financial leasing company
In case of any change in the information contained in the special 
registration, a notification shall be made to the AMCM within one 
month after the change occurs.
FINANCIAL MARKETS


45
A Mainland leasing company should, within 20 working days after the completion of the project, submit a report on the 
completion of the project through the NDRC online system.
(II) Approval requirements of the CBIRC
Pursuant to the Notice by the General Office of the Ministry of Commerce on Matters Concerning Adjustments to 
the Duties of Administration of Financial Leasing Companies, Commercial Factoring Companies and Pawn Shops 
(Shang Ban Liu Tong [2018] No. 165), the Ministry of Commerce has allocated the responsibility for developing the 
rules for business operation and regulation of financial leasing companies to the CBIRC, and relevant duties shall be 
performed by the CBIRC since 20 April 2018. However, after such adjustments, the CBIRC has not yet issued a new 
Interim Measures for the Supervision and Administration of Financial Leasing Companies. If a Mainland financial leasing 
company intends to set up a financial leasing company in Macao, it is recommended to communicate with the Mainland 
regulators in advance to confirm whether it is required to obtain the approval of the CBIRC or its branches. It is also 
advised to communicate with the AMCM in advance to know what materials are needed and the specific requirements 
for the establishment of a financial leasing company in Macao.
We will only briefly analyse and introduce the approval requirements of the CBIRC for finance lease companies to set up 
financial leasing companies in Macao.
A Mainland finance lease company may establish a financial leasing company in Macao by way of indirect investment 
or direct investment, i.e. indirectly establishing a financial leasing company in Macao through its overseas specialised 
subsidiary (which is a project company of the overseas specialised subsidiary), or directly establishing a specialised 
subsidiary of the finance lease company in Macao.
1. Establishment of financial leasing specialised subsidiaries in Macao by Mainland finance lease companies (i.e. 
overseas specialised subsidiaries of finance lease companies)
•	 Pre-approval
In accordance with the Measures for the Administration of Finance Lease Companies, the Implementation Measures 
of the China Banking and Insurance Regulatory Commission for the Administrative Licensing Items concerning Non-
Banking Financial Institutions and the Interim Provisions on the Administration of the Specialized Subsidiaries of 
Finance Lease Companies, a finance lease company should, upon obtaining approval by the CBIRC, apply for the 
establishment of a specialised subsidiary
2 pursuant to the laws and regulations of the country or region of registration 
of the proposed subsidiary.
When establishing an overseas specialised subsidiary, the finance lease company should first apply to its provincial 
branch office of the CBIRC, which will accept the application and conduct a preliminary examination, and the CBIRC 
will then review its application and make a final decision.
A finance lease company applying for establishment of an overseas specialised subsidiary should satisfy the following 
criteria:  
2Specialised subsidiaries mean specialised leasing subsidiaries established in free trade zones and bonded areas in China as well as overseas by a finance lease company 
pursuant to the relevant laws and regulations to engage in financial leasing business in specific fields.   Specific fields mean financial leasing business fields for which the 
finance lease company has operated in and the operation is relatively matured, including aircraft leasing, ship leasing and any other leasing business fields recognised by 
the CBRC.
Main requirements for finance lease companies to establish overseas specialised subsidiaries
•	 The establishment of the overseas specialised subsidiary is required for business development needs, and there are clear overseas 
development strategies.
•	 It is in good operating conditions, sound corporate governance structure, risk management and internal control system, and meets 
various regulatory indicators.
•	 It employs a professional team corresponding to its overseas business environment.


46
•	 Post-reporting
The finance lease company shall, upon obtaining the CBIRC’s approval, complete establishment formalities for the 
overseas subsidiary pursuant to the laws and regulations of the country or region of registration of the proposed 
subsidiary, and report to the CBIRC and the provincial CBIRC branch at the locality of the finance lease company on 
name, date of establishment, place of registration, registered capital, capital contribution currency, business scope 
authorized by the parent company, etc. of the overseas subsidiary within 15 working days from establishment of the 
overseas subsidiary.
2. A Mainland finance lease company establishes a financial leasing company in Macao through its overseas 
specialised subsidiary (i.e. a project company of the overseas specialised subsidiary)
•	 No pre-approval required
In accordance with the Measures for the Administration of Finance Lease Companies, the Implementation Measures 
of the China Banking and Insurance Regulatory Commission for the Administrative Licensing Items concerning Non-
Banking Financial Institutions and the Interim Provisions on the Administration of the Specialized Subsidiaries of 
Finance Lease Companies, specialised subsidiaries of finance lease companies may establish project companies 
overseas to engage in financial leasing businesses. The specialised subsidiaries shall comply with the laws and 
regulations of the place where the project company is located, and the relevant reporting provisions for establishment 
of a project company in domestic bonded areas by a finance lease company to engage in financial leasing business, 
including but not limited to the following:
Reporting matter
Reporting content/time requirements
Contract concluded
1.	The finance lease company should report to the CBRC or its branches within 
15 working days from execution of the lease contract by the project company;
2.	The report should cover a feasibility study report for the project, the articles of 
association of the project company, information of the personnel responsible 
for the project, a legal opinion issued by a law firm on the financial leasing 
project undertaken by the project company or the relevant contract text, and 
other documents and materials required by the CBRC or its branches.
Main requirements for finance lease companies to establish overseas specialised subsidiaries
•	 It should contribute capital using its own funds other than non-own funds such as entrusted funds or borrowed funds etc., and the 
equity investment balance shall in principle not exceed 50% of its net assets (including the current investment amount).
•	 It complies with state laws and regulations, and has no major violations or non-compliance during the past two years.
•	 It has certain advantages in human resource, and experience in specialised management, business development etc.
•	 Its internal management level and risk management and control capability align with its overseas business development.
•	 It is in good operating conditions, and is consecutively profitable for the past two accounting years.
•	 It abides by the laws and regulations, has a good regulatory rating and complies with the laws and regulations of its place of 
incorporation.
•	 It shall satisfy any other prudential criteria stipulated by the CBRC.
FINANCIAL MARKETS


47
Reporting matter
Reporting content/time requirements
Financial leasing business 
1.	Finance lease companies should submit quarterly special reports to the CBRC 
and its branches on the relevant information on financial leasing business 
launched by the project company established;
2.	The report should include information on project companies newly established, 
existing and closed during the reporting period; type and size of leased assets; 
financial status and business results; business environment and risk analysis; 
and operation management and risk control measures.
The completion of the performance 
of the lease contract by the project 
company or the occurrence of 
significant events
1.	The finance lease company should report to the CBRC or its branches within 
10 working days of the completion of performance of the lease contract by the 
project company or occurrence of a significant event;
2.	The report should include equity transfer, asset sale, damage or loss of the 
subject matter and other major losses, and litigation.
The completion of the performance 
of the lease contract by the project 
company and completion of 
liquidation 
1.	The finance lease company should report to the CBRC within 15 working days 
upon completion of liquidation of the project company;
2.	The report should include information on completion of liquidation.
Although such method does not require pre-approval from the CBIRC, as the project company is a special project 
subsidiary established for conducting the financial leasing business under a specific lease contract, normally, it can only 
conduct a specific financial leasing business. However, the required license and registration formalities in Macao for 
the establishment of a financial leasing specialised subsidiary or a project subsidiary for financial leasing are the same. 
Therefore, when setting up a financial leasing company in Macao, the finance lease company should consider setting 
up a financial leasing specialised subsidiary (a platform-type company that can carry out financial leasing business in a 
particular field) or a project subsidiary for financial leasing (a project company conducting a particular financial leasing 
business) according to its development needs and purposes. 
•	 Post- reporting
In accordance with the Measures for the Administration of Finance Lease Companies, an overseas project company 
established by a specialised subsidiary shall, after commencing financial leasing business, report to the local CBRC 
offices, and the local CBRC offices where the finance lease company is located on a quarterly basis.
(III) Registration requirements of Ministry of Finance (for finance lease companies with State-owned financial capital)
In accordance with the Measures for the Administration of the Registration of Property Rights over State-owned Financial 
Capital (for Trial Implementation), for overseas subsidiaries established by finance lease companies with state-owned 
financial capital, the head office of the financial institutions to which such finance lease companies belong must register 
such subsidiaries with the competent financial authorities.
Conclusion
This article gives preliminary introduction to the establishment of financial leasing companies in Macao by Mainland 
leasing companies. Due to the differences in the shareholders’ information, the nature of the company, the purpose 
of outbound investment and the development plan of the Mainland leasing company, the examination requirements 
of application materials of the AMCM and the approval/filing requirements of the relevant Mainland government 
departments for Mainland leasing companies seeking to set up financial leasing companies in Macao will also 
be different.  Mainland leasing companies need to take adequate consideration of its own situation and needs in 
establishing a financial leasing company in Macao.  


48
Recently there have been a few exciting developments in the Hong Kong fund industry. 
This client alert provides an update on the enactment of the carried interest tax concession 
regime for private equity funds, as well as subsidies to be granted to eligible open-ended 
fund companies (OFCs) and real estate investment trusts (REITs).
I. Carried interest tax concession regime
On 7 May 2021, the Inland Revenue (Amendment) (Tax Concessions for Carried Interest) 
Ordinance (Ordinance) came into operation, and introduced the much anticipated tax 
concession regime for carried interest distributed by eligible private equity funds operating 
in Hong Kong SAR (the Carried Interest Tax Concession Regime) to their fund sponsors.
Under the Carried Interest Tax Concession Regime, eligible carried interest will be taxed at 
0% profits tax rate and all of the eligible carried interest would also be excluded from the 
employment income for the calculation of the investment professional’s salaries tax.
The Carried Interest Tax Concession Regime, coupled with the introduction of the limited 
partnership fund regime which came into force on 31 August 2020, aim to attract more 
private equity funds to operate and be managed in Hong Kong, while leveraging the 
unique advantages that Hong Kong has to offer.
We list out in the table below a summary of the key requirements under the Carried 
Interest Tax Concession Regime:
Hong Kong fund industry updates: Carried 
interest tax concession regime and the OFC 
and REIT Grant Scheme
Jingjing Jiang, Cindy Shek
Subject
Key requirements
Eligible 
carried 
interest
•	 A sum received by or accrued to a person by way of profit-related return 
subject to a hurdle rate which is a preferred rate of return on investments in the 
fund; and
•	 The Ordinance does not specify the ratio of the hurdle rate, therefore the hurdle 
rate can be determined as 0%.
Tax rate 
for eligible 
carried 
interest 
•	 “Eligible carried interest” will be taxed at a 0% profits tax rate; and
•	 All of the eligible carried interest would also be excluded from the employment 
income for the calculation of the investment professional’s salaries tax.
Qualified 
fund/carried 
interest payer
•	 The eligible carried interest should be distributed by a fund which fulfills the 
definition of “fund” under section 20AM of the Inland Revenue Ordinance (applies 
to private equity funds managed in Hong Kong or outside Hong Kong), and the 
fund must be certified by the Hong Kong Monetary Authority (“HKMA”);
•	 Certified affiliated corporations or joint ventures who are providing investment 
management services in Hong Kong; and
•	 ITVF Corporations.
Qualifying 
transactions
•	 The carried interest tax concession regime must occur from private equity 
transactions, specifically stocks, debentures, loan bonds, funds, bonds or notes 
issued by private companies.
Jingjing Jiang
Cindy Shek
FUNDS


49
Subject
Key requirements
Qualifying 
carried interest 
recipients
•	 Only persons providing investment management service to a HKMA certified investment fund in Hong Kong or 
arranging such services to be carried out in Hong Kong are considered qualifying carried interest recipients;
•	 These recipients include SFC licensed corporations, unlicensed entities that provide investment management 
services to a “qualified investment fund” defined under the unified tax exemption for funds regime or the ITVF 
Corporation; and 
•	 Persons employed by the foregoing entities or their affiliated corporations or joint ventures providing investment 
management services in Hong Kong.
Substantial 
activities in 
Hong Kong
•	 Qualifying carried interest recipients must demonstrate they are undertaking core income generating activities in 
Hong Kong;
•	 Having two or more full-time employees in Hong Kong who carry out the investment management services; 
and
•	 The operating expenditure incurred in Hong Kong for the provision of the investment management services for 
each year of tax assessment shall be HK$2 million or more.
II. Subsidies available to eligible OFCs and REITs 
(I) Introduction
The Securities and Futures Commission (SFC) announced on 10 May 2021 the implementation of the Hong Kong 
Government’s grant scheme to subsidise the setting up of OFCs and REITs in Hong Kong (Grant Scheme). The purpose 
of the Grant Scheme is to reinforce Hong Kong’s role as a leading capital raising venue and its status as an international 
asset and wealth management centre by encouraging a broader range of investment vehicles.
(II) Details of the Grant Scheme
1. Application period for OFC and REIT applicants
The Grant Scheme is valid for application for a period of three years, from 10 May 2021 to 9 May 2024. As the 
Government has allocated funding of HK$270 million to the Grant Scheme (as announced by the Financial Secretary in 
the 2021-22 Budget Speech), the Grant Scheme will operate on a first-come-first-served basis, meaning the application 
period may be curtailed when the initial funding is fully committed.
Although the Grant Scheme will operate on a first-come-first-served basis based on the submission time of the 
grant application, the SFC will only take up an application if the applicant has submitted all relevant documents that 
meet applicable requirements and has submitted the application within the relevant application deadline. Application 
documents may be returned by the SFC if they are not in good order.
2. Eligible applicants
•	 Investment managers of OFCs: An Investment manager of an OFC, who has successfully incorporated the OFC 
or re-domiciled the non-Hong Kong fund corporation in Hong Kong as an OFC on or after 10 May 2021, may 
apply for a grant under the Grant Scheme on behalf of the OFC.
•	 REIT managers: A REIT manager may apply for a grant under the Grant Scheme on behalf of a SFC-authorised 
REIT listed on the Stock Exchange of Hong Kong Limited (SEHK) on or after 10 May 2021 with a minimum 
market capitalisation of HK$1.5 billion (or equivalent) at the time of listing. For a REIT which is also listed outside 
Hong Kong, the minimum market capitalisation of its units listed on SEHK should be HK$1.5 billion (or equivalent) 
at the time of listing.
3. Grant amount
The grant amount will be equivalent to 70% of eligible expenses (see below for an explanation of eligible expenses) for 
each application, with the following conditions:
•	 OFC: Subject to a cap of HK$1 million per OFC and a maximum of three OFCs per investment manager.
•	 REIT: Subject to a cap of HK$8 million per REIT.
4. Eligible expenses
Eligible expenses must be expenses paid to Hong Kong-based service providers in relation to the incorporation of an 


50
OFC
REITS
•	Fees charged by law firms or legal advisers for legal work in relation 
to the incorporation or re-domiciliation of an OFC, including (i) the 
drafting of legal documents and offering documents of the OFC and (ii) 
work done in relation to the authorisation of an OFC with the SFC.
•	Fees charged by auditors, accountants or tax advisors for accounting 
and/or tax services in relation to the incorporation or re-domiciliation 
of an OFC.
•	Fees charged by fund administrators, corporate service providers or 
company secretaries for incorporation or re-domiciliation services in 
relation to the set-up of an OFC, including work done for all filings 
necessary for the incorporation or re-domiciliation or registration of an 
OFC.
•	Fees charged by regulatory consultants for work done in relation to 
the incorporation or re-domiciliation of an OFC and the authorisation 
of an OFC with the SFC.
•	Listing agent fees in the case of listed OFCs.
•	Underwriting commissions charged by underwriters for the 
listing of a REIT.
•	Fees charged by law firms or legal advisors for legal work 
in relation to the listing of a REIT, including (i) the drafting 
of legal documents and offering circular of the REIT and 
(ii) work done in relation to the authorisation of a REIT with 
the SFC. 
•	Fees charged by auditors, accountants or tax advisors for 
accounting and/or tax services in relation to the listing of a 
REIT.
•	Fees charged by the valuer of a REIT to produce valuation 
report on properties for the listing of a REIT.
•	Expenses paid to marketing agencies or consultants for 
advertisement and marketing related services for the listing 
of a REIT, including roadshow expenses.
•	Listing agent fees.
OFC, re-domiciliation of a non-Hong Kong fund corporation to Hong Kong as an OFC or listing of a REIT on SEHK. 
Examples of eligible expenses include:
1https://www.sfc.hk/-/media/files/PCIP/FAQ-PDFS/FAQ-on-OFC-and-REIT-Grant-Scheme__20210510.pdf
The following are not considered eligible expenses:
•	 Statutory fees such as registration or application fees to the SFC and expenses incurred in relation to an 
application to the SFC for the licensing or registration of an investment manager.
•	 Costs incurred in the establishment of a sub-fund under a pre-existing umbrella OFC and listing fees to the SEHK.
•	 Audit fees paid to accounting firms in relation to the annual audit review.
5. Minimum operation condition
The Government reserves the right to claw back the grant if:
•	 the OFC commences winding-up or applies for termination of registration within two years from the date of its 
incorporation or re-domiciliation; or
•	 the REIT is delisted from SEHK or suspended from trading within two years of its listing date.
Whether a suspension of trading warrants a clawback of grant will be considered on a case-by-case basis. An 
example from the SFC’s Frequently Asked Questions
1 is that a temporary trading suspension of a REIT due to pending 
announcements will not generally give rise to a clawback of grant. On the other hand, a grant awarded may be clawed 
back if a REIT has been suspended from trading on SEHK for a continuous period of 18 months within 2 years of its 
listing date.
6. Application process and deadline
An applicant must submit the Grant Scheme application form together with the required supporting documents to the 
SFC within three months from (as applicable):
•	 the date of the certificate of incorporation or re-domiciliation issued by the Companies Registry for private OFCs;
•	 the authorisation date for public OFCs (the public OFC may submit to the SFC a duly signed and completed 
“Confirmation of Intention to Apply for a Grant” as part of its initial product application submission); or
•	 the listing date of the REIT.
Conclusion
We believe the Grant Scheme provides much welcomed incentives for the asset and wealth management industry in 
Hong Kong. Along with the facilitative tax environment created by the Carried Interest Tax Concession Regime, we 
foresee market players which are exploring onshore options to view Hong Kong as an increasingly attractive place of 
domicile for funds.
FUNDS


51
With the Legislative Council of Hong Kong SAR passing its second and third reading of 
the Limited Partnership Fund Bill (“Bill”) on 9 July and gazettal of the Limited Partnership 
Fund Ordinance (Cap.637) (“LPFO”) on 17 July, the long-awaited Hong Kong Limited 
Partnership Fund (“LPF”) regime is finally set to sail on 31 August 2020.
In addition to forming an open-ended fund company (“OFC”) or a unit trust, the 
introduction of the LPF regime now provides fund managers with the option of setting up 
funds structured as a limited partnership in Hong Kong SAR.
This article identifies the key issues fund managers and sponsors should consider in light 
of the new LPF regime.
I. What has changed since March 2020?
Introduction of the Hong Kong 
Limited Partnership Fund regime
Hayden Flinn, Jingjing Jiang, Guo Sun Lee, Cindy Shek, Minny Siu, Justin Cherrington
Jingjing Jiang
Guo Sun Lee
Hayden Flinn
Legislative process of the LPF regime


52
The Bill was scrutinised by the Legal Services Division since its introduction in March. 
Whilst remaining largely intact, several amendments were introduced. In particular, section 
24(2)(c) of the Bill requires a statement by the General Partner (“GP”) in the annual return 
as to whether the LPF will remain in operation, or will carry on business as a fund 12 
months after the anniversary of the latest annual return submitted to the Companies 
Registrar ("Registrar”). Amendments to section 89 of the Bill has also been introduced 
to define the burden and standard of proof in respect of a person for a specified offence 
under the LPFO.
II. The GP and the investment manager
The GP is required to appoint an investment manager to conduct day-to-day investment 
management functions.
1SFC’s circular dated 7 January 2020 entitled “Circular to private equity firms to be licensed”, accessible at: https://www.sfc.
hk/edistributionWeb/gateway/EN/circular/doc?refNo=20EC2
 Minny Siu
Cindy Shek
Justin Cherrington
(I) Must the GP and/or the investment manager be licensed?
If the GP has fully delegated the investment management activities to the investment 
manager, the GP may not need to be licensed. In turn, unlike the Hong Kong OFC, the 
GP does not necessarily need to appoint a Securities and Futures Commission (“SFC”) 
licensed entity to act as the investment manager if the LPF will not be carrying on a 
business of regulated activities in Hong Kong.
The SFC clarified the licensing requirements applicable to private equity funds in early 
2020
1. In summary, if a person conducts regulated activities in Hong Kong, he would 
need to be licensed irrespective of his role in the LPF (the likely roles which may trigger a 
licensing requirement include the GP
, the investment manager, the investment committee, 
the distributor or placement agent). Unless otherwise exempted, licensing requirements 
may be triggered when a person or entity deals in, advises on or manages a portfolio of 
assets (this may include private equity and venture capital investments) which fall within 
the definition of “securities” under the SFO.
A GP or an investment manager of a LPF which does not invest in “securities” (e.g. the 
LPF invests in shares in a Hong Kong private company, non-securities assets such as real 
estate or other commodities) may be able to remain unlicensed. It should be noted that 
although shares or debentures of a Hong Kong private company falls outside the definition 
of “securities” under the SFO, shares or debentures of private companies incorporated 
outside of Hong Kong would still be considered as “securities”.
Although retaining unlicensed GP and/or the investment manager may mean the LPF is 
free from the SFC’s direct supervision hence arguably lowering regulatory and compliance 
costs, certain market players including investors and various service providers may 
prefer to deal with licensed sponsors so as to comply with their internal approval process 
and provide additional regulatory comfort. Fund managers may wish to plan ahead and 
consider if they wish to set up a fund management business in Hong Kong, or partner 
with licensed entities.
FUNDS


53
(II) Do I need to appoint a custodian?
The GP is not required to appoint a third party custodian to demonstrate proper custody of the LPF assets under the 
LPFO. However, to the extent that the GP or the investment manager is a Type 9 licensee, the requirements under the 
SFC’s Fund Manager Code of Conduct will apply to the investment management activities in respect of the LPF. This 
includes a requirement for the GP or the investment manager (as applicable) to: (a) exercise due skill, care and diligence 
in the appointment of the custodian; or (b) if self-custody is adopted, the GP or the investment manager must adopt 
policies and enforce procedures to separate custodial functions from its investment management functions.
III. Responsible person of the LPF and its obligations
The LPFO requires a GP to appoint a responsible person (“RP”) to conform with the Anti-Money Laundering (“AML”) 
and Counter Terrorist Financing (“CTF”) obligations of the LPF against each customer of the LPF (including the limited 
partners of the LPF) in accordance with Schedule 2 of the Anti-Money Laundering and Counter-Terrorist Financing 
Ordinance (Cap.615) (“AMLO”).
The RP will remain ultimately responsible for the LPF’s AML/CTF obligations under the LPFO, which is notably different 
from other jurisdictions including Singapore and the Cayman Islands where the ultimate responsibility of AML/CTF 
compliance rests with the GP (although the GP can outsource such functions to third party service providers).
Below shows an overview of the requirements under Schedule 2 of the AMLO:
Given the LPFO requires the RP to be an authorised institution, a licensed corporation, an accounting professional or a 
legal professional, such parties are already subject to the AMLO. Implementation of AML/CTF measures should therefore 
be relatively straightforward. For instance, a LPF managed by a Type 9 licensee should be able to leverage its existing 
AML/CTF policies and measures that are already in place when managing an offshore domiciled limited partnership fund.
As the global financial services sector is steering towards digitisation of their services and processes, the regulators 
have also caught up by updating the Hong Kong Monetary Authority AML Guidelines and SFC Guideline on Anti-Money 
Laundering and Counter-Terrorist Financing in late 2018, which provide guidance to authorised institutions and licensed 
entities on remote customer onboarding from the AML and ongoing compliance perspectives. Accordingly, LPFs may 
thereby onboard investors by utilising these remote measures. 


54
IV. Registration and ongoing compliance
The LPF regime adopts an opt-in registration scheme which does not require SFC authorisation or approval unless the 
LPF is targeted to the retail public.
The LPF application pack is to be submitted by a Hong Kong law firm or a solicitor. Similar to a private company in Hong 
Kong, the LPF is required to file annual returns and notify the Registrar for change of particulars. Schedule 3 of the LPFO 
also prescribes fees for lodging a registration application, filing annual return and notification of change, which are all 
notably lower than the existing fees charged by our Cayman counterpart.
It is advisable for fund sponsors to start lining up their service providers, including the administrator or company 
secretarial providers, who may assist with these ongoing regulatory obligations.
V. Tax implications
As with any fund jurisdictions, tax treatment continues to play a vital role in fund structuring. With the recent publication 
of the interpretation and practice notes in respect of profits tax exemption for funds by the Inland Revenue Department 
(referred as DIPN 61), there is now further clarity as to the taxation of each fund entity (including the relevant LPFs and 
any special purpose entities), investor and the investment manager in terms of whether they qualify for the unified fund 
tax exemption (“UFE”).
(I) Taxation implications for the LPF and special purpose entity
The UFE was contained in the Inland Revenue (Profits Tax Exemption for Funds) (Amendment) Ordinance 2019 which 
came into effect on 1 April 2019. The UFE provides a jurisdictionally neutral tax treatment for private funds in Hong 
Kong. In summary, private funds (including LPFs) will be exempted from profits tax in Hong Kong as long as they meet 
the definition of a “fund” and satisfy certain conditions. To qualify for the UFE, the relevant profits of the LPF must derive 
from “qualifying transactions” (including transactions in securities, futures contracts, shares in private companies and 
foreign currencies etc) that are carried out or arranged in Hong Kong by an authorised institution or licensed corporation 
or where the LPF is a qualified investment fund. This profit tax exemption, subject to certain conditions, also applies to 
special purpose entities held by the LPF.
Further, unlike Singapore which requires the GP to apply to the local monetary authority for tax exemption, the UFE does 
not impose pre-approval requirements. Rather it allows for self-assessment by the relevant entity to determine if the LPF 
satisfies the relevant conditions to be profit tax exempt.
The subscription, transfer or redemption of LPF interest will not attract Hong Kong stamp duty as it does not fall under 
the definition of “stock". However, stamp duty will apply where the LPF accepts capital contributions or distributes profits 
in kind which involve the transfer of dutiable assets (such as Hong Kong stock or immovable property).
(II) Taxation implications for the investment manager / investment advisor
Management fee received by a Hong Kong-based investment manager will generally be subject to profits tax of 16.5% 
without specific tax incentive. However, as Hong Kong adopts a territorial concept of taxation, only profits sourced 
in Hong Kong would be subject to Hong Kong taxation. Hence, if the core investment management activities are 
conducted outside of Hong Kong, an offshore claim on the relevant portion of the management fee income can be 
applied for to lower the profits tax. This may be relevant and favourable to investment managers with transnational 
presence.
FUNDS


55
(III) Carried interest remains unresolved
The Financial Secretary announced earlier this year in the Budget that the Hong Kong Government aims to provide more 
certainty on carried interest taxation which has yet been clarified. The industry is expecting attractive tax concession on 
carried interest to complement the LPF regime and completing the Hong Kong investment management ecosystem.
VI. Fund documentation
The LPFO affirms contractual freedom among partners of a LPF
2, which is on par with many other popular offshore fund 
jurisdictions. Accordingly, there should be no need for a complete overhaul of the existing fund documentation that fund 
sponsors and investors have been using for existing funds established in other jurisdictions.
There is no requirement for a LPF to have a private placement memorandum or an offering document, and the GP is not 
required to file the same with the Registrar or the SFC. This is contrary to the Cayman regime which, under the revised 
Private Funds Law, 2020, requires either a private placement memorandum, a summary of terms or marketing materials 
containing certain prescribed information to be filed with the Cayman Islands Monetary Authority.
Fund sponsors who are looking to conduct fundraising with the LPF structure may wish to start revisiting existing fund 
documents with their legal advisers to cater for jurisdiction-specific amendments.
VII. The way forward
The LPFO does not currently allow re-domiciliation of offshore funds to become an LPF in Hong Kong. We look forward 
to the Hong Kong Government introducing such mechanism as an enhancement to the LPF regime as we understand a 
lot of market players are exploring this possibility.
The LPF regime is undoubtedly introduced at an opportune time. With the recent changes to Cayman private funds 
regulations, ranging from more stringent reporting and filing obligations and economic substance requirements to 
changes in legislations, the initial attractiveness derived from tax benefits and reporting laxity has largely subsided. We 
also see a global trend where fund sponsors are preferring to align the substance of asset management activities with 
the fund domicile. In addition, Hong Kong’s proximity to China Mainland and its membership in the Greater Bay Area 
forms a breeding ground for attractive investment opportunities in fast-growing industries ranging from technology, 
media and telecom, healthcare, biomedical to fintech companies.
The authors would like to thank Florence Lau and Boer Ma for their contributions to this article.
2Section 16(1) of the LPFO.


56
I. Introduction
The Hong Kong Inland Revenue Department (IRD) released Departmental Interpretation 
and Practice Note (DIPN) 61 on 30 June 2020, with the aim of clarifying the scope and 
operation of the new unified tax treatment for investment funds in Hong Kong SAR which 
applies from 1 April 2019.
The new unified tax regime replaces the earlier profits tax exemptions that applied 
separately to offshore funds, offshore private equity (PE) funds and open-ended fund 
companies (OFCs). The changes were introduced by the Inland Revenue (Profits Tax 
Exemption for Funds) (Amendment) Ordinance 2019 (2019 Ordinance).
This guidance from the IRD is relevant for all funds operating in Hong Kong but particularly 
so for those funds that will embrace the Hong Kong Limited Partnership Fund regime. 
It was also timely given and echoed the announcements issued in early 2020 by the 
Financial Secretary regarding changes to the tax treatment of a genuine carried interest for 
Hong Kong-Limited Partnership Fund (LPF).
II. Summary of DIPN 61 and the unified fund regime
In summary, the 2019 Ordinance seeks to remove the ring-fencing features that previously 
benefited offshore funds by extending profits tax exemption to privately offered funds 
operating in Hong Kong, regardless of whether they are domiciled inside or outside of 
Hong Kong. From 1 April 2019, all funds (regardless of their structure, size, purpose or the 
location of their central management and control) will enjoy profits tax exemption, subject 
to meeting certain conditions.
DIPN 61 outlines the conditions for accessing the new unified funds exemption. Broadly 
speaking: (1) a “qualifying fund” will be exempted from profits tax on assessable profits 
arising from (2) “qualifying transactions” in certain classes of specified assets, incidental 
transactions and (if the fund is an OFC) transactions in assets of a class that is not 
specified, provided that (3) the transactions are carried out or arranged in Hong Kong 
by a “specified person”, or the fund is otherwise a “qualified investment fund”. These 
conditions are discussed below.
Further, where a fund is exempted, a “special purpose entity” (SPE) owned by the fund 
may be likewise exempted (to the extent of that ownership interest). DIPN 61 explains that 
this is intended to cater for funds with one or more tiers of SPEs to hold their investment 
in private companies in order to facilitate the subsequent disposal of such companies by 
transferring the ownership interests in SPEs.
IRD practice note DIPN 61
Justin Cherrington, Jingjing Jiang, Sam Duncan
Justin Cherrington
Jingjing Jiang
FUNDS


57
(I) Qualifying funds
In applying each of the criteria the IRD has adopted a holistic approach in terms of ascertaining whether a fund satisfies 
the requirements for the profits tax exemption.
•	 The profits tax exemption applies to entities that qualify as a “fund” for the whole of the year of assessment. 
A fund can take many different forms, including a mutual corporation, OFC, limited partnership or other trust-
like arrangement. What these arrangements have in common is that they have the characteristics of pooled 
investment, similar to the definition of “collective investment scheme” under the Securities and Futures Ordinance 
(Cap. 571) (SFO).
•	 DIPN 61 provides the IRD’s views on the meaning of the terms: “arrangement in respect of property” and “managed 
as a whole”, as well as the “pooling”, “control” and “purpose tests” that are relevant for determining whether an 
entity is a qualifying fund.
•	 Relevantly for many of our clients, DIPN 61 contains guidance and examples of when complex and multi-vehicle 
fund structures, including master-feeder structures and parallel fund, will be considered one or more “funds” for 
the purposes of the exemption.
•	 Single investor funds may satisfy the requirements for exemption where the investor is grouped/invested with 
other funds, such that the fund structure is seen as managed as a whole and satisfies the pooling requirements. 
Other than this possible exception, the guidance provides that, only under “very special circumstances” will the 
IRD accept that a fund with only one investor at a particular point in the income year is a qualifying fund (e.g. 
during the start-up period or winding-down period).
(II) Profits from qualifying investments
•	 For qualifying funds, no profits tax is payable on profits from “qualifying transactions”
1 and incidental transactions 
(up to a 5% threshold). DIPN 61 contains commentary on when a transaction is likely to be incidental – for 
example, the IRD considers that holding a debt interest to derive interest income is not a “qualifying transaction” 
in securities (because there are not two parties involved) but the receipt of interest on such a security is incidental 
and subject to the 5% threshold.
1Schedule 16 of the Inland Revenue Ordinance (Cap. 112) lists 11 classes of assets that are specified for qualifying transactions.


58
•	 Where the qualifying transactions involve interests issued by private companies, in order for the profits exemptions 
to apply, a fund will need to satisfy a number of additional conditions. These additional conditions are likely to be 
relevant to PE funds.
(III) Carried out or arranged by a specified person or “qualified investment fund”
•	 The qualifying transaction must be carried out or arranged in Hong Kong by a “specified person”. This includes 
a corporation licensed under the SFO. DIPN 61 explains that this includes a situation where the investment 
manager of a fund (i.e. a specified person) arranges in Hong Kong to buy or sell stocks traded on the Tokyo 
Stock Exchange through an intermediary in Tokyo.
•	 If this condition is not satisfied, the exemption may still apply if the fund is a “qualified investment fund”. Broadly, 
this includes a fund with over 4 external investors who together contribute over 90% of the aggregate capital 
commitments of the fund, provided that not more than 30% of the net proceeds of the fund can be distributed to 
the originator (i.e. investment manager) or its associates.
FUNDS


59
•	 These requirements seek to deny tax exemption for funds that are simply a vehicle of one single investor, or 
where profits are siphoned to one single investor who may be the fund manager.
•	 Additionally, the 30% distribution limit concerns the payment of performance fees or carried interest (in whatever 
form). In other words, the fund may pay a carried interest of up to 30% of net proceeds without impacting its 
exemption status. The IRD considers that this 30% limit is higher than the industry benchmark for performance 
fees or carried interests that is typically paid to investment managers (i.e. 20% of the fund’s profits above a hurdle 
rate). This requirement may be of particular importance in respect of the future taxation of genuine carried interest 
for Hong Kong-based funds as the Government frames the profit tax exemption on such interests.
•	 Helpfully, DIPN 61 provides guidance on when it is appropriate to look through a series of intermediaries in a fund 
structure (e.g. feeder funds or parallel funds) when counting the number of investors.
III. Former fund regimes
While the 2019 Ordinance introduced a unified tax exemption for investment funds, the former regimes for offshore 
funds, offshore PE funds and OFCs are still applicable for years of assessment ended prior to 31 March 2019.
The IRD guidance published in DIPN 43 and 51 continues to be relevant in circumstances where the former regimes 
apply (i.e. pre-1 April 2019).
IV. Further observations
DIPN 61 also contains guidance on:
•	 the anti-round tripping provisions, which are designed to prevent abuse or roundtripping by resident persons to 
take advantage of the profits tax exemption;
•	 the tax residence of funds and SPEs;
•	 the reporting, compliance and due diligence requirements for privately offered funds under the Common 
Reporting Standard (CRS);
•	 the Hong Kong and United States Intergovernmental Agreement (IGA) for Foreign Account Tax Compliance Act 
(FATCA), which applies to certain privately offered funds and passive NFFEs (broadly, a non-US entity that is not a 
financial institution); and
•	 Hong Kong’s transfer pricing regime – and in particular, areas of relevance for fund investment managers, such as 
ensuring that the management fee they charge is at arm’s length and the fund maintains adequate transfer pricing 
documentation, as required.


60
On 2 September 2020, the Securities and Futures Commission of Hong Kong SAR (SFC) 
published the Consultation Conclusions on Proposed Enhancements to the Open-ended 
Fund Companies (OFC) Regime and Further Consultation on Customer Due Diligence 
Requirements
1 (Consultation Conclusion). The Consultation Conclusion summarised the 
feedback from the industry and the SFC’s response in relation to its consultation paper
2 
issued in late 2019 (Consultation Paper).
I. Overview
•	 The OFC regime was introduced in July 2018 to provide an option for Hong Kong 
domiciled funds to be structured in a corporate form
3.
•	 On 20 December 2019, the SFC issued the Consultation Paper under which it 
proposed relaxations and enhancements to the OFC regime in the following areas: 
	
‒ custodian eligibility requirements for private OFCs;
	
‒ investment scope for private OFCs;
	
‒ re-domiciliation of overseas corporate funds; and
	
‒ significant controllers register requirements applicable to all OFCs.
•	 After months of deliberation, the Consultation Conclusion confirmed the following 
enhancements to private OFCs: 
	
‒ The custodian eligibility requirements would be expanded to include Type 1 licensed 
entities. A new Appendix A to the OFC Code
4 would be introduced and be applicable 
to custodians of private OFCs.
SFC introduces enhancements to further 
promote the OFC regime
Hayden Flinn, Cindy Shek, Florence Lau
1https://apps.sfc.hk/edistributionWeb/api/consultation/conclusion?lang=EN&refNo=19CP4
2SFC, Consultation Paper on Proposed Enhancements to the Open-ended Fund Companies Regime, available at: https://www.
sfc.hk/edistributionWeb/gateway/EN/consultation/openFile?refNo=19CP4.
3An overview of the OFC regime is available at https://www.kwm.com/en/hk/knowledge/insights/open-ended-fund-companies-
are-here-20180731
4Requirements for safekeeping of private OFC scheme property under 7.3(g) of the OFC Code.
Hayden Flinn
Cindy Shek
FUNDS


61
5https://apps.sfc.hk/edistributionWeb/api/consultation/conclusion?lang=EN&refNo=20CP3 
6For details on the Hong Kong Limited Partnership Fund regime, please refer to our earlier publication, available at: https://www.kwm.com/en/hk/knowledge/insights/hk-
limited-partnership-regime-rolling-out-20200729.
Free from license condition
The licensed or registered intermediary’s license or registration shall not be subject to the 
condition that it shall not hold client assets.
Minimum capital requirement
The intermediary has to meet the capital requirements of minimum paid-up share capital of 
HK$10 million and minimum liquid capital of not less than HK$3 million.
Private OFC shall be the client
The private OFC shall be the client of the intermediary in respect of its Type 1 regulated activity 
business.
Responsible/executive officer
The custodian is required to have at least one responsible officer/executive officer responsible 
for the overall management and supervision of the private OFC’s custodial function.
Independence from investment 
manager
The intermediary must be independent of the investment manager.
	
‒ The investment scope of private OFCs would be expanded to allow investments in all asset classes.
	
‒ All investment restrictions on private OFCs would be removed. However, new provisions would be included in the 
OFC Code to require investment managers and custodians to have sufficient expertise and experience in managing 
and safekeeping asset classes in which OFC invests, with corresponding enhanced risk disclosure in the offering 
documents.
	
‒ Re-domiciliation of overseas corporate funds would be allowed as long as they satisfy the key requirements for the 
registration of an OFC, including the appointment of an investment manager, custodian and director who fulfill the 
relevant eligibility requirements.
•	 Apart from the introduction of re-domiciliation of overseas corporate funds which is expected to take effect on 1 
November 2021, the abovementioned enhancements on OFCs have now taken effect in Hong Kong.
•	 On 23 December 2020, the SFC also concluded a further consultation on the client due diligence (CDD) 
requirements for OFCs.
5 It was proposed that an OFC will be required to appoint a responsible person to perform 
anti-money laundering and counter terrorist financing (AML/CTF) functions similar to the requirements on limited 
partnership funds under the Limited Partnership Fund Ordinance
6. The SFC is seeking to work on the legislative 
amendments to give effect to such new requirements. 
II. Details of the enhancements to the OFC regime
(I) Custodian eligibility requirements for private OFCs
Under the previous regime, custodians for both public and private OFCs were required to meet the same eligibility 
requirements as for custodians of SFC-authorised funds. In other words, OFC custodians must either be (i) a Hong 
Kong or overseas bank (or a trust company which is a subsidiary of a Hong Kong or overseas bank); or (ii) a trustee of a 
registered scheme under the Mandatory Provident Fund Schemes Ordinance.
Many industry players have called out for greater flexibility on custodian eligibility requirements, noting that it is common 
to have other local or overseas service providers, including prime brokers to hold assets for private funds. In addition, 
comparable jurisdictions such as Singapore allow broker-dealers to act as custodians for private variable capital 
companies if they hold the relevant licence.
Taking into account industry feedback, the SFC has confirmed that intermediaries licensed or registered for Type 1 (dealing 
in securities) regulated activities may act as custodians for private OFCs provided the following requirements are met:


62
Although the eligibility threshold for private OFC custodians has been lowered significantly, the proposed custodian 
should take note that the SFC requires the custodian to be compliant with all of SFC's regulations, codes and related 
guidance applicable to OFC custodians, including the Appendix A of the OFC Code
7 which further elaborates on the 
obligations of OFC custodians, including requirements regarding dealings with client money and client securities and the 
keeping of records.
(II) Investment scope
Previously, private OFCs must invest at least 90% of their gross asset value in securities and futures contracts and/
or cash, bank deposits, certificates of deposit, foreign currencies and foreign exchange contracts (SFO Assets). 
Investments in other non-SFO Assets classes were subject to a 10% “de minimis” investment limit. These investment 
restrictions applicable to private OFCs have been removed altogether, so as to put private OFCs on a level playing field 
with other overseas corporate fund structures (including the Irish Collective Asset-management Vehicle in Ireland, the 
Open-ended Investment Company in the United Kingdom and the Variable Capital Company in Singapore), as well as 
the Limited Partnership Fund (LPF) in Hong Kong SAR.
The SFC has also introduced new provisions in the OFC Code to require that investment managers and custodians 
have sufficient expertise and experience in managing and safekeeping asset classes in which an OFC invests, including 
requiring enhanced risk disclosure in the fund offering documents in respect of different type and nature of assets.
(III) Re-domiciliation of overseas corporate funds
The previous OFC regime did not provide for OFC re-domiciliation. As such, corporate funds incorporated overseas 
could only “re-domicile” by way of other means including asset transfer or share swaps which would trigger associated 
tax obligations. By contrast, other jurisdictions have established statutory re-domiciliation mechanisms for both 
conventional companies and corporate funds, and ancillary tax legislation.
On 2 July 2021, the Securities and Futures (Amendment) Bill 2021 (“Amendment Bill”) was gazetted to introduce a 
statutory re-domiciliation regime which allows offshore corporate funds to migrate to Hong Kong while maintaining 
their corporate identity, continuity and track record without having to establish a completely new legal entity. It is also 
confirmed that no stamp duty will arise as there will be no change in the legal personality of the corporate fund, and as 
such there will be no “transfer” of assets from one legal person to another when the fund migrates to Hong Kong using 
the OFC structure. The Amendment Bill is due to come into operation on 1 November 2021.
8 
The “onshorisation” of funds has become more popular these days, due to various factors including investor 
preferences, perceptions around use of traditional offshore centres, the enhanced requirements by overseas regulators 
on the transparency of offshore funds, and economic substance requirements being introduced by traditional offshore 
fund jurisdictions. The re-domiciliation of corporate funds will allow the OFC regime to be on par with other jurisdictions, 
and increase the competitiveness and attractiveness of Hong Kong as a fund domicile jurisdiction.
(IV) AML/CTF obligations of OFCs
There is currently no prescribed AML/CTF obligation imposed on OFCs, and the investment manager of each OFC is 
expected to carry out the relevant AML/CTF measures.
The SFC Consultation Paper proposed to require all retail and private OFCs to keep a register of significant controllers 
(SCR) similar to the requirement under the Companies Ordinance (Cap. 622 of Laws of Hong Kong SAR) for all other 
conventional companies, so as to enhance the transparency of corporate beneficial ownership of OFCs.
However, the SFC acknowledged the difficulties which would arise from requiring OFCs to keep a SCR given its open-
ended nature. In particular, the investors in a public OFC are constantly changing due to the frequent subscription and 
redemption of shares feature of retail funds. Accordingly, the SFC proposed to require OFCs to appoint a responsible 
person (being an authorised institution, a licensed corporation, an accounting professional or a legal professional) to 
carry out AML/CTF functions as stipulated under Schedule 2 to the Anti-Money Laundering and Counter-Terrorist 
Financing Ordinance (Cap. 615 of Laws of Hong Kong SAR), to further align with the LPF regime. 
7The SFC’s Code on Open-ended Fund Companies is available at: https://www.sfc.hk/web/EN/assets/components/codes/files-current/web/codes/code-on-open-ended-
fund-companies/code-on-open-ended-fund-companies.pdf.
8For a more detailed discussion about process and effect of the re-domiciliation regime, please see our client alert on “Moving your investment funds to Hong Kong 
– Hong Kong’s fund re-domiciliation proposal” at https://www.kwm.com/en/hk/knowledge/insights/moving-your-investment-funds-to-hk-hks-fund-re-domiciliation-
proposal-20210309.
FUNDS


63
Proposed enhancement
Proposed effective date
Custodian eligibility requirement
Effective. 
Expansion of investment scope and 
removal of investment restrictions
Effective. 
Re-domiciliation of overseas corporate 
funds
Amendment Bill is expected to come into effect on 1 November 2021.
AML/CTF requirements
6-month transition period after passing the amendment bill to allow time for OFCs to 
prepare for implementation.
On 23 December 2020, the SFC concluded a further consultation on the CDD requirements for OFCs.The SFC agreed 
that the appointment of a responsible person should be made by the board of directors of an OFC, given that the board 
is legally responsible for all affairs of an OFC. The SFC is seeking to work on the legislative amendments in particular the 
Securities and Futures Ordinance (Cap. 571 of Laws of Hong Kong SAR) and other relevant legislations to give effect to 
such new requirements.
(V) Grant Scheme 
On 10 May 2021, the SFC announced the implementation of the Hong Kong Government’s grant scheme to subsidise 
the setting up of OFCs in Hong Kong. The Grant Scheme is valid for application for a period of three years (from 10 May 
2021 to 9 May 2024), and will operate on a first-come-first-served basis.
9
III. Implementation timeline
The SFC has proposed the following timeline for the proposed enhancements:
Conclusion
We welcome the SFC’s enhancements to the OFC regime. We see this as an important step for the SFC to improve the 
OFC regime to further develop Hong Kong into a full service asset management centre.
9For a more detailed discussion about the grant scheme, please see our client alert on “Hong Kong fund industry updates: Carried interest tax concession regime and the 
OFC and REIT Grant Scheme” at https://www.kwm.com/en/hk/knowledge/insights/hk-fund-industry-updates-carried-interest-tax-concession-regime-and-the-ofc-and-
reit-grant-scheme-20210514. 


64
The Financial Services and the Treasury Bureau (FSTB) of Hong Kong SAR published 
a consultation paper on 31 July 2019 seeking comments on the proposal (Proposal) 
to establish a regime for limited partnership funds (LPF) in Hong Kong. King & Wood 
Mallesons submitted a detailed submission on the Proposal to the FSTB during the 
four-week industry consultation period and held a face to face meeting with the FSTB 
discussing our submissions. Finally, the Limited Partnership Fund Ordinance (Ordinance) 
came into operation on 31 August 2020 after the Bill (Bill) was gazetted on 20 March 
2020 and introduced into the Legislative Council for its First Reading and Second Reading 
in due course.
The proposed LPF regime, together with the introduction of the open-ended fund 
company (OFC) regime in July 2018, and the expansion of mutual recognition of fund 
arrangements in recent years show the Hong Kong government’s commitment to 
strengthen the city’s position as an international hub for fund management activities and 
investment fund domiciliation.
This client alert outlines the key characteristics and requirements of the proposed LPF 
regime under the Ordinance and its major differences from the Proposal, followed by our 
take on the proposed LPF regime.
I. Driving forces for the introduction of the LPF regime
With 560 private equity and venture capital firms and around US$160 billion worth of 
asset under management in Hong Kong in 2019
1, Hong Kong is currently Asia’s second-
largest private equity (PE) hub. The increasing number of Mainland Chinese PE investors 
(encompassing state-owned enterprises, pension and insurance funds and domestic PE 
funds) who are constantly expanding their inbound and outbound investment activities 
bring tremendous potential for Hong Kong to develop its own PE market.
Unfortunately, the old fund regime in Hong Kong is not well-equipped for such 
development to take place. The unit trust structure and the OFC structure, the two fund 
forms offered under the old Hong Kong regime, are more popular amongst public funds 
and hedge funds since PE funds usually take the form of limited partnerships. Whilst 
the existing Limited Partnerships Ordinance (Cap. 37) (LPO) in Hong Kong allows the 
establishment of partnership, it has features which are not appealing for use in the PE 
fund context, for example its restrictive provisions with respect to capital contributions and 
distribution of profits, the lack of contractual flexibility of the partnership and the absence 
of a straightforward dissolution mechanism.
For these reasons, the PE industry has long been calling for the introduction of a new 
limited partnership regime that is catered for PE fund use.
Is Hong Kong SAR ready for its own limited 
partnership fund regime?
Hayden Flinn, Guo Sun Lee, Jingjing Jiang, Cindy Shek, Justin Cherrington
Hayden Flinn
Guo Sun Lee
Jingjing Jiang
1According to AVCJ’s data and cited by Legislative Council in its Brief on the Bill dated 18 March 2020 and accessible at: 
https://www.legco.gov.hk/yr19-20/english/bills/brief/b202003201_brf.pdf.
FUNDS


65
 Cindy Shek
Justin Cherrington
II. What makes Hong Kong an ideal place of domicile?
Recently, we have seen traditionally-popular PE fund domicile jurisdictions such as the 
Cayman Islands introduce reforms to their laws and regulations in light of global initiatives 
to combat cross-border tax avoidance, money-laundering and terrorist financing. In 
December 2018 and June 2019, the Cayman Islands instituted the Cayman Islands 
International Tax Co-operation (Economic Substance) Law (Economic Substance Law) 
as a response to global OECD BEPS standards regarding geographically mobile activities. 
The Economic Substance Law introduces certain reporting and economic substance 
requirements for “relevant” entities conducting “relevant activities”, and these entities will 
be required to report to the Cayman Tax Information Authority in respect of some of their 
activities on an annual basis. This impacts most Cayman Islands incorporated managers 
who are now required to comply with economic substance requirements and subject to 
more stringent regulatory oversight. Furthermore, on 7 February 2020, the Private Funds 
Law, 2020 came into force in the Cayman Islands, which requires, among other things, 
certain closed-ended funds to be registered with and regulated by the Cayman Islands 
Monetary Authority.
These reforms pose uncertainties to the fund formation environment. The absence of 
clarity and market consensus around the economic and practical impact of these changes 
offers an opportunity for Hong Kong to become the next alternative jurisdiction for 
investment funds with the LPF regime.
Hong Kong’s proximity to China Mainland and position as the financial centre in the 
Guangdong-Hong Kong-Macao GBA continues to offer Hong Kong the natural edge to 
stay competitive in the international market.
In addition, Hong Kong has been an organic part of the renminbi internationalisation drive, 
opening up channels for renminbi to benefit from its financial environment. To date, Hong 
Kong provides the broadest range of offshore renminbi products, and has been hosting 
the largest renminbi liquidity pool outside China Mainland. As Hong Kong continues to 
bridge the expansion of offshore renminbi activities and support the growing demand 
for renminbi reserves assets, we see increasing opportunities for investment funds to be 
domiciled in Hong Kong under the proposed LPF regime which would facilitate sponsors 
in managing renminbi assets portfolios through Hong Kong.
While IPOs have been a popular means of exit for many PE funds, Hong Kong continues 
to lead the world in IPO – offering yet another unique advantage for the proposed LPF 
regime.
The possibility of unifying an investment fund’s domicile, operations, management team 
and exit channels in one single jurisdiction avoids the complexities and costs of appointing 
additional layers of service providers and dealing with multiple regulators, thus making 
Hong Kong an ideal place of domicile.
III. Proposed LPF regime at a glance
Broadly, the LPF is a “fund” that is registered by the Registrar of Companies (RoC) as an 
LPF. It comprises one general partner (GP) and at least one limited partner (LP) and is 
governed by its limited partnership agreement (LPA). Key entities of an LPF include the 
investment manager (IM), the auditor, the responsible person (RP), and if applicable, the 
authorised representative (AR). Custodians are not mandatory as long as there is proper 
custody of assets.
2
The table below shows the key features of the LPF, the GP
, the LP
, and the key entities of 
the LPF:
2Unlike the unit trust regime and the OFC regime, there is no bright-line requirement that there must be a custodian. This is 
a favourable feature as a custodian is not necessarily required for some of the assets in which PE funds may invest (eg real 
estate and property).


66
The LPF
Requirements
Characteristics
•	 must satisfy the definition of “fund” as set out in the Ordinance
3 
•	 must have one GP and at least one LP and be constituted by the 
LPA;
•	 must have a registered office in Hong Kong and a business 
registration certificate.
•	 has no separate legal personality;
•	 has the freedom to contract;
•	 has no minimum capital requirement or statutory investment 
restrictions.
The GP
Requirements
Characteristics
•	 must be any of the following: 
- 	a private company limited by shares incorporated in Hong Kong
- a registered non-Hong Kong company
- a limited partnership (whether it is registered under the LPO or a 
foreign jurisdiction with or without a separate legal personality)
- 	an LPF
- 	an individual who is at least 18 years old
•	 has unlimited liability for all debts and obligations of the LPF
•	 bears the ultimate responsibility for the management and control 
of the LPF
•	 has the duty to appoint an IM, an auditor, and an AR if the GP 
is an LPF or a non-Hong Kong limited partnership with no legal 
personality
•	 has the duty to ensure proper custody of assets 
The LP
Requirements
Characteristics
•	 can be any of the following: 
- 	an individual
- 	a corporation
- 	a partnership
- 	an unincorporated body
- 	any other entity
•	 has the right to participate in the economic return of the LPF but 
has no day-to-day management rights or control over the assets
•	 its liability is limited to the agreed contribution it makes, unless the 
limited partner has participated in the day-to-day management 
of the LPF, subject to the non-exhaustive exemptions granted 
under the “safe harbour” provisions
4
The IM
•	 must be appointed by the GP to carry out day-to-day investment management functions of the LPF
5;
•	 must be any of the following: 
- 	a Hong Kong incorporated company
- 	a registered non-Hong Kong company
- 	a Hong Kong resident that is at least 18 years old
•	 can be the GP itself.
The auditor
•	 must be appointed by the GP to carry out annual audits of the financial statements of the LPF;
•	 must be independent of the GP
, the IM and also the AR (if applicable) of the LPF.
The RP
•	 must be appointed by the GP to carry out the anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist financing (AML) measures set out in Schedule 2 to 
the Anti-Money Laundering and Counter-Terrorist Financing Ordinance (Cap. 615) (AMLO)
6;
•	 must be any of the following: 
- 	an authorised institution
- 	a corporation licensed by the Securities and Futures Commission (SFC)
- 	an accounting professional
- 	a legal professional
3Under section 3 of the Ordinance, a “fund” is defined, in brief, as an arrangement where (i) either the property is managed as a whole by or on behalf of the operating 
person of the arrangement, or the contributions of the participating persons and the profits or income from which payments are made to them are pooled; (ii) the 
participating persons do not have day-to-day control over the management of the property; and (iii) the purpose or effect of the arrangement is to enable the operating 
person and participating persons to receive profits, income, gains or other returns arising from the acquisition, holding, management or disposal of the property. For 
the complete definition and exceptions for “fund”, please see section 3 of the Ordinance, which is accessible at https://www.elegislation.gov.hk/hk/cap637?xpid=
ID_1595838263726_001.
4Section 27 and Schedule 2 of the Ordinance.
5The initial proposed IM is deemed to be appointed as the IM of the LPF with effect from registration of the LPF, until otherwise replaced (section 20(3) of the Ordinance).
6The initial proposed RP is deemed to be appointed as the RP of the LPF with effect from registration of the LPF, until otherwise replaced (section 33(3) of the Ordinance).
FUNDS
Key features


67
The AR
Requirements
Characteristics
•	 must be appointed by the GP to be responsible for the 
management and control of the LPF if the GP is an LPF or a non-
Hong Kong limited partnership with no legal personality
7;
•	 must be any of the following: 
- 	a Hong Kong incorporated company
- 	a registered non-Hong Kong company
- 	a Hong Kong resident that is at least 18 years old
•	 is jointly and severally liable for all debts and obligations of the 
LPF with the GP;
•	 shares the ultimate responsibility for the management and control 
of the LPF with the GP
.
IV. Registration
To register a fund as an LPF, the proposed GP of the LPF must make an application to the RoC, which is required to 
be submitted on behalf of such GP by a Hong Kong law firm or a solicitor. A fixed fee of HK$3,034 is payable to the 
RoC in respect of the application and registration of an LPF, which is relatively low compared to the prescribed fee in the 
Cayman Islands.
A streamlined channel is also provided to qualifying structures registered under the LPO to migrate to the LPF regime 
upon the submission of an application similar to what is required for the registration of a new LPF.
8 Such migration would 
not result in any identity or continuity disruptions and would not trigger any profits tax and stamp duty implications.
Unlike the OFC structure, which is required to be registered and authorised by the SFC (if it is a public OFC), the LPF 
is only required to register with the RoC and does not need the authorisation of the SFC unless it is offered to retail 
investors (subject to applicable exemptions) and is not subject to any SFC-imposed investment restrictions, disclosure 
and operational requirements. However, if the GP or the IM of an LPF carries out regulated activities in Hong Kong as 
defined in the Securities and Futures Ordinance (Cap. 571) (SFO), appropriate licence(s) from the SFC must be obtained.
A certificate of registration of LPF will be issued by the RoC upon completion of registration and is conclusive evidence 
that the fund is registered as an LPF.
V. Key comparisons between the Proposal and the Ordinance
We identified below several major differences between the Proposal and the Ordinance.
(I) Clear definition of “fund”
An LPF must meet the definition of “fund”. Unlike the Proposal which makes reference to the definition of “fund” under 
section 20AM of the Inland Revenue Ordinance (Cap. 112) (IRO) and the definition of “collective investment scheme” 
under the SFO, the definition of “fund” is set out in full under the Bill (also the Ordinance). As noted in our submission to 
the FSTB, this is the preferred approach as it helps to avoid any unnecessary confusion.
Notably, though the definition of “fund” under the Ordinance
9 remains highly similar to the definition of “fund” under 
the IRO and the definition of “collective investment scheme” under the SFO, one of the exclusions applicable to those 
definitions has been left out of the definition under the Ordinance. The IRO definition and the SFO definition both 
excludes “an arrangement under which each of the participating persons [i.e. the investors] is a corporation in the same 
group of companies as the person operating the arrangements”.
It is not advisable to include such exclusion in the LPF context as PE funds are often initially set up with LPs that are 
affiliated to the GP (GP Affiliated LPs) for administrative and commercial reasons. Under the Ordinance, such exclusion 
has instead been replaced by our suggestion that the LPF be given a 24-month window to satisfy the requirement 
that not all the partners in the LPF are corporations in the same group of companies.
10 This ensures that the LPF has 
sufficient time to line up and admit non-GP Affiliated LPs. 
7The initial proposed AR is deemed to be appointed as the AR of the LPF with effect from registration of the LPF, until otherwise replaced (section 23(4) & (5) of the 
Ordinance).
8Part 7 of the Ordinance.
9See Footnote 3.
10Sections 7(1)(i) and 7(2) of the Ordinance. The failure to satisfy such requirement may entitle the RoC to strike the name of an LPF off the LPF register. Other 
circumstances in which the RoC may be entitled to do so include where the LPF is not in operation or carrying on business as a fund after 24 months of its registration 
or where the LPF does not have an IM or RP (section 65(2) of the Ordinance).


68
Ordinance, to ensure relevant AML standards are met, the 
GP of the LPF is now required to appoint an RP who will 
take over the role of conducting AML measures.
VI. Safe harbour provisions
As noted in the table above, LPs may risk losing their 
limited liability if they participate in the management of 
the LPF. Taking into account the market practice for LPs 
to have some degree of management involvement or 
decision-making power in the LPF, a non-exhaustive list 
of “safe harbour” activities has been introduced in the 
Ordinance to offer bright-line guidance as to what activities 
would not be regarded as management of the LPF.
11 This 
should be sufficiently wide to cover the standard range of 
management that LPs have in PE funds.
Examples of such activities include:
•	 acting as or appointing someone to act as an 
agent, officer or employee of the LPF;
•	 acting as or appointing someone to act as a 
director, shareholder, or officer of the GP;
•	 serving on or appointing someone to serve on a 
board or committee of the LPF or the GP;
•	 serving on or appointing someone to serve on a 
board or committee of portfolio companies;
•	 approving the GP or the IM to carry out certain 
actions relating to the business, prospects or 
transactions of the LPF; and
•	 taking part in certain decisions of the LPF including 
extension of fund term and change in investment 
scope.
VII. AML concerns vs investor confidentiality 
In line with international and local AML efforts, the 
Ordinance requires the RP to carry out necessary AML 
measures and imposes certain record-keeping obligations 
on the GP or the IM of the LPF.
12 In short, it is required 
that records containing particulars relating to the partners, 
customers, transactions and controller of each partner of 
the LPF
13 (AML records) should be kept at the registered 
office of the LPF or such other place notified to the RoC. 
Although the AML records are required to be made 
available to the GP and LPs of the LPF, regulators and 
law enforcement agencies, it is made clear under the 
Ordinance that they must not be made available for public 
inspection. The public, however, will be able to inspect 
(II) Relaxed eligibility criteria of the GP
Under the Proposal, a GP must be a Hong Kong 
incorporated private company limited by shares. In our 
submission to the FSTB, we explained that there is no 
comparable requirement in other jurisdictions and it is 
unduly restrictive as it denies the flexibility of allowing the 
GP to be set up in other commonly used legal forms (eg 
a foreign corporation or a limited partnership). The FSTB 
decided to remove this requirement from the Ordinance, 
as reflected in the table above.
(III) New requirement for an AR
We understand that a main reason for the original 
requirement that the GP be a Hong Kong limited private 
company is the concern that there will be difficulties in 
attributing liability to a GP that has no legal personality. As 
noted above, such requirement has been relaxed under 
the Ordinance and the GP can now be an LPF or a non-
Hong Kong limited partnership with no legal personality. 
To alleviate the relevant concern, such GP will now be 
required to appoint an AR who will share with the GP the 
ultimate responsibility to manage the LPF and be jointly 
and severally liable for any liabilities of the LPF.
(IV) Relaxed eligibility criteria of the IM
Like the Proposal, the Ordinance mandates that the 
GP delegates all day-to-day investment management 
functions to an IM. Whilst we consider such requirement 
to be unnecessary and unattractive as the GP can take on 
such functions itself and it imposes additional restriction 
on the set up of an LPF, it is worth noting that the 
requirement has been significantly relaxed.
Under the Ordinance, the IM is no longer required to 
be an authorised institution, a SFC-licensed entity, 
an accounting professional or a legal professional. 
Interestingly, it is specified that the GP of an LPF can act 
as the IM. Practically, this may be unorthodox from a legal 
perspective since the GP will essentially be contracting 
with itself in respect of such appointment. However, it is 
not unusual for GP to take up the investment management 
functions in certain PE funds so it would be interesting to 
see how this is applied practically.  
(V) New requirement for an RP
As indicated under the Proposal, the original eligibility 
criteria of the IM aims at ensuring that suitable persons 
are appointed to undertake the necessary AML measures. 
In light of the now relaxed IM eligibility criteria under the 
11Schedule 2 of the Ordinance.
12Sections 33 and 29 of the Ordinance.
13For definition of “controller”, please refer to section 29(6) & (7) of the Ordinance. The definition is largely similar to the definition of “beneficial owner” under the 
AMLO.
FUNDS


69
the LPF register kept by the RoC, which will contain all 
documents registered with and the certificate issued by 
the RoC. Such documents may include annual return 
which is required to be filed in a specified form by the 
GP to the RoC, amongst other notifications relating to 
certain changes to the LPF.
14 It is unclear at this stage 
what information will be required to be provided in the 
annual return. However, it is worth noting that where any 
information is specified as being excluded from public 
inspection in the Ordinance (eg the AML records), it will 
not be made available to the public as part of the LPF 
register kept by the RoC. This shows the government’s 
effort to ensure a reasonably high level of confidentiality is 
accorded to the LPs to ensure the attractiveness of the 
proposed regime.
VIII. Tax treatment
LPF will enjoy profits tax exemption as long as it meets 
the definition of “fund” under section 20AM of the IRO and 
subject to certain exemption conditions. Qualifying funds 
will be able to enjoy profits tax exemption on transactions 
in qualifying assets in Schedule 16C to the IRO and 
incidental transactions for any year of tax assessment.
The LPF will be treated as a separate entity from partners 
for tax purposes. The GP (or authorised representative, if 
applicable) of the LPF is responsible for lodging profits tax 
returns on behalf of the LPF. Both the GP (or authorised 
representative, if applicable) and the Manager will be 
responsible for ensuring the LPF complies with the 
requirements of the IRO.
On distribution of profits and assets by the LPF to the LPs, 
it is proposed that those proceeds, as well as redemption 
and transfer of LP interests, will not be subject to stamp 
duty as an interest in a LPF is not a “stock”.
While qualified LPFs may enjoy profits tax exemption, 
Hong Kong-based managers or advisors arranging or 
conducting the specified transactions remain chargeable. 
The IRD has stressed in their practice notes that these 
local service providers should be adequately compensated 
for their services or remunerated on an arm’s length 
basis
15.
However, it would appear that the Hong Kong 
Government will legislate to address the IRD view that the 
carried interest is typically a fee for services or a type of 
disguised management fee. The Financial Secretary Paul 
14For example, changes in the particulars relating to the AR (section 23(6) of the Ordinance), change of GP or changes in the particulars relating to the GP (section 
25(1)(a) & (b) of the Ordinance), changes in the address of the registered office of the LPF (section 25(1)(c) of the Ordinance), changes in the investment scope 
or principal place of business of the LPF (section 25(1)(d) of the Ordinance), change of IM or changes in the particulars relating to the IM (section 25(1)(e) of the 
Ordinance), and change of RP or changes in the particulars relating to the RP (section 25(1)(f) of the Ordinance).
15Paragraph 72 of PN51 provides that management and performance fees based on a cost-plus formula are not likely to have been determined on the arm’s length 
basis, in particular when the investment managers or advisors performed significant functions and bore considerable risks in Hong Kong to generate the profits of the 
offshore funds.


70
Chan Mo-po said in his budget speech in February 2020: 
With a view to attracting more private equity funds to 
domicile and operate in Hong Kong, we plan to provide 
tax concession for carried interest issued by private equity 
funds operating in Hong Kong subject to the fulfilment 
of certain conditions. We will consult the industry on the 
proposal, and the relevant arrangement will be applicable 
starting from 2020-21 upon completion of the legislative 
exercise.
IX. Dissolution and liquidation mechanisms
Unlike the limited partnership regime under the LPO, 
the LPF regime offers a straightforward dissolution 
mechanism. One important feature is that an LPF may 
be dissolved in accordance with the LPA. This offers the 
flexibility much needed in the PE fund context as unlike 
public funds or hedge funds, PE funds often have specific 
investment targets and cycles and hence a limited term.   
Apart from dissolution in accordance with the LPA, an 
LPF can also be dissolved with or without a court order 
in certain default situations.
16 In respect of dissolution 
without a court order, an LPF can be dissolved where 
certain default events occur in relation to the GP or the AR 
(if applicable) of the LPF and that the GP or the AR is not 
replaced within 30 days after the date of the occurrence 
of such default events. These events include where the 
GP or the AR is bankrupt, dissolved, dead, wound up, or 
ceases to be the GP or the AR of the LPF (as the case 
may be).
In respect of dissolution with a court order, a partner or a 
creditor of an LPF may apply to the court for the LPF to be 
dissolved if, for example, a partner wilfully or persistently 
commits a breach of the LPA, the business of the LPF can 
only be carried on at a loss, or it is just and equitable that 
the LPF be dissolved. Further, an LPF may be wound up 
by the court as an unregistered company in accordance 
with the Companies (Winding UP and Miscellaneous 
Provisions) Ordinance (Cap. 32). 
17
X. The future vehicle of choice?
The proposed LPF regime provides a practical alternative 
for the domiciliation of PE funds and potentially more 
flexibility for fund managers to meet market demand. The 
limited partnership is a familiar investment vehicle for fund 
managers across different jurisdictions. With the Chinese 
government’s initiative of developing the GBA
18, we see 
the potential for the LPF regime to be embraced by 
fund managers in the region seeking to raise funds from 
Mainland Chinese investors or to raise funds to invest in 
China.
Given the change of the regulatory landscape in traditional 
offshore jurisdictions like the Cayman Islands, this 
proposed LPF regime also enables Hong Kong to grasp 
the opportunity of the shift of fund structures and activities 
from offshore to onshore. 
Additionally, Hong Kong’s relatively extensive network of 
double tax agreements, as compared with other PE fund 
domicile jurisdictions (such as the Cayman Islands), may 
prove beneficial for LPFs and investors and their relevant 
underlying overseas investments.
The authors would like to thank Florence Lau, Boer Ma, Cheryl Ho and 
Hazel He for their contributions to this article.
16Sections 70(2) and 71 of the Ordinance.
17Part 6, Division 2 of the Ordinance.
18The “Outline Development Plan for the Guangdong-Hong Kong-Macau Greater Bay Area” was announced in February 2019, under which one of the key focus areas 
is to develop the Greater Bay Area into an international financial hub, including developing Guangzhou into a private equity “trading market”.
“
”
FUNDS


71
Introduction
We observe growing interest from Chinese financial institutions in the use of orphan 
special purpose vehicles (“SPVs”) in repackaging structures for financing deals. Chinese 
clients do not just include traditional sell-side clients like investment banks and authorised 
institutions, but also securities houses and many buy-side clients such as fund managers 
and asset managers.
The key advantages in the use of repackaging structures include their off-balance sheet 
treatment, and reduced credit risks to the arranger’s corporate group.
This article provides an introduction to the background, basic features and commercial 
uses of repackaging transactions, and answers to some of our clients’ frequently asked 
questions.
I. How long have repackaging structures been around?
Repackaging structures are not a recent invention. The earliest repackaging transaction 
is thought to have been conceived as early as the 1980s in the UK. Since then there has 
been explosive growth in the scale and variety of repackaging transactions across multiple 
asset classes, including bond-linked, equity-linked, credit-linked, commodity-linked and 
other structures linked to bespoke products.
The following key features of repackaging transactions are all well-established in global 
markets:
•	 orphan nature of the SPV;
•	 insolvency remoteness and ring-fencing through limited recourse and non-petition;
•	 security over the underlying collateral assets;
•	 use of derivatives to manage cashflows discrepancies between the note level and 
the collateral asset pool level; and
•	 use of pre-enforcement liquidation by a disposal agent and trustee enforcement.
Practical guides on orphan SPV repackaging 
transactions for Hong Kong SAR and China 
Mainland clients
Richard Mazzochi, Minny Siu, Angus Sip, Ryan Iskandar 
 Minny Siu
Angus Sip
Richard Mazzochi


72
The volume and complexity of repackaging transactions fell after the global financial crisis in 2008, but have resumed 
in recent years. There have been various initiatives in recent years to develop multi-dealer repackaging programmes in 
Europe and the US, where multiple financial institutions accede to a common programme to offer products on more 
standardised terms.
The use of repackaging transactions is relatively novel to China Mainland clients. Instead of using the repackaging 
structure in traditional methods such as large volume “flow” transactions that are linked to safe and liquid assets, 
Chinese financial institutions have successfully and creatively leveraged repackaging structures to fit their own unique 
business and capital needs. 
II. What is the basic structure of a repackaging transaction?
Traditionally, many of the simpler repackaging transactions are structured with the following features:
•	 An orphan SPV issuer issues notes (“Notes”) and uses the issuance proceeds to purchase underlying assets, 
such as a portfolio of bonds (“Collateral Assets”).
•	 In repackaging transactions arranged by Chinese financial institutions, these structures are often “pass-through”, 
under which the cashflows under the Notes will match the cashflows under the Collateral Assets precisely without 
the need for a swap in managing cashflow discrepancies.
•	 If it is necessary to modify the cashflows under the Collateral Assets for any reason (e.g. changing the interest 
rate or currency), the SPV issuer enters into a swap transaction with the Swap Counterparty (usually the arranger 
or one of its affiliates), under which the SPV issuer pays to the Swap Counterparty cashflows it receives from the 
Collateral Assets, and the Swap Counterparty pays to the SPV issuer cashflows which match payments under 
the Notes.
•	 The SPV issuer grants security over the Collateral Assets it holds as well as all of its rights, title and interest under 
the swap transaction (if any) and other related transaction documents in favour of the Trustee.
•	 The Trustee holds the benefit of the security on trust for the secured creditors, which include the Noteholders and 
the Swap Counterparty.
To increase cost-efficiency, arrangers will typically arrange for note programmes to be established by the SPV issuers. 
The programme documentation will set out the framework for the basic structure above, which allow the SPV to enter 
into repackaging transactions using shorter form issuance documentation. Such programmes are commonly known as 
“repackaging programmes”.
FUNDS


73
III. What is an orphan SPV?
A fundamental feature of repackaging structures is the use 
of an insolvency remote “orphan” SPV as the issuer. The 
SPV is typically a company established in a tax neutral or 
tax favourable jurisdiction (such as the Cayman Islands 
or Ireland), and is independently owned and controlled by 
independent directors.
When establishing a repackaging programme, a 
professional corporate services provider is usually 
appointed to assist with incorporating and managing the 
SPV. The professional corporate services provider’s core 
business activities include holding the shares of the SPV 
on trust for a charitable purpose, as well as providing 
independent directors for the SPV. The SPV and the 
professional corporate services provider will enter into 
an administration agreement appointing the professional 
corporate services provider as the administrator of the 
SPV and setting out the scope of its services. Any fees, 
costs and expenses payable to the administrator will 
usually be borne by the arranger.
At KWM, we have strong relationships with the most 
well-established corporate services providers that have a 
long track record in incorporating and managing orphan 
SPVs. While fraud risk cannot be completely eliminated, 
appointing a reputable corporate services provider will 
help to minimise this risk. Arrangers and investors can 
also take comfort that the Collateral Assets for any series 
of Notes is secured in favour of the Trustee, who holds 
the security on trust for the secured creditors. The orphan 
SPV and its directors are usually subject to restrictions 
from dealing with Collateral Assets under the repackaging 
programme documents.
Such arrangements ensure that the SPV will not be 
regarded as a subsidiary of the arranger or the originator, 
or indeed of any corporate group. It will be for all intents 
and purposes an “orphan” with no affiliates.
IV. What are the pros and cons of repackaging 
transactions?
A common question that many Chinese clients ask is 
whether they should set up a repackaging programme, 
or a more traditional structured notes programme with a 
corporate group entity as the issuer. Some of the pros and 
cons of setting up a repackaging programme are set out 
below.
(I) Pros
•	 Off-balance sheet treatment in respect of Collateral 
Assets – Perhaps the most important advantage that 
a repackaging structure gives is off-balance sheet 
treatment in respect of the Collateral Assets. The SPV 
is an “orphan” that is not an affiliate or subsidiary of the 
arranger group. This means that any Collateral Assets 
that the SPV purchases for any repackaging transaction 
will not form part of the balance sheet of the arranger 
group, including any assets that the SPV purchases 
from the arranger group. When the arranger group sells 
assets to the SPV, this accelerates cash receipts on the 
sale of the assets while removing the assets from the 
balance sheet of the arranger group. In doing so the 
debt-to-equity ratio of the arranger group is reduced, 
and the financial ratios are improved so as to enable it 
to borrow more on-balance sheet.
•	 Off-balance sheet treatment in respect of Notes – For 
similar reasons as described above, any Notes issued 
by the orphan SPV will not form part of the balance 
sheet of the arranger group. This has a number of 
advantages – for example, that the arranger group will 
not need to hold capital under the Financial Resources 
Rules (“FRR”) for notes issued by the orphan SPV 
issuer. In addition, for Chinese financial institutions, 
Notes issued by the orphan SPV should not constitute 
foreign debt of the Chinese financial institutions and 
therefore should not require NDRC filings.
Although there have been instances where issuances 
by a corporate group issuer under a structured notes 
programme have achieved off-balance sheet treatment, 
this often requires discussions with accountants and 
specific structuring features (such as holding and 
granting security over the reference assets). Using a 
repackaging programme is arguably a more established 
and reliable method of achieving this outcome.
•	 Reduced credit risk to the arranger group – Another 
important advantage of repackaging transactions is 
reduced credit risk to the arranger group. Investors in 
structured notes issued by a corporate group issuer 
are exposed to the credit risk of both the arranger 
group (via the issuer) and reference assets that underlie 
the structured notes. However, in a repackaging 
transaction, investors are only exposed to the credit risk 
of the Collateral Assets. The SPV issuer is not part of 
the arranger group and is structured to be “insolvency 
remote”.
•	 Tackle investment restrictions – Repackaging 
structures may also help tackle investment restrictions 
imposed on the investors. Financial institutions or funds 
may be subject to investment restrictions, such as 
restrictions from making loans or investments in equity 
or fund products. Often they are not restricted from 
investing in fixed income products. Repackaging notes 
issued by an orphan SPV are often regarded as fixed 
income products falling within their investment scope.
•	 Others – Other key benefits of using repackaging 
transactions include obtaining a favourable tax 
treatment and avoiding conflicts of interest with an 
independent board in place at the SPV level.


74
(II) Cons
•	 Costs – The main drawback of establishing a repackaging programme is cost. As it is a more complex structure 
than a traditional structured notes programme, there are more parties and documents involved, which will involve a 
substantially higher establishment and on-going maintenance cost. The list of the key parties and documents involved 
in a repackaging programme are described below.
•	 Time – It also generally takes longer to establish the repackaging programme than a traditional structured notes 
programme. A typical timeline for establishing a repackaging programme is described below.
We observe a trend amongst Chinese Mainland financial institutions in Hong Kong SAR to maintain both a repackaging 
programme and a traditional structured notes programme, which provides the greatest flexibility to meet client and 
business demands.
V. How to achieve “insolvency remoteness” in repackaging transactions?
An SPV is structurally independent of the arranger group, and will not be affected by the insolvency of the arranger 
group.
Apart from the SPV corporate ownership independence, the programme documents will also adopt contractual 
“insolvency remoteness”. Common contractual provisions include:
•	 Restrictions on the SPV against engaging in any business (other than the issuance of notes under the repackaging 
programme), the disposal of assets, declaration of dividends, owning of any subsidiary or incurring of liabilities except 
for those contemplated by the repackaging transactions.
•	 “Limited recourse” language – i.e. noteholders and other secured creditors in respect of a repackaging transaction 
only have recourse to Collateral Assets which are subject to security for that transaction.
•	 “Non-petition” language – i.e. noteholders and other secured creditors agree not to take any legal proceedings or file 
any winding-up petition against the SPV. 
VI. How to achieve “ring-fencing” in repackaging transactions?
It is typical for arrangers to establish repackaging programmes such that a single SPV can enter into multiple series of 
repackaging transactions. It is important that each series of repackaging transaction is “ring-fenced” from all other series, 
such that the collateral assets held by the SPV for a particular series are only available to the noteholders and other 
secured creditors for that series, and not to any other creditor of the SPV.
This is achieved by:
•	 “Limited recourse” language – i.e. noteholders and other secured creditors for a particular series will only have 
recourse to Collateral Assets which are subject to security for that series only, and not to the Collateral Assets for any 
other series.
•	 Security – i.e. security over Collateral Assets for a particular series is created in favour of the trustee, which holds it on 
trust for the noteholders and other secured creditors for that series only.
It is also important that the SPV is “insolvency remote” (as discussed in Section V above) from a ring-fencing perspective, 
as these ring-fencing mechanisms may not always survive in an insolvency scenario.
VII. How are repackaging transactions operated in practice?
As discussed in Section III above, arrangers typically appoint professional corporate services providers when establishing 
repackaging programmes, who appoint independent directors for the SPV. The directors will be involved in signing 
transaction documents and holding board meetings, but will not be typically involved in running the transactions. This 
means that other parties will be responsible for all structural and operational aspects of repackaging transactions, 
including making all determination and decisions and taking actions.
We list out some of the most common roles in a typical repackaging transaction:
FUNDS


75
Arrangers
•	 Managing and overseeing the setting up of programme and structuring each note issuance
Dealer
•	 Initial purchaser of notes for on-sale to investors 
•	 Usually a Type 1 licensed entity
Calculation Agent 
•	 Making certain calculations and determinations in connection with the Notes
Originator 
•	 The arranger (or one of its affiliates) usually holds (or acts as the dealer in respect of) the Collateral 
Assets that are sold to the SPV
•	 The originator can also be a buy-side client of the arranger which holds the underlying asset and is 
looking to accelerate cash receipts and remove assets from its balance sheet
Disposal Agent
•	 Pre-enforcement liquidation of the Collateral Assets before redemption
Swap Counterparty
•	 Taking on certain risks in a repackaging, e.g. interest rate and currency mismatches between the 
receivables and the Notes, or providing leverage on the return of the Notes
Arrangers will usually also appoint a professional trustee and agency services provider to perform the following roles:
A key consideration for arrangers is that, while they will necessarily be heavily involved in structuring and running 
repackaging transactions, there are certain limits in order to retain off-balance sheet accounting treatment. For example, 
arrangers should not have any control over the orphan SPV’s board of directors. The directors need to be genuinely 
independent directors that act in the best interests of the orphan SPV.
Voting rights in respect of the Collateral Assets should be held solely by the orphan SPV but not the arranger. As security 
interest over the Collateral Assets is created in favour of the trustee, the SPV usually covenants not to exercise voting 
rights unless it receives a direction from the noteholders by way of extraordinary resolution.
VIII. What documents are required to establish a repackaging programme?
Arrangers will need to appoint a local counsel to incorporate the SPV in their jurisdiction of choice (e.g. for a Cayman 
SPV, Cayman counsel is required). Many such local counsel have a professional corporate services provider arm, and it 
is common to appoint both of them together.
Local counsel will typically prepare the following documents:
Account Bank
•	 Maintaining an account into which proceeds of the underlying assets are deposited  
Custodian 
•	 Safekeeping of the underlying assets (usually for securities cleared through external clearing 
systems)
Paying Agent
•	 Making payments to the noteholders as they fall due
Note Trustee / 
Security Agent
•	 Acting on behalf of the noteholders as an intermediary between the noteholders and the issuer, 
representing the noteholders’ interests throughout the life of the notes
•	 Also holding the benefit of the security on behalf of the investors and other parties whose interests 
are secured
Settlement Agent
•	 Assisting with the initial settlement of the Notes
•	 Usually be appointed if the arranger does not have an account with clearing systems


76
As your arranger and trustee counsel, we will prepare the following programme documents:
IX. What licences may be required for repackaging transactions?
The following licences may be relevant to repackaging transactions under the Securities and Futures Ordinance (Cap. 
571) (SFO):
Type 1
(Dealing in securities)
•	 Repackaging notes are typically sold to professional investors
•	 Type 1 licence always required when selling to corporate or individual professional 
investors
•	 The Dealer must be a Type 1 licensed entity for the SPV to rely on an exemption 
under the SFO
Type 3
(Leveraged foreign exchange trading) 
•	 Potentially relevant if an FX swap is required
Type 8 
(Securities margin financing) 
•	 Needs to be considered for leveraged transactions
Type 9
(Asset management)
•	 This may be relevant in “managed” repackaging transactions, where notes issuance 
proceeds are deposited with an investment or asset manager
•	 Not required for most repackaging transactions
Type 11
(Dealing in or advising on OTC 
derivative products)
•	 When it comes into force, the arranger group entity that acts as the swap 
counterparty will need to be Type 11 licensed
SPV incorporation 
documents 
•	 To incorporate the SPV
Declaration of Trust
•	 For the share trustee to declare a charitable trust over the shares of the SPV 
Administration Agreement
•	 To appoint the professional corporate services provider as the administrator of the SPV
•	 Arranger usually also signs up to bear the fees, costs and expenses on behalf of the SPV 
Offering Circular
•	 Disclosure document for the repackaging programme
•	 Will contain risk factors, terms and conditions, selling restrictions and any other disclosure that may 
be required
Principal Trust Deed
•	 Appoints the trustee and sets up the framework for creating the notes and security for any series 
Agency Agreement
•	 Appoints the agents of the SPV as listed in Section VII above
Dealer Agreement
•	 Agreement to sell notes to the Dealer for distribution to investors
Swap Schedule
•	 Form of Schedule to an ISDA Master Agreement between the Swap Counterparty and SPV
•	 Sets up the framework for confirmations to be entered into for any issuance
•	 Not always necessary to be drafted at programme establishment
FUNDS


77
•	The SPV establishment process is straightforward and will 
be handled by an offshore counsel in a suitable offshore 
jurisdiction. It usually takes up to a week to establish a SPV.
•	A legal identifier code (LEI) is now mandatory for programme 
establishment. This is usually obtained within 48 hours of SPV 
establishment.
•	Draft Offering Circular will be provided to clearing systems for 
comments and allocation of programme number.
•	Turnaround time for ICSDs is at least ten business days.
•	Other programme level documentation include: Principal Trust 
Deed, Agency Agreement, Dealer Agreement.
•	KYC will be conducted by the note trustee / agent.
•	Time for KYC completion for new SPV can be three weeks or more. KYC needs to be completed before 
programme establishment.
There are many other regulatory considerations that may be relevant to repackaging transactions, including but not 
limited to:
•	 suitability requirements when marketing to investors; 
•	 arrangers’ liability for market misconduct and misrepresentation;
•	 SFC Code of Conduct requirements for complex products and derivative products; and
•	 regulations in relation to OTC derivatives, including reporting, margining, clearing and potential licensing issues.
This is a big topic which needs to be considered on a case-by-case basis for each transaction. We are happy to discuss 
further with any client on potential regulatory considerations relating to any repackaging transaction.
X. What is a typical timeline for establishing a repackaging programme?
Depending on the corporate approval process of the arranger institution (which may range from one month to up to 
six months or more), the setup of a repackaging programme itself can be completed within six to ten weeks. Timeline 
for a note drawdown under the programme varies from case to case depending on the complexity and novelty of the 
structure.
The programme establishment process is summarised in the chart below.


78
On 14 May 2021, the Supreme People’s Court (SPC) and the Hong Kong Special 
Administrative Region (HKSAR) government signed the Record of Meeting on Mutual 
Recognition of and Assistance to Bankruptcy (Insolvency) Proceedings between the 
Courts of the Mainland and the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region (the “Record 
of Meeting”). In order to further refine the cooperative framework for insolvency matters 
in both places, the SPC has issued the Supreme People’s Court’s Opinion on Taking 
Forward a Pilot Measure in relation to the Recognition of and Assistance to Insolvency 
Proceedings in the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region (the “Pilot Opinion”), which 
provides innovative guidelines for insolvency cases cross border of Mainland and HKSAR, 
the scope and legal effect of mutual recognition, and the cooperate method of both 
judicial. Starting from the background of the Pilot Opinion, we, as a law firm specializing 
in debt restructuring in the China Mainland and Hong Kong SAR, analyse the innovative 
highlights of the Pilot Opinion and look ahead at the prospect of cooperation on cross- 
border insolvency developments.
I. Background of the Pilot Opinion 
Under the Basic Law of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of the People’s 
Republic of China, Hong Kong may render judicial assistance through consultation 
with judicial organs in other parts of the country. In terms of mutual recognition and 
enforcement of judgments and arbitral awards, eight arrangements for judicial assistance 
in civil and commercial matters have been signed between the Mainland and Hong Kong, 
but bankruptcy matters had been excluded from the judicial assistance scope before. 
Article 5 of the Enterprise Bankruptcy Law of the People’s Republic of China (the “Enterprise 
Bankruptcy Law”) contains principled provisions on cross-border bankruptcy, but there 
is no systematic judicial document in this area. The promulgation of the Pilot Opinion is 
an expanded exploration of judicial assistance in the bankruptcy sector. It is undoubtedly 
an inspiration for cross-border insolvency practice, preservation of estate, involvement 
in derivative litigation and arbitration, and foreign creditors’ participation in insolvency 
proceedings.
Interpretation of the Supreme People’s Court’s 
Opinion on Taking Forward a Pilot Measure in 
relation to the Recognition of and Assistance 
to Insolvency Proceedings in the Hong Kong 
Special Administrative Region
Hao Zhaohui, Shen Yuhan
DISPUTE RESOLUTION
Hao Zhaohui


79
Simultaneously, cross-border trade and investment have 
raised actual demands for collaboration in cross-border 
insolvency practice. Statistics show that in 2018, Hong 
Kong set up about 40,000 enterprises in the Mainland 
and the Mainland’s non-financial direct investment in 
Hong Kong were more than USD 70 billion. Frequency 
investment activities will inevitably be accompanied 
by the withdrawal of some enterprises. Therefore, the 
demand for mutual assistance in debt restructuring judicial 
proceedings is no longer a matter in theory. Prior to the 
signing of the Record of Meeting, bankruptcy practitioners 
in both places were “struggling” in individual cases and 
were unable to find the golden rule. With the signing of the 
Record of Meeting, the Pilot Opinion was issued timely 
to boost the confidence of cross-border investors, offer 
stable expectations for parties involved in cross-border 
transactions, and provide a fair model for dealing with 
cross-border bankruptcy cases.
II. Interpretation of innovation points of the Pilot 
Opinion
The Pilot Opinion contains innovative provisions regarding 
the model, the scope of applicable cases, the legal effect, 
the application materials to be submitted by Hong Kong 
liquidators and the termination of assistance. This article 
analyses the innovative provisions based on the specific 
provisions of the Pilot Opinion as follows:
(I) Scope of the pilot
Articles 1 and 5 of the Pilot Opinion provide for the 
applicable territorial scope and competent court, which 
designates Shanghai Municipality, Xiamen Municipality in 
Fujian Province and Shenzhen Municipality in Guangdong 
Province as pilot areas in the Mainland. The intermediate 
people’s courts of the three pilot cities may recognize 
and assist with the Hong Kong insolvency proceedings in 
accordance with the Pilot Opinion. Shanghai, Shenzhen 
and Xiamen were chosen for the reason that they are 
the top three cities that accommodate most places of 
business, representative offices or assets of debtors in the 
Hong Kong insolvency proceedings, and that there are 
many Hong Kong-invested enterprises in the three regions. 
In 2019 and 2020, the Shanghai Third Intermediate 
People’s Court and the Shenzhen Intermediate People’s 
Court respectively obtained bankruptcy assistance from 
the High Court of the Hong Kong Special Administrative 
Region (the “High Court”), which have gained experience 
on a case-by-case basis.
Hong Kong courts, in accordance with common 
law principles, recognize and assist the insolvency 
proceedings in the Mainland not limited to the insolvency 
proceedings conducted by people’s courts in the aforesaid 
pilot areas. In fact, in the previous bankruptcy liquidation 
cases of CEFC Shanghai International Group Limited 
(“CEFC”) and Shenzhen Everich Supply Chain Co., Ltd. 
(Everich), Hong Kong courts recognized the position and 
power of Mainland administrators in Hong Kong, on the 
grounds that the insolvency proceedings of the two places 
were highly compatible, and that they did not harm the 
interests of creditors. Therefore, with the precedents and 
later regulations, it would be more convenient for Mainland 
administrators to apply for the judicial recognition and 
assistance of bankruptcy cases to the Hong Kong courts.


80
(II) Types of applicable cases 
Articles 2 to 4 of the Pilot Opinion set out the applicable 
types of cases. Firstly, the Pilot Opinion applies to 1) 
similar collective debt liquidation procedures in the two 
places, including bankruptcy proceedings (bankruptcy 
liquidation, reorganization and settlement proceedings) 
in the Mainland, under which the debtor must satisfy the 
bankruptcy requirements under Article 2 of the Enterprise 
Bankruptcy Law; and 2) compulsory winding up, creditors’ 
voluntary winding up and scheme of arrangement 
approved by court of Hong Kong in accordance with 
section 673 of the Companies Ordinance of the HKSAR. 
Secondly, the so-called “Centre of main interests” 
principle, which means the Pilot Opinion applies to Hong 
Kong insolvency proceedings where the HKSAR has been 
the centre of main interests of the debtor continuously for 
at least 6 months. And “Centre of main interests” generally 
means the place of incorporation of the debtor. At the 
same time, the people’s court shall take into account other 
factors including the place of principal office, the principal 
place of business, the place of principal assets etc. of the 
debtor.
(III) Application materials 
Articles 5 to 8 of the Pilot Opinion stipulate what materials 
Hong Kong liquidators shall submit and what information 
shall be specified in their application when they apply to 
mainland courts for recognition of and assistance to Hong 
Kong insolvency proceedings. Article 8 stipulates that the 
people’s court shall make a notification and announcement 
within five days from the date of receiving the application 
for recognition and assistance, and that interested parties 
shall have the right to put forward objections in writing.
(IV) Legal effect
Articles 9 to 15 of the Pilot Opinion describe the legal 
effect of the Mainland’s recognition of and assistance 
to the Hong Kong insolvency proceedings. Generally 
speaking, mailing an application for recognition and 
assistance in enforcement by a Hong Kong administrator 
to a People’s Court in the Mainland has almost the same 
effect of the insolvency proceedings in the Mainland 
under the Enterprise Bankruptcy Law. On one hand, 
after the people’s court recognizes the Hong Kong 
insolvency proceedings, individual repayment will be 
deemed invalid. On the other hand, any civil action or 
arbitration involving the debtor that has started but has 
not yet been concluded shall be suspended; however, 
such action or arbitration can proceed after the Hong 
Kong administrator takes over the debtor’s property. 
Additionally, the measures for preserving the property of 
the debtor by the courts of the Mainland shall be lifted 
and the procedure for execution shall be suspended. The 
Hong Kong liquidator shall not perform his duties beyond 
the scope provided by the Enterprise Bankruptcy Law and 
the law of the HKSAR. In other words, the Hong Kong 
liquidator is not allowed to enjoy any preferential treatment 
that goes beyond the extent permitted by applicable laws 
in bankruptcy proceedings in the Mainland on the ground 
that it complies with Hong Kong laws. Especially when 
the Hong Kong liquidator performs any duty that involves 
waiver of property rights, creation of security on property, 
loan, transfer of property out of the Mainland and other 
acts for disposing of the property that has a major impact 
on the creditors’ interest, it requires separate approval 
by the people’s court. The Pilot Opinion also innovatively 
proposes the “two-administrator model”, which means 
that for a case where the people’s court recognizes the 
Hong Kong insolvency proceedings, it may, upon an 
application by the Hong Kong liquidator or a creditor, 
designate a Mainland administrator, whose duties and 
affairs shall be dealt with in accordance with the Enterprise 
Bankruptcy Law, instead of laws of the HKSAR.
(V) Termination of proceedings
Articles 17 to 18 of the Pilot Opinion stipulate that 
under what circumstances that a people’s court may 
modify or terminate any recognition or assistance. Such 
circumstances include: the centre of main interests 
of the debtor is not situated in the HKSAR or it has 
been situated in the HKSAR for less than six months 
continuously; Article 2 of the Enterprise Bankruptcy Law 
of the People’s Republic of China is not satisfied; Mainland 
creditors are unfairly treated; there is fraud; there is any 
other circumstance where the people’s court considers 
that recognition or assistance shall not be rendered and 
the people’s court shall refuse to recognise or assist the 
Hong Kong Insolvency Proceedings if it considers that 
such recognition or assistance violates the basic principles 
of the law of the Mainland or offend public order or good 
morals.
(VI) Ways of paying off creditor’s rights
According to Article 20 of the Pilot Opinion, if a people’s 
court recognizes and assists the Hong Kong insolvency 
proceedings, the bankruptcy property of the debtor in the 
Mainland shall first satisfy preferential claims under the law 
of the Mainland. The remainder of the property is to be 
distributed in accordance with the Hong Kong Insolvency 
Proceedings provided that creditors in the same class 
are treated equally. It is intended to maintain the principle 
of complying with the substantive provisions of the laws 
and regulations of the Mainland. Where a creditor’s 
claims have the priority to be paid substantively based 
on security interests, priority of construction proceeds 
and other provisions in accordance with the laws and 
regulations of the Mainland, the creditor continues to enjoy 
its rights based on the nature of the security interests 
or construction proceeds. Such rights are derived from 
the substantive provisions of the laws of the Mainland, 
and therefore will not be affected by the bankruptcy 
DISPUTE RESOLUTION


81
proceedings outside the territory. In addition, the balance 
of insolvency estate shall be distributed and liquidated in 
accordance with the Hong Kong insolvency proceedings 
based on the principle of equal liquidation.
III. Significance of the Pilot Opinion to bankruptcy 
practitioners in the Mainland and Hong Kong
(I) Response to judicial practice exploration
Prior to the promulgation of the Pilot Opinion, there had 
been precedents of mutual recognition of Insolvency 
proceedings between the Mainland and the HKSAR in 
practice. The typical cases were bankruptcy liquidation of 
CEFC and Everich.
In the CEFC bankruptcy liquidation, CEFC’s administrator 
applied to the High Court for recognition of Insolvency 
proceedings in the Mainland. Upon examination of 
the relevant evidence, Justice Jonathan Harris of the 
High Court held that since the domestic insolvency 
proceedings are collective liquidation (or reorganization) 
proceedings involving all creditors and the insolvency 
proceedings are opened by the company’s in its place 
of incorporation (Mainland China), given the compatibility 
between the Enterprise Bankruptcy Law and the Hong 
Kong bankruptcy law, the insolvency proceedings in 
the Mainland may cover the debtor’s assets, liabilities 
and affairs in Hong Kong. Meanwhile, Justice Harris 
specifically pointed out in the decision that, without the 
special permission of the High Court, any person other 
than the administrators shall not file any lawsuit relating to 
CEFC, as long as CEFC is still under the insolvency and 
liquidation proceedings in the Mainland
1.
In the Everich bankruptcy liquidation case, the Hong Kong 
court also held that the insolvency proceedings initiated in 
the Mainland were the whole insolvency proceedings for 
the disposal and takeover of the debtor (i.e. the Collective 
Insolvency Proceedings, the identification standard 
of which was to determine whether the insolvency 
proceedings were made for the interests of all creditors), 
and the insolvency proceedings were initiated in the 
place of incorporation of the debtor. Therefore, the Hong 
Kong court granted Everich’s administrators various 
administrative duties as well as rights, including but 
not limited to receiving the information of the company, 
investigating the property of the company, preventing the 
property disposal of the debtor, taking over the assets and 
accounts of the debtor, and filing a lawsuit in the name of 
the debtor. The effectiveness of Mainland administrators’ 
actions in Hong Kong was recognized
2.
(II) Opportunities and challenges for future cooperation 
on cross-border insolvency 
It should be noted that Article 14 of the Pilot Opinion sets 
forth restrictive provisions for the Hong Kong administrator 
on the waiver of property rights, creation of security on 
property, loan, transfer of property out of the Mainland 
and other acts for disposing of the property that has 
a major impact on the creditors’ interest. This article 
maintains certain equivalence with the aforesaid case 
provisions of Hong Kong courts recognizing insolvency 
proceedings in the Mainland. However, Article 15 of 
the Pilot Opinion provides an innovative model for the 
Mainland administrator and Hong Kong liquidator to 
assist with the bankruptcy of the debtor in the Mainland, 
i.e. the people's court may, upon an application by the 
Hong Kong liquidator or a creditor, designates a Mainland 
administrator to take charge of the insolvency affairs 
of the debtor in the Mainland, which imposes a higher 
requirement on practitioners’ familiarity with the laws of 
both places, as well as on cross-border asset disposal 
and participation in litigation.
IV. Prospects for cooperation between the two 
places on insolvency matters
In summary, the Pilot Opinion provides clear guidelines for 
the transition of mutual recognition and assistance, and 
for the mutual assistance of bankruptcy administrators 
in insolvency proceedings in both the Mainland and 
Hong Kong. It is undoubtedly a significant achievement 
of judicial assistance in the bankruptcy sector between 
the Mainland and the HKSAR. For the bankruptcy 
practitioners in the Mainland and the HKSAR, we believe 
that as economic exchanges between the two places 
deepen, the Pilot Opinion will certainly apply to more 
cases and provide more extensive and clear guidance for 
the future assistance in cross-boundary insolvency, which 
will in turn improve the business environment.
1HCMP 2295/2019, by the High Court of the Hong Kong Special Administration Region Court of First Instance.
2HCMP 708/2020, IN THE HIGH COURT OF THE HONG KONG SPECIAL ADMINISTRATIVE REGION COURT OF FIRST INSTANCE.


82
Introduction
The Arbitration (Amendment) Ordinance 2021 of the Hong Kong Special Administrative 
Region of China (“Hong Kong”) (the “Arbitration Ordinance”) took effect on 19 May 2021, 
further promoting the implementation of the Supplemental Arrangement Concerning 
Mutual Enforcement of Arbitral Awards between the Mainland and the Hong Kong Special 
Administrative Region (Fa Shi [2020] No. 13] (the “Supplemental Arrangement”) in Hong 
Kong. This article will focus on the major changes in the Arbitration Ordinance, briefly 
review the basic procedures for enforcing Mainland awards
1 in Hong Kong SAR, and 
address several practical concerns often enquired by Mainland parties.
I. Major changes in the Arbitration Ordinance
On 17 February 2021, the Department of Justice of Hong Kong issued a press release 
proposing amendments to the then-current Arbitration Ordinance to fully implement 
the Supplemental Arrangement
2. The Legislative Council of Hong Kong considered and 
passed the amendments in the following month
3. There are two major changes: firstly, 
it removes the restrictions on the enforcement of Mainland awards under Section 93, 
allowing parties to enforce their awards both with Mainland courts and the High Court 
of Hong Kong (“Hong Kong court”) at the same time; secondly, it repeals the list of 
“recognised” Mainland arbitral authorities
4 published under Section 97.
These changes provide a new solution to the enforcement of Mainland awards. We will 
likely see more parties to seek enforcement of the Mainland awards in favour of them in 
Hong Kong SAR when they meet challenges in China Mainland. 
II. Overview of the Mainland awards enforced in Hong Kong
From 2000 to 2009, 94.22% of Mainland awards were successfully enforced in Hong 
Kong. The Hong Kong court received eighty four applications to enforce Mainland awards. 
All applications were granted with the leave to enforce. Eighteen respondents seek to set 
aside the order and only five of them were approved
5. 
From 2009 to 2017, 96.58% of Mainland awards were successfully enforced in Hong 
Kong. During this time, the number of applications reached to 249, of which 85, or 
34.13% were from the Mainland, ranking the first place. In other words, 9 Mainland 
awards on average filed for enforcement in Hong Kong each year. Especially in 2017, 
17 Mainland awards were filed for enforcement in Hong Kong
6. In this eight years, 11 
applications were made to set aside the order and the only 3 were granted.
Applying for enforcement of Mainland awards 
in Hong Kong SAR under the Arbitration 
Ordinance 2021
Qi Yuan, Han Weizhe, Wang Shuai
1Under the Arbitration Ordinance, Mainland award means an arbitral award made in accordance with the Arbitration Law of the People's Republic of China.
2https://www.doj.gov.hk/sc/community_engagement/press/20210217_pr1.html, last accessed on 1 May 2021.
3https://www.legco.gov.hk/yr20-21/chinese/ord/2021ord001-c.pdf, last accessed on 1 May 2021.
4https://www.gld.gov.hk/egazette/pdf/20162051/cgn201620517226.pdf, last accessed on 2 May 2021.
5Paragraph 100 of the Report of the Bills Committee on Arbitration Bill of the Legislative Council of Hong Kong issued for the House Committee meeting on 22 
October 2010, cited by Zhou Lixin, Xiao Zhenran and Li Shilie in “Enforcement of Mainland Awards in Hong Kong (I)”, footnote 17. https://www.hkba.org/node/13884, 
last accessed on 2 May 2021. 
6https://www.hkiac.org/about-us/statistics/enforcement-awards, last accessed on 1 May 2021.
Qi Yuan
DISPUTE RESOLUTION


83
According to these publicly available data, we believe 
that the Mainland awards are very likely to be enforced 
in Hong Kong. This record also demonstrates that the 
close cooperation in trade and capital between the 
Mainland and Hong Kong has given rise to a series of civil 
and commercial disputes, and that many of the parties 
ordered to pay compensation in Mainland awards may 
have properties available for enforcement in Hong Kong. 
Therefore, Hong Kong is an unignorable option to enforce 
awards for Chinese parties to international arbitration and 
cross-border disputes.
III. Basic procedures for applying for enforcement 
of Mainland awards
A party applying for enforcement of an award in Hong 
Kong should first submit an application to the Court of 
First Instance of the Hong Kong court (the “Court”) in 
accordance with Section 84 of the Arbitration Ordinance
7. 
Then the Court may grant a leave to “enter judgment” in 
terms of the application. 
Once the court has granted the leave, the award becomes 
enforceable as if it were a judgment of the Hong Kong 
court. If the Court dismisses the application, the applicant 
may also, with leave, appeal to the Hong Kong court 
against the Court’s decision.
According to the Rules of the High Court
8, after a “leave” 
is granted, the court will serve an “order granting the 
leave” on the party subject to enforcement (“debtor”) and 
require the debtor to perform the award. The debtor may 
raise objection within 14 days or a period specified by 
the court upon receipt of the order. During this “objection 
period”, the award cannot be actually enforced.
IV. Legal issues to be considered in applying for 
enforcement of Mainland awards
(I) Property investigation prior to the initiation of 
enforcement proceedings
Different from the enforcement requirements in the 
Mainland, an applicant applying for enforcement in Hong 
Kong should provide information of the properties pending 
enforcement. The Hong Kong court are not obliged to and 
will not take the initiative to investigate about the debtor’s 
property for the applicant. 
In view of this, it is practically necessary for the applicant to 
investigate the debtor’s property available for enforcement 
before making a formal application. In addition, property 
investigations prior to enforcement proceedings in the two 
jurisdictions are also different. The property investigation in 
Hong Kong may cover the following:
•	 Basic information. Obtaining from the registration 
authority the debtor’s registration information, including 
but not limited to company’s name, address, company 
secretary, and shareholders;
•	 Property. Using a third party institution database to 
search whether the debtor has ever held any property 
or conducted any transactions in Hong Kong to trace 
the debtor’s assets;
•	 Litigations. Using a third party database to search 
whether debtor is involved in any litigation in Hong 
Kong
9 and to trace the debtor’s assets; 
•	 Winding up. This is to enquire with government 
authority whether the debtor has ever been or is now 
in the winding up proceedings, or has been declared 
liquidated. If the debtor is undergoing the winding up 
proceedings, then the applicant may make claims 
against the liquidator for repayment of the relevant 
debts; and
•	 Shareholding. To our knowledge, shareholders of listed 
companies in Hong Kong who hold more than 5% of 
shares are required to disclose their equity. Except 
for this, there is no way to directly and fully trace the 
debtor’s equity investments in Hong Kong. 
•	 In addition, the applicant may engage legitimate private 
investigation firms in Hong Kong to conduct a more in-
depth investigation on the debtor’s assets.
(II) Limitation on applications for enforcement of 
Mainland awards in Hong Kong
The Arrangement Concerning Mutual Enforcement of 
Arbitral Awards between the Mainland and the Hong 
Kong Special Administrative Region (Fa Shi [2000] No. 3) 
(the “Arrangement”) provides: “Only when the result of 
the enforcement of the award by the court of one place 
is insufficient to satisfy the liabilities may the applicant 
apply to the court of another place for enforcement of the 
outstanding liabilities.” 
Subject to such requirement, many parties will give 
priority to the enforcement of arbitral awards in the 
Mainland, taking into account such factors as the cost 
of enforcement. If the enforcement proceedings in the 
7(1) Subject to section 26(2), an award, whether made in or outside Hong Kong, in arbitral proceedings by an arbitral tribunal is enforceable in the same manner as 
a judgment of the Court that has the same effect, but only with the leave of the Court. (2) If leave is granted under subsection (1), the Court may enter judgment in 
terms of the award. (3)The leave of the Court is required for any appeal from a decision of the Court to grant or refuse leave to enforce an award under subsection (1).
8Order 73, rule 10(6) of the Rules of the High Court: Within 14 days after service of the order made under paragraph (4) or, if the order made under paragraph (4) is 
to be served out of the jurisdiction, within such other period as the Court may fix, the debtor may apply to set aside that order, and the settlement agreement, award, 
order, direction or emergency relief shall not be enforced until after the expiration of that period or, if the debtor applies within that period to set aside the order made 
under paragraph (4), until after the application is finally disposed of.
9Including: Hong Kong Court of Final Appeal, High Court, District Court, Small Claims Tribunal, Labour Tribunal, and Lands Tribunal.


84
Mainland are ineffective or pending, the enforcement 
proceedings in Hong Kong may not commence in a 
timely manner, which may have a significant impact on the 
interests of the successful parties.
The guiding case CL v. SCG [2019] HKCFI 398
10, 
jointly issued by the Supreme People’s Court and the 
Department of Justice of Hong Kong, affirms the general 
provision on the time limit for applying for enforcement of 
a Mainland award in Hong Kong: The limitation period for 
application for enforcement of an award shall commence 
on the date when the debtor “fails to make payment within 
a reasonable time of the publication of the Award and 
demand being made”. 
In addition, under Section 4.1.c of the Hong Kong 
Limitation Ordinance, the limitation period for enforcement 
application is six years. Not the same as in the Mainland, 
there is no provision for suspension or interruption of such 
period. 
Before the 2021 amendment, it is important for the 
applicant to be aware of these differences and coordinate 
the enforcement procedures in the Mainland and Hong 
Kong. After the amendment, it is recommended that the 
successful party should apply for enforcement in both the 
Mainland and Hong Kong at the same time against the 
debtor as soon as possible.
(III) Documents required to be submitted in connection 
with applications for enforcement of Mainland awards in 
Hong Kong
In accordance with Section 85 of the Arbitration 
Ordinance
11, and Order 73, Rule 10 of the Rules of the 
High Court, the documents required to be submitted for 
enforcement of Mainland awards in Hong Kong include: 
(1) an affidavit; (2) the duly authenticated original award 
or a duly certified copy of it; (3) the original arbitration 
agreement or a duly certified copy of it; and (4) an 
authenticated translation if the award is not in Chinese or 
English.
It is worth noting that as an application for enforcement 
of an award is generally made ex parte by a party, the 
party making the application assumes a duty of full and 
frank disclosure of all relevant information in support of the 
application. In Grant Thornton International Ltd v JBPB 
& Co [2013] HKEC 477, the court held that the applicant 
should disclose facts and evidential material relevant to 
the success of the application, including whether there is 
any proceeding to set aside the arbitral award. Inaccurate 
disclosure or material omissions may be fatal to the 
application.
Additionally, as the Arbitration Ordinance allows for 
simultaneous applications for enforcement of awards in 
both the Mainland and Hong Kong, the problem of double 
enforcement still exists. The Supplemental Arrangement 
provides for a system to share information between the 
two jurisdictions, i.e. “The courts of the two places shall, 
at the request of the court of the other place, provide 
information on its status of the enforcement of the arbitral 
award. The total amount to be recovered from enforcing 
the arbitral award in the courts of the two places shall 
not exceed the amount determined in the arbitral award.” 
In the future, applicants are encouraged to disclose the 
enforcement of the award in the Mainland, in particular 
the amount recovered, and apply for enforcement in Hong 
Kong only in respect of the amount not yet recovered, in 
order to improve the efficiency of the application review 
and the possibility of the leave being granted.
(IV) The relationship between the Mainland’s 
proceedings to set aside arbitral awards and Hong 
Kong’s enforcement proceedings
In accordance with UNCITRAL Secretariat Guide on 
the Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of 
Foreign Arbitral Awards (New York, 1958), the Convention 
on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral 
Awards “does not apply to setting aside proceedings” 
and “a respondent’s cross-motion to set aside the award 
was governed by domestic law on arbitration.” Similarly, 
the Arrangement and the Supplemental Arrangement 
(collectively, the “Arrangements”), which deal with inter-
regional judicial matters in China, do not deal with the 
setting aside of arbitral awards.
The Mainland award is made under the Arbitration 
Law of the People’s Republic of China (the “Arbitration 
Law”). Pursuant to Article 58 of the Arbitration Law, the 
application for setting aside a Mainland award shall be 
made to the intermediate people’s court at the place 
where the arbitration institution resides. According to 
Section 95(2)(f) of the Arbitration Ordinance, a Hong Kong 
court may refuse to enforce a Mainland award if the award 
has been set aside by a court of competent jurisdiction in 
the Mainland.
If the debtor applies for setting aside the Mainland award 
in the Mainland at the same time as the applicant applies 
10https://www.chinacourt.org/article/detail/2020/11/id/5627700.shtml, last accessed on 2 May 2021.
11(a) the duly authenticated original award or a duly certified copy of it;
(b) the original arbitration agreement or a duly certified copy of it; and
(c) if the award or agreement is not in either or both of the official languages, a translation of it in either official language certified by an official or sworn translator or 
by a diplomatic or consular agent.
DISPUTE RESOLUTION


85
12Under the Arbitration Ordinance, Convention award means an arbitral award made in a State or the territory of a State, other than China or any part of China, which 
is a party to the New York Convention.
13Under the Arbitration Ordinance, Macao award means an arbitral award made in Macao in accordance with the arbitration law of Macao.
for enforcement of such award in Hong Kong, how will 
the enforcement proceedings in Hong Kong proceed 
before the Mainland court makes a ruling on the setting 
aside case? Does it have to be suspended? Neither the 
Arbitration Ordinance nor the Arrangements explicitly 
address this issue. It is noteworthy that under Sections 
89 and 98D of the Arbitration Ordinance, if the party 
concerned applies for setting aside or suspending a 
Convention award
12 or a Macao award
13, the Hong Kong 
court “may, if it thinks fit, adjourn the proceedings for the 
enforcement of the award” and “may, on the application 
of the party seeking to enforce the award, order the 
person against whom the enforcement is invoked to give 
security.” There is, however, no similar statutory provision 
in respect of Mainland awards.
In the precedents such as La Dolce Vita Fine Dining Co 
Ltd v. Zhang Lan and Others [2020] HKCFI 622, however, 
the Hong Kong court, in response to an application by 
the respondents for a stay of proceedings in relation to 
the enforcement of a Mainland award (where the place of 
arbitration was Beijing), rendered an order as follows: “The 
Summons be adjourned for a period of 3 months from 
the handing down of this Decision, on condition that the 
1st, 2nd and 3rd Respondents give security by payment 
into court (or by provision of such other security as is 
acceptable to the Applicants) of 40% of the total sum 
of the Awards, and costs of the Summons on indemnity 
basis.” 
In view of this, we understand that if a debtor applies 
for a stay of enforcement proceedings on the ground 
that the Mainland court has not yet made a ruling on the 
setting aside case, the Hong Kong court will also have 
the discretion to decide whether to stay the proceedings 
and whether to require the debtor to provide security 
depending on the actual circumstances of the case. Such 
practice is notably different from that in the Mainland 
where the enforcement court should order the stay of 
enforcement of a Mainland award if an application for 
setting aside such award is made by the debtor and 
accepted by a court.
(V) Property preservation or similar measures in 
enforcing Mainland awards
Under Article 6 of the Arrangement Concerning Mutual 
Assistance in Court-ordered Interim Measures in Aid of 
Arbitral Proceedings by the Courts of the Mainland and 
of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, before 
the arbitral award is made, a party to arbitral proceedings 
administered by a Mainland arbitral institution may, 
pursuant to the Arbitration Ordinance and the High Court 
Ordinance, apply to the High Court for interim measure. In 
Hong Kong, interim measure includes injunction and other 
interim measure for the purpose of maintaining or restoring 
the status quo pending determination of the dispute; 
taking action that would prevent, or refraining from taking 
action that is likely to cause, current or imminent harm or 
prejudice to the arbitral proceedings; preserving assets; or 
preserving evidence that may be relevant and material to 
the resolution of the dispute.
Therefore, where a Mainland award is potentially enforced 
in Hong Kong, the applicant should first consider to apply 
to a Hong Kong court for interim measures at the time of 
initiating arbitration in order to prevent the counterparty 
from transferring, concealing or selling its property.
If the applicant has not applied to the Hong Kong court 
for interim measures against the debtor before the award 
is made, it may still do so before or after the application 
for enforcement of the arbitral award is accepted 
in accordance with Article 4 of the Supplemental 
Arrangement.
(VI) Enforcement measures in enforcing Mainland 
awards 
In addition to injunction and other interim measures, 
the applicant may, depending on the type of assets of 
the debtor, seek charging order, asset sale order,  third 
party debt order, or to have the responsible person to be 
examined by the court under Order 48 of the Rules of the 
High Court to disclose assets of the debtor. The applicant 
may even file a winding up petition to compel the debtor 
to go bankrupt and subsequently seek repayment of its 
debt from the debtor’s estate.
The victory in arbitration is an important step for obtaining 
legal relief, but it is not the end of the story. Where a 
debtor refuses to perform a binding award, the ultimate 
satisfaction of the claim still depends on the progress of 
the court’s enforcement proceedings. Parties who have 
obtained a favourable Mainland award and need to apply 
for enforcement of such award in Hong Kong should figure 
out a best solution for the enforcement by fully considering 
the specific circumstances of the case, the assets of the 
debtor, as well as the procedure, time and financial costs 
of the various enforcement measures.


86
Introduction
The recent decision by the Hong Kong court in Re Ando Credit Ltd [2020] HKCFI 2775 
marks its first appointment of provisional liquidators
1 over a Hong Kong company with the 
express purpose of allowing the liquidators to seek recognition in China Mainland.
This represents a major breakthrough in judicial cooperation over cross-border winding up
2, 
demonstrating China Mainland and Hong Kong’s key efforts in facilitating mutual assistance 
for winding up matters. We understand that the Mainland and Hong Kong have begun to 
discuss a bilateral mechanism to recognise and assist companies in winding up matters, 
and we look forward to seeing the arrangement in operation as soon as possible.
I. Background
The winding up of Hong Kong companies is governed by the Companies (Winding Up 
and Miscellaneous Provisions) Ordinance (Cap. 32) and is generally divided into voluntary 
winding up and compulsory winding up. This article focuses on compulsory winding up – 
if a company is unable to pay its debts, its creditors may petition the court for an order of 
compulsory winding up and the appointment of a liquidator. One of the liquidator’s major 
duties is to investigate the assets of the company in liquidation, recover such assets, and 
repay debts to the creditors based on the pari passu principle.
In theory, a winding up order issued by Hong Kong courts covers worldwide assets. In 
other words, all assets of the company in liquidation, regardless of the location, are subject 
to the winding up laws of Hong Kong. However, in practice, the actual execution of a Hong 
Kong winding up order in other jurisdictions requires judicial recognition from that particular 
jurisdiction.
Although Article 5 of the Enterprise Bankruptcy Law of the People’s Republic of China
3 
allows PRC courts, without contravening fundamental principles and relevant practices of 
the PRC laws, to recognise and enforce judgements of foreign courts, we understand that 
the provision does not apply to winding up orders issued by Hong Kong courts. A letter 
from the Supreme People’s Court of the PRC in 2011
4 explicitly stated that there is no legal 
Another major breakthrough: Mutual assistance 
in cross-border insolvency between China 
Mainland and Hong Kong SAR
Barbara Chiu, Nichole Hou, Tony Gu
1Known as “bankruptcy administrator” or “liquidation group” in China Mainland.
2Known as “enterprise bankruptcy” in China Mainland.
3Article 5 of the Enterprise Bankruptcy Law of the People’s Republic of China: “Where any legally effective judgment or 
ruling made by a foreign court involves any debtor's assets within the territory of the People's Republic of China and if 
the debtor applies with or requests the people's court to confirm or enforce it, the people's court shall, according to the 
relevant international treaties that China has concluded or acceded to or according to the principles of reciprocity, conduct 
an examination thereon and, when believing that it does not violate the basic principles of the laws of the People's Republic 
of China, does not damage the sovereignty, safety or social public interests of the state, does not damage the legitimate 
rights and interests of the creditor within the territory of the People's Republic of China, grant confirmation and permission for 
enforcement.” (English translation)
4“The Supreme People’s Court’s Reply Letter Regarding Norstar Automobile Industrial Holding Limited’s Request for Application 
for Recognition of An Order of the Courts of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region” (《最高人民法院关于北泰汽车工业
控股有限公司申请认可香港特别行政区法院命令案的请示的复函》) [2011] Civ 4 Others No. 19.
Barbara Chiu
Nichole Hou
DISPUTE RESOLUTION


87
5The full name is “Arrangement on Reciprocal Recognition and Enforcement of Judgments in Civil and Commercial Matters by the Courts of the Mainland and of the 
Hong Kong Special Administrative Region” (《内地与香港特别行政区法院相互认可和执行当事人协议管辖的民商事案件判决的安排》).
6Re Cw Advanced Technologies Ltd [2018] 3 HKLRD 552, para 35, “From the perspective of Hong Kong policy-makers, this case underscores again the urgent need 
to enact a statutory cross-border insolvency regime” and Re Da Yu Financial Holdings Limited (in liquidation) [2019] HKCFI 2531, paras 46 and 53.
7Since the beginning of 2020, the High Court of Hong Kong have begun to recognize China Mainland liquidators, and cases include the CEFC case (Re CEFC 
Shanghai International Group Ltd [2020] 1 HKLRD 67) and the Everich case (Re The Liquidator of Shenzhen Everich Supply Chain Co, Ltd [2020] HKCFI 965).
basis for the PRC courts to recognise winding up orders 
of Hong Kong courts, and the Arrangement on Reciprocal 
Recognition of Judgments in Civil and Commercial Matters
5 
is similarly not applicable.
Given the absence of a mechanism for recognising the 
Hong Kong’s winding up process in China Mainland, 
liquidators appointed by Hong Kong courts often face 
difficulty when investigating and recovering assets in China 
Mainland. In order to resolve problems resulting from this, 
Hong Kong courts have indicated in different cases that 
there is an urgent need to establish a statutory cross-
border insolvency mechanism
6. Recent cases
7 have also 
reflected Hong Kong courts’ desire actively to facilitate 
cooperation in cross-border insolvency.
II. The judgment of Re Ando
In Re Ando Credit Ltd, the applicant made an ex parte 
application to the court to appoint a provisional liquidator 
for a Hong Kong company Ando Credit Limited ( 安道信
貸有限公司) (“Ando”). The application was made with the 
express purpose of seeking recognition in China Mainland, 
with a view to facilitating the Hong Kong liquidator to 
recover the very substantial receivables believed to be 
owed to Ando by its debtors in China Mainland.
The Companies Judge acknowledged the possibility of 
recognition of Hong Kong appointed liquidators under 
the PRC Enterprise Bankruptcy Law, citing the article 
“Exploration into the practice of cross-border bankruptcy 
between Mainland and Hong Kong” (《内地与香港跨境
破产的实践探索》). That article reflected the increasingly 
open attitude towards the recognition and assistance with 
China Mainland insolvency proceedings by the Hong Kong 
courts and also the likelihood of PRC courts providing 
assistance based on the principle of reciprocity. The court 
noted that in the near future, an agreement may be entered 
into between the Hong Kong SAR Government and the 
PRC Supreme People’s Court which will provide a clear 
statutory basis for such mutual recognition.
The court granted the application and specifically 
ordered the inclusion of an express provision permitting 
the provisional liquidators to make an application for 
recognition to the Shenzhen Bankruptcy Court, subject to 
the Hong Kong court’s approval of the various stages of the 
application.
III. Insights from Re Ando
The Re Ando decision showcased another significant step 
in promoting judicial cooperation regarding cross-border 
insolvency. Given the unprecedented nature of the case, 
it remains to be seen whether and how the appointment 
of the provisional liquidators is to be recognised by the 
Shenzhen Bankruptcy Court, and the degree of scrutiny 
by the Hong Kong courts during the various stages. In any 
event, the decision should be welcomed by creditors and 
insolvency practitioners, especially in light of the growing 
number of cross-border financial arrangements with 
debtors based in China Mainland.
In line with the trend, the Legislative Council Panel on 
Administration of Justice and Legal Services in Hong Kong 
issued a policy paper in June 2020 proposing a possible 
framework for co-operation between Hong Kong SAR 
and China Mainland on recognition of and assistance in 
corporate insolvency matters. It is hoped that any such 
a formal framework would simplify the mutual judicial 
recognition of insolvency proceedings and afford better 
protection of the assets of the debtor company as well as 
the interests of the creditors.


88
Chinese domestic enterprises’ path to REIT 
offerings and listings in Hong Kong SAR
Sun Haotian, Chen Hua, Wang Letao, Jessica Zhou, Yang Xiaoquan, Qiu Liang, Li Nan, Wen Jiaolin
On 17 May 2021, SF Real Estate Investment Trust (“SF REIT”) was successfully listed on 
the Stock Exchange of Hong Kong Limited (HKEx), making itself the first listed logistics real 
estate investment trust (REIT) in Hong Kong Special Administrative Region (“Hong Kong”). 
It points out a new possible option for the Chinese domestic enterprises seeking financing 
offshore. Yuexiu REIT became the first Hong Kong-listed REIT with underlying properties 
located in China in 2005. CMC REIT and SF REIT have also got listed in Hong Kong in 
recent years. In addition to Singapore, Hong Kong has become another major market for 
public offerings of REITs by the domestic enterprises. This article provides an all-round 
introduction to the offering of REITs in Hong Kong by Chinese domestic enterprises from 
such perspectives as the background of offshore REIT offering, the transaction structure 
and listing procedures of REITs in Hong Kong, the red-chip restructuring for REIT offerings 
and compliance.
I. Overview of Offshore offering of REITs by Chinese enterprises
After explosive growth, China’s real estate market has gradually entered a stage of high 
existing housing stock. It is particularly urgent to make good use of existing assets and 
realise the exit of heavy assets. REITs originated in the U.S. in 1960, and have grown 
rapidly in developed regions such as Australia, Hong Kong, and Singapore, as well as 
some emerging markets. As they are publicly offered, REITs are characterized by strong 
liquidity, high investor recognition, and non-reflection on the balance sheet. In order to 
make good use of existing assets and ease financial pressure, more and more Chinese 
domestic enterprises choose to issue REITs in Hong Kong or Singapore where there are 
mature rules and investors with a good understanding of assets from China Mainland.
IPO & LISTING
Sun Haotian
Chen Hua
Wang Letao
Qiu Liang
Jessica Zhou
Yang Xiaoquan


89
(I) REIT listings on HKEx
1 
To date, REITs with Chinese properties listed on HKEx are as follows:
1According to data on cn-abs.com, as of 17 May 2021, 15 REITs from the China have been listed in Hong Kong. Since RREEF China Commercial Trust and New 
Century REIT have been delisted, there are now 13 REITs available for trading.
2According to the Singapore Stock Exchange (SGX), as of 14 May 2021, a total of 47 REITs from the China were available for trading on Singapore Stock Exchange.
(II) REIT listings on SGX
2
To date, REITs with Chinese properties listed on SGX are as follows:
Name
Date of listing
Property type
Property portfolio
Yuexiu REIT
(00405.HK)
21 December 
2005
Complex, 
office building, 
shopping mall
City Development Plaza, Fortune Plaza, Victory Plaza, and 
White Horse Building 
Hui Xian REIT 
(087001.HK)
Friday, 29 April 
2011
Complex, hotel
Oriental Plaza
Spring REIT 
(01426.HK)
5 December 
2013
Office building
China Central Place Tower 1 and Tower 2
CMC REIT
(1503.HK)
10 December 
2019
Complex and 
office building
New Times Plaza, Cyberport Building, Technology Building, 
Technology Building 2, and Garden City Shopping Centre
SF REIT
(2191.HK)
17 May 2021
Industrial and 
logistics
Asia Logistics Hub - SF Centre, FTI Park in Guicheng, 
Foshan, and FTI Park in Wuhu
Name
Date of listing
Property type
Property portfolio
Mapletree Logistics 
Trust 
(M44U.SG)
28 July 2005
Industrial and 
logistics
Mapletree Northwest Logistics Park (Phase 1), Mapletree 
Northwest Logistics Park (Phase 2), Mapletree Waigaoqiao 
Bonded Logistics Park, Mapletree Yangshan Bonded 
Logistics Park, Mapletree Ouluo Logistics Park, Mapletree 
American Industrial Park, Mapletree Hangzhou Logistics 
Park, Mapletree Jiaxing Logistics Park, Mapletree Zhenjiang 
Logistics Park, Mapletree (Wuxi) Logistics Park, Mapletree 
Wuxi New District Logistics Park, Mapletree Changshu 
Logistics Park, Mapletree Nanchang Logistics Park, 
Mapletree Tianjin Logistics Park, Mapletree Wuhan Logistics 
Park, Mapletree Fengdong (Xi'an) Industrial Park, Mapletree 
Xi'an Distribution Centre, Mapletree Changsha Logistics 
Park Phase 1, and Mapletree Zhengzhou International 
Logistics Park 
Starhill Global REIT 
(P40U.SG)
20 September 
2005
Shopping mall
Renhe Spring Zongbei Property
Ascott Residence 
Trust
(HMN.SG)
31 March 2006
Serviced 
residences
Somerset Xuhui Shanghai, Ascott Guangzhou, Citadines 
Xinghai Suzhou, Citadines Zhuankou Wuhan, Somerset 
Grand Central Dalian, Somerset Heping Shenyang, and 
Somerset Olympic Tower Tianjin
CapitaLand China 
Trust
(AU8U.SG)
8 December 
2006
Shopping mall
CapitaMall Xizhimen, CapitaMall Wangjing, CapitaMall Grand 
Canyon, CapitaMall Shuangjing, CapitaMall Qibao, Rock 
Square, CapitaMall Xinnan, CapitaMall Saihan, CapitaMall 
Erqi, CapitaMall Minzhongleyuan, CapitaMall Wuhu
Mapletree Greater 
China Commercial 
Trust (RW0U.SG)
7 March 2013
Office building
Gateway Plaza and Sandhill Plaza
OUE Commercial 
REIT (TS0U.SG)
27 January 
2014
Complex
Lippo Plaza


90
II. Transaction structures and key processes of REITs in Hong Kong
(I) Transaction structures
The main transaction structures of REITs in Hong Kong are as follows:
IPO & LISTING
(II) Key processes
1. Key listing rules
On 4 December 2020, the Securities and Futures Commission of Hong Kong (“SFC”) released the revised Code on 
Real Estate Investment Trusts (“Code”). Comparing with the 2014 Code, the main highlights of this revision include: 1) 
REITs are allowed, subject to relevant conditions, to invest in minority-owned properties, 2) their investment in a property 
development projects may exceed 10% of the gross asset value, and 3) their maximum borrowing limit is increased from 
45% to 50% of the total gross asset value. The main provisions of the latest Code are as follows:
Name
Date of listing
Property type
Property portfolio
BHG Retail REIT 
(BMGU.SG)
11 December 
2015
Shopping mall
BHG Beijing Wanliu, BHG Chengdu Konggang, BHG Dalian 
Jinsanjiao, BHG Hefei Mengchenglu, and BHG Xining 
Huayuan
EC World REIT 
(BWCU.SG)
28 July 2016
Industrial and 
logistics
Chongxian Port Investment, Chongxian Port Logistics, Fu 
Heng Warehouse, Fu Zhuo Industrial, Hengde Logistics, 
the Stage 1 Properties of Bei Gang Logistics, and Wuhan 
Meiluote
EC World REIT 
(BWCU.SG)
20 January 
2017
Industrial and 
logistics
Shiqi Metro Mall, Xiaolan Metro Mall, Ocean Metro Mall, 
Dasin E-Colour, Shunde Metro Mall, and Tanbei Metro Mall
Sasseur REIT
(CRPU.SG)
28 March 2018
Shopping mall
Sasseur (Chongqing Liangjiang) Outlets, Sasseur (Chongqing 
Bishan) Outlets, Sasseur (Hefei) Outlets, and Sasseur 
(Kunming) Outlets


91
Main rules
Main contents
Characteristics
1.	Dedicated investments in real estate that generates recurrent rental income;
2.	Active trading of real estate is restricted;
3.	The greater proportion of income shall be derived from rentals of real estate;
4.	A significant portion of income is distributed to holders in the form of regular dividends;
5.	A maximum borrowing limit is defined; and
6.	Connected party transactions are subject to holders’ approval.
Open market 
requirements
At least 25% of the total issued and outstanding units must at all times be held by the public.
Institution 
requirements
1.	Must be in the form of trust;
2.	Must have a trustee acceptable to the SFC, and the trustee and the manager shall be independent of each 
other;
3.	Must have a manager acceptable to the SFC, and the manager must appoint a listing agent, a financial adviser, 
and an auditor;
4.	Must appoint an independent property valuer who shall value the relevant REITs on a yearly basis.
Investment 
limitations
The scheme shall primarily invest in real estate.
1.	The real estate shall generally be income-generating (at least 75% of the gross asset value of the scheme shall 
be invested in real estate that generates recurrent rental income at all times);
2.	The scheme may acquire uncompleted units in a building which is unoccupied and non-income producing or 
in the course of substantial development, redevelopment or refurbishment (but the aggregate contract value of 
such real estate together with the Property Development Costs shall not exceed 25% of the gross asset value 
of the scheme at any time);
3.	The offering document shall clearly disclose if the scheme intends to acquire further properties during the first 
12 months from listing.
The scheme may invest in the following financial instruments:
1.	Securities listed on HKEx or other internationally recognised stock exchanges;
2.	Unlisted debt securities;
3.	Government and other public securities; and
4.	Local or offshore property funds; 
Provided that: investment in any of the above financial instruments may not exceed 10% of the gross asset value 
of the scheme.
The aggregate investments in such Minority-owned Properties shall not exceed 10% of the gross asset value of 
the scheme (“10% Cap”).
The aggregate investments in Non-qualified Minority-owned Properties, Property Development, Relevant 
Investments and other ancillary investments of the scheme shall not exceed 25% of the gross asset value of the 
scheme at any time.
Investments in Qualified Minority-owned Properties are not included into such aggregate investments.
Holding period limitations
The scheme shall hold each property within the scheme (other than a Non-qualified Minority-owned Property) for 
a period of at least two years.
Limitations on borrowing
1.	Aggregate borrowings shall not at any time exceed 50% of the total gross asset value of the scheme;
2.	The scheme may pledge its assets to secure such borrowings.
If a REIT is named after a particular type of real estate, the REIT shall invest at least 70% of its non-cash assets in 
such type of real estate.
Highlights
It is the management company’s responsibility to conduct all proper and thorough due diligence on all relevant 
aspects of any property investment. Relevant aspects would include matters such as:
1.	 The ownership and title of the property;
2.	 Necessary government approvals and town planning requirements;
3.	 Restrictions on property usage and foreign ownership;
4.	 Safety requirements;
5.	 Land premium requirements;


92
Main rules
Main contents
Highlights
6.	 Existence of encumbrances on the property;
7.	 Compliance with zoning and building requirements;
8.	 Current and prospective leases and material agreements;
9.	 Outgoings required in maintaining and operating the property; and
10.	The scope and value of the insurance in place.
Holding period
Unless the scheme has clearly communicated to its holders the rationale for disposal prior to this minimum 
holding period and its holders have given their consent to such sale by way of a special resolution at a general 
meeting.
Dividend policy
The scheme shall distribute to unit holders as dividends each year an amount not less than 90% of its audited 
annual net income after tax.
2. Listing application procedures
Hong Kong REITs are mainly regulated by the SFC. All REITs proposed to be listed on the Hong Kong securities market 
must first be approved by the SFC, and then apply for listing in accordance with the requirements of HKEx. In addition, 
an REIT seeking for listing is governed by the Code and the relevant provisions of Listing rules issued by HKEx.
The application for listing of REITs in Hong Kong is divided into two stages. In the first stage, after an issuer files the 
listing application (A1) with the SFC, the SFC will make several rounds of enquiries for the issuer to respond. If no further 
enquiries are made, the SFC will issue approval-in-principle (“AIP”) to the issuer. In the second stage, after the issuer 
obtains the AIP from the SFC, it shall file the listing application (A2) with HKEx and upload the post-hearing information 
packs on HKEx’s website. The AIP will be issued until HKEx has confirmed that it has no further comments. After the 
completion of the public offering and pricing, a REIT was officially approved by the SFC and HKEx for its listing on the 
exchange.
Unlike an IPO application, REITs are required to apply for REIT manager and responsible officer licenses in their 
listing applications. After the establishment of a REIT management company, if at least one responsible officer of the 
management company is required to pass one of the recognised industry qualification examinations, the issuer may 
apply to the SFC for a Type 9 license or a responsible officer license. The issuer’s application for REIT manager and 
responsible officer licenses may be conditionally approved by the SFC when it obtains the AIP from the SFC for its 
REIT listing, and when it obtains the AIP from HKEx, the SFC will issue a formal approval and the REIT manager and 
responsible officer licenses.
III. Offshore listing and restructuring of REITs 
Offshore listing and restructuring of REITs is essentially the same as the restructuring required for a Chinese enterprise to 
issue and list shares on an offshore stock exchange through a Red-chip structure (“Offshore IPO and Restructuring”). It 
requires a new offshore issuer and a new shareholding structure, allowing onshore assets to be injected into the offshore 
structure and achieve the consolidation of financial statements at the offshore issuer level. Therefore, the offshore listing 
restructuring of REITs is also a red-chip restructuring. 
(I) Overall structure of REITs red-chip restructuring 
The shareholding structure of a project company before red-chip restructuring is roughly as follows:
IPO & LISTING


93
Circular No. 37 or ODI formalities?
There are some relevant offshore investment formalities involved in the process that the Chinese actual controller/
original shareholder of the onshore company sets up an offshore structure and finally holds shares in the offshore holding 
company.
Currently, onshore natural persons are only allowed to make overseas investment by way of round-trip investment via 
offshore SPVs in the onshore company in which they originally held equity interests. They are required to go through 
the foreign exchange registration formalities for their overseas investment in accordance with the Circular of the SAFE 
on Foreign Exchange Administration of Outbound Direct Investments and Financing and Round-Trip Investments by 
Domestic Residents via Special Purpose Vehicles (“Circular No. 37”). The Chinese domestic enterprises and institutions, 
however, are required to go through the required formalities for their overseas direct investment (ODI), which generally 
include the approval or filing formalities with the authorities of commerce, development and reform, and foreign exchange 
administration. Therefore, if the actual controller or the original shareholder of the onshore company holds equity 
interests in the first tier offshore company in the name of an onshore natural person, they are required to go through the 
registration formalities in accordance with Circular No. 37; if they hold in the name of a Mainland enterprise or institution, 
they are required to go through the ODI formalities. As there is generally more than one tier of offshore companies in the 
offshore structure of red-chip restructuring, the Chinese domestic enterprises or institutions shall go through ODI offshore 
reinvestment formalities for their indirect investment in the second or even lower tier offshore companies according to 
relevant laws and regulations or capital inflow and outflow requirements.
ODI formalities are complex, time-consuming and subject to the principle of authenticity review. Therefore, for non-
professional financial investment institutions whose controlling natural person shareholders can be traced after equity 
According to red-chip restructuring practices, a general shareholding structure of “actual controller/original shareholder 
of an onshore company - offshore holding company - offshore SPV - onshore company” will be formed after the red-chip 
restructuring. The main steps are as follows:
1. Building an offshore red-chip shareholding structure
After the restructuring kicks off, a red-chip shareholding structure will first be established overseas by the actual 
controller/original shareholder of the onshore company. As an offshore shareholding platform, a shell company may 
be set up in the Cayman Islands, the British Virgin Islands (BVI) or Hong Kong based on its structure design and actual 
needs, such as tax avoidance, confidentiality and convenience of future offshore shareholding operations. A general 
offshore red-chip structure is as follows: 


94
look-through review, it is suggested that they complete 
their ODI under REIT restructuring by going through the 
foreign exchange registration formalities according to 
Circular No. 37. For ODI by A-share listed companies, 
SASAC holding companies and other entities, because it 
is difficult to trace their natural person shareholders, they 
generally complete their ODI under REIT restructuring 
by going through the ODI formalities. It should be noted 
that under Circular No. 37, domestic natural person 
shareholders cannot actually make capital contributions 
in cash to offshore companies. Therefore, in the absence 
of debt financing, shareholders pay a relatively low cash 
consideration for shares in offshore holding companies 
under Circular No. 37. Those (such as financial investors) 
who acquire shares in onshore companies based on their 
valuation or other higher consideration may be exposed to 
the risk of tax base erosion. As a result, they would better 
think twice.
2. Outbound transfer of onshore assets
While building the offshore red-chip shareholding 
structure, there are also onshore restructuring actions 
such as spin-off of non-proposed listed assets and 
incorporation of proposed listed assets. Once completed, 
onshore and offshore equity interests will be connected by 
the way that the company at the lowest tier in the offshore 
structure
3  acquires the equity of an onshore project 
company (“Outbound Transfer of Onshore Assets”). 
Outbound Transfer of Onshore Assets is a key step in red-
chip restructuring. It is advisable to avoid any changes 
in the equity structure of the offshore holding company 
after the Outbound Transfer of Onshore Assets, so as to 
prevent additional tax burden arising from indirect transfer 
of onshore assets in accordance with the Announcement 
on Several Issues Concerning the Enterprise Income Tax 
on Indirect Transfer of Assets by Non-Resident Enterprises 
(“Announcement No. 7”).
Follow the two-step or sell-then-buy approach?
Outbound Transfer of Onshore Assets also involves 
another key regulation concerning red-chip restructuring, 
the Provisions on the Merger and Acquisition of Domestic 
Enterprises by Offshore Investors (“Document No. 10”).
To avoid the application of the related party acquisition 
examination
4 under Document No. 10, a commonly used 
solution
5 is to “introduce unrelated offshore investors to 
IPO & LISTING
onshore companies and change onshore companies into 
foreign invested enterprises, thus making the requirement 
that the target company under Document No. 10 shall 
be an onshore company not applicable”. Since the REITs 
listings in Hong Kong and Singapore do not require 
actual controllers to remain unchanged for a certain 
period of time, red-chip restructuring of REITs has one 
more option than that of offshore IPOs. There are two 
ways to introduce unrelated offshore investors in REITs 
restructuring: (1) the two-step approach, i.e. introducing 
an unrelated offshore investor holding a small proportion 
of equity (e.g. 5%) to an onshore company to make it 
a China-foreign joint venture (“JV”), which will be then 
acquired by a subsidiary of the actual controller; and (2) 
the sell-then-buy approach, i.e. selling the 100% stake of 
the onshore company to an unrelated offshore investor 
to make the company a wholly foreign-owned enterprise 
(“WFOE”), which will be then acquired by a subsidiary of 
the actual controller.
6
According to Document No. 10, offshore investors shall 
acquire the equity of an onshore company at its appraised 
value. In the two-step approach, an unrelated offshore 
investor only acquires a small proportion of the equity of 
an onshore company, which does not need too much 
fund, and the onshore company is still under the control of 
the actual controller. Thus, the acquisition by a subsidiary 
of the actual controller is acquisition under the common 
control, which may leave more room for tax planning. 
In the sell-then-buy approach, however, an unrelated 
offshore investor is required to buy 100% of the equity 
in the onshore company at one time, which needs more 
working capital to complete the acquisition. Moreover, as 
such acquisition is completed based on the company’s 
valuation, the acquisition consideration is higher, and the 
original equity premium is higher, which may also bring 
greater tax costs. Meanwhile, as the M&A by the offshore 
investor is a transfer of control by a third party, the space 
for tax planning is relatively small compared with the 
transfer under the common control. Nevertheless, from 
listing cases of REITs, the sell-then-buy approach is the 
mainstream choice for listing REITs offshore, especially 
in Singapore. Therefore, if you choose to list REITs in 
Singapore, judging from regulators’ common practice, it is 
safer to choose the sell-then-buy approach, and it is more 
appropriate to choose the two-step approach if you take 
economic efficiency into consideration.
3Subject to the characteristics of industries suitable for issuing REITs, the restricted industries for foreign investment are generally not involved, nor does it apply to 
Outbound Connect of Onshore Assets through VIE agreements.
4According to Article 11 of Document No. 10, the merger and acquisition of an affiliated onshore company by an onshore company, enterprise or natural person in the 
name of an offshore company legally established or controlled by such onshore company, enterprise or natural person (“Affiliated M&A") shall be subject to approval by the 
MOFCOM. In practice, the MOFCOM approval for Affiliated M&A can hardly be obtained.
5This is only applicable to cases where the actual controller is a Chinese national. If the actual controller is a foreign national who does not habitually reside in China, there 
is usually no need to follow the two-step or the sell-then-buy approach, or go through foreign exchange registration formalities under Circular No. 37.
6Red-chip listing generally requires that the actual controller of a company to be listed remain unchanged for one year. The sell-then-buy approach, however, will result in 
the change of the actual controller of the company to be listed, so red-chip listing usually does not take this approach. 


95
If you take the two-step approach, i.e., after an unrelated offshore investor acquires shares of an onshore project 
company, you may have the unrelated offshore investor exit the listing structure by directly acquiring its equity in the 
onshore project company via an offshore SPV; or the offshore holding company may achieve the 100% control of the 
onshore project company by offshore share swap or changing the unrelated offshore investor into a shareholder of the 
offshore holding company. In the end, the two-step or sell-then-buy restructuring lead to the following structure:
3. Trust structure building
The important factor that differentiates offshore listing and restructuring of REITs from Offshore IPO and Restructuring 
is that the former, based on the feature of REITs as a financial product, requires that a trust structure be established 
between the offshore holding company and the project company holding the property, appoint a REIT manager, and 
incorporate the project company into the REIT. After the trust structure is set up, the offshore holding company becomes 
the unitholder of the REIT. There are two common ways to build a trust structure: setting up a trust before the Outbound 


96
Transfer of Onshore Assets; and setting up a trust by means of transfer after the Outbound Transfer of Onshore Assets. 
The former approach may avoid the application of Announcement No. 7 that requires EIT filing for indirect transfer 
of onshore assets, while the latter facilitates the injection of assets into the REIT when there is a greater possibility of 
successful listing and pricing, which is conducive to keeping safe these pooled assets. The trust, when built, will lead to 
the following structure:
IPO & LISTING
(II) Other key issues under the law
1. Big Red-chip Approval?
It is generally accepted in practice that a big red-chip structure refers to a to-be-listed-offshore entity whose actual 
controller or controlling shareholder is a Chinese organisation in accordance with the Notice of the State Council on 
Further Strengthening the Administration of Issuance and Listing of Shares Overseas (the “Red-chip Guidelines”). If, 
however, the shares of the Chinese organisation are ultimately owned by a natural person, a structure will generally 
be erected offshore by the person in the restructuring to avoid the Big Red-chip Approval. For this reason, those who 
usually have to adopt a big red-chip structure are mainly Chinese companies, generally SOEs and listed companies, 
whose actual controller or controlling shareholder is not a natural person.
Approval of the China Securities Regulatory Commission (CSRC) and/or the relevant provincial people’s government 
or the competent authorities under the State Council is required for an overseas listing under the big red-chip structure 
(the “Big Red-chip Approval”) pursuant to the Red-chip Guidelines and the listing practices. In practice, except for large 
SOEs, it is difficult to obtain the Big Red-chip Approval.
The Red-chip Guidelines, however, leave a small space for the offering of REITs with a big red-chip structure: The Red-
chip Guidelines are worded in such a way that the Guidelines only apply to the issuance of “shares” but not “trust units”. 
For the existing REITs with a big red-chip structure in the Singapore and Hong Kong markets, no disclosures on Big 
Red-chip Approval are made in their offering documents. Therefore, REITs with a big red-chip structure are generally 
not considered to be subject to the Big Red-chip Approval if foreign counsel confirms that the trust units offered by the 
REITs are not "shares" under local listing rules.
2. How to pay the consideration for Outbound Transfer of Onshore Assets?
Onshore project companies in the REIT listings are all asset-heavy enterprises holding properties, which have a high 


97
net asset value. Both the Outbound Transfer of Onshore Assets and the injection of assets into REITs require a high 
consideration. If a share swap is impossible, it is a big challenge to pay the consideration in cash for the acquisition of 
the shares in the onshore project company. In typical offshore IPO restructuring, it is customary to pay the consideration 
prior to the submission of the listing application or prior to the listing. Quite differently, REITs may use the proceeds from 
the listing to pay the consideration for the Outbound Transfer of Onshore Assets. This arrangement relieves the pressure 
on the cash flow in the restructuring. Before submitting the application for the REIT listing, the issuer is required to take 
the following actions to effectuate the transfer of shares and shareholders’ rights to the subsidiary of the offshore holding 
company: (i) procure that the subsidiary of the offshore holding company and the shareholders of the onshore project 
company have entered into a share transfer agreement; and (ii) complete the formalities for change with the competent 
administration for industry and commerce. The issuer, however, is not required to actually pay the consideration. After the 
REIT listing, the issuer may use part of the proceeds to pay the consideration, which will be disclosed in the application 
documents and the offering circular.
Before the offering of SF REIT, SF Holding Co., Ltd. was required to spin off its assets and subsidiaries (the “Spin-Off 
Assets”) and inject the Spin-Off Assets into SF REIT. Pursuant to the Share Purchase Agreement, the buyer completed 
the closing by providing promissory notes to the seller first and must honour such promissory notes within five days after 
the offering. Banks were invited to form a syndicate to extend loans to the SF REIT subsidiaries to acquire the Spin-Off 
Assets. After the offering, SF REIT honoured the promissory notes with the proceeds and the loans from the syndicate.
Notably, however, if domestic assets are acquired by a foreign investor, Article 16 of Document No. 10 should apply. In 
another word, the consideration for the transfer of shares should generally be paid within three months of the date of 
issuance of the business license of the foreign-invested enterprise.
(III) Tax planning
As the project company in the REIT listing holds properties and is an asset heavy  company, the transfer of shares 
and assets involved in the incorporation of proposed listed assets, the spin-off of non-proposed listed assets and 
the Outbound Transfer of Onshore Assets in the restructuring may incur heavy taxes. Therefore, tax planning is more 
important in the red-chip REITs restructuring than in the general offshore IPO restructuring.
A brief overview of common tax planning approaches in red-chip REITs restructuring is as below:
Approach
Main content
Purposes of tax planning
Provision for dividends
Increasing distributable profit and withholding 
for dividends to shareholders.
Reducing the net assets of 
the domestic company, and 
thus reducing share transfer 
consideration and share 
transfer premium in the case 
of an Outbound Transfer of 
Onshore Assets, and further 
reducing income taxes.
Capital reduction
Reducing the capital of the onshore project 
company. Subject to a 45-day announcement 
period, it is time-consuming.
Forward spin-off
(i.e. transfer of 
pooled assets to 
a new entity)
Separation: The newly 
established entity after 
the separation holds the 
pooled assets
If the onshore project company holds both 
operating properties (pooled assets) and 
non-operating properties (non-pooled 
assets), it is required to spin off the assets, 
business, liabilities and personnel unrelated 
to the pooled assets of the REITs.
When the non-pooled assets are spun off, 
there are two types of spin-off: forward and 
reverse. Apart from the general transfer of 
assets, separation and asset contribution 
have some room for tax planning and can 
reduce the drain on the company's cash 
flow.
There is room for special tax 
restructuring, but only if no 
change occurs in 12 months in 
the shareholders of the newly 
spin-off company/new project 
company holding the pooled 
assets.
If, in order to meet the above 
requirement, it may be 
impossible to inject assets prior 
to the REIT listing. In this case, 
the sponsor will be required 
to undertake to contribute the 
assets immediately after the 
expiry of the 12-month lock-up 
period and to make up for the 
cash flows during the period 
when the properties are not 
pooled.
Asset contribution: The 
pooled assets are used 
to establish a new project 
company
Reverse spin-off
(i.e. retention of 
the pooled assets 
in the old entity)
The newly established 
entity after the separation 
holds the non-pooled 
assets
Asset contribution: The 
non-pooled assets are 
used to establish a new 
company


98
IPO & LISTING
Approach
Main content
Purposes of tax planning
Share swap
In the case of an acquisition of an onshore 
project company by an SPV established 
under an offshore holding company, a share 
swap may be considered in addition to a cash 
acquisition.
The SPV further establishes an onshore SPV 
(“Cash Company”) which holds the cash assets 
equivalent to the valuation of the onshore 
project company. Subsequently, the SPV will 
acquire the onshore project company at a 
consideration of 100% of the equity interest in 
the Cash Company held by the SPV. In another 
word, the equity interest in the Cash Company 
held by the SPV is swapped with that in the 
onshore project company held by the original 
shareholders.
Reducing corporate income 
tax costs for the Outbound 
Transfer of Onshore Assets.
Establishment of a partnership in the middle
A domestic partnership is established indirectly 
by an offshore holding company to acquire the 
onshore project company.
The partnership may be 
exempt from corporate 
income tax. It may be set up 
in a location with a friendly tax 
environment, such as Hainan 
province and Nansha District, 
Guangzhou.
Setting Foreign debt 
The onshore project company can borrow from 
its foreign shareholder, to set up foreign debt.
On one hand, The interest expenses incurred 
by the company can be deducted before tax 
if the ratio of its debt investment to its equity 
investment from its affiliates does not exceed 
the prescribed threshold. On the other hand, 
for the onshore project company, in addition to 
dividends, debt and interest payment will allow 
outbound movement of funds and reduce taxes 
associated with dividends.
A certain ratio of equity to 
debt will be established in the 
onshore project company. The 
increased percentage of debt 
capital (debt financing) and 
the decreased percentage of 
equity capital (equity financing) 
will increase pre-tax deductions 
and distribution to the foreign 
shareholder in addition to the 
dividends, thus reducing the 
taxes.
The above are the main considerations related to tax planning. Please seek advice on relevant analysis and conclusion 
from accountants or professional tax advisors in the REIT listing.
IV. Key compliance points for offshore REIT listings
Like IPOs, the REIT listings in Hong Kong is also subject to a compliance test by the securities regulator. The due 
diligence and solution of compliance issues will decide whether the related assets can be listed and will have an impact 
on the valuation.
(I) General key points of legal due diligence of REIT assets
Logistics properties and commercial properties, including malls, office buildings and hotels, are currently the main 
properties in offshore REIT listings. The legal due diligence of these underlying assets and the project company 
particularly focuses on the following:


99
No.
Items
Special key points
Legal due diligence 
approach
Solutions
1
Planned vs 
actual use of 
the land
•	The planned use of the 
land may be inconsistent 
with its actual use.
•	In accordance with 
Article 81 of the Land 
Administration Law, 
anyone who does not 
use state-owned land 
in accordance with the 
approved use shall be 
ordered to surrender the 
land and be fined by the 
competent authority of 
natural resources of the 
people’s government at or 
above the county level.
Reviewing the use of 
land or buildings as 
stated in the state-
owned land use 
certificate, contract 
for the grant of the 
right to use state-
owned construction 
land, construction land 
permit, construction 
project planning permit 
and other relevant 
certificates.
•	The company undertakes to fully 
compensate the REITs/project 
company for any losses suffered by 
the REITs due to the inconsistency 
between the planned use and actual 
use of the project.
•	To confirm the compliance of not using 
the land for the planned use of the 
project, a certificate of compliance 
shall be obtained from or an interview 
shall be conducted with the competent 
authority.
2
Investment 
intensity, 
land use and 
planning 
indexes
The project investment 
contract or any other 
agreements between the 
project company and 
the local government 
usually stipulate the 
investment intensity and 
tax contribution, etc. It 
is necessary to review 
whether the project 
investment amount and 
tax comply with the 
investment contract. 
Otherwise, there is 
the risk of breach of 
contract.
Reviewing the project 
investment contract 
and other agreements 
between the project 
company and the 
local government and 
referring to the project 
construction application 
documents.
If the project company is likely to be 
held liable for breach of contract for 
its failure to comply with the project 
investment contract, it may enter into 
a supplementary waiver agreement 
with the government to alter the 
original agreement or the government 
may waive the project company from 
liability for breach of contract.
3
Compliance 
of project 
operation 
modes
•	The commercial real 
estate projects are 
mainly operated by the 
developers in three modes: 
self-holding; lease and 
sale; and leaseback after 
sale.
•	Investigating the 
compliance of different 
operation modes.
•	Self-holding: Reviewing 
the compliance of the 
lease contracts and other 
agreements between the 
developer and tenants.
•	Lease and sale / 
leaseback after 
sale: Reviewing the 
construction of the 
project, the renewal of 
the contract after the 
expiration of the lease 
term, etc.
•	Self-holding: Signing a new 
supplementary agreement or amending 
the contract to eliminate the non-
compliance of the lease contracts or 
any adverse effect on the future benefit 
arrangement of the REITs.
•	Lease and sale / leaseback after 
sale: Rectifying the possible non-
compliance in the project construction 
and obtaining the compliance 
certificate from the competent authority 
or interviewing with the competent 
authority on compliance.
4
Compliance 
of projects 
under 
construction 
or completed
•	For projects under 
construction or completed, 
examining whether 
the approvals for EIA, 
planning, and inspection 
and acceptance after 
completion, and the title 
certificates have been 
obtained.
•	If any building is 
constructed without 
approval, the project 
company may be imposed 
administrative penalties 
such as demolition of such 
building and a fine.
By a physical visit, 
verifying whether 
the area and other 
information of the 
building are consistent 
with the EIA record 
or registration form, 
construction planning 
permit, completion and 
acceptance document 
and title certificate.
•	Retaining the illegal building, but closing 
down its operation and terminating 
the relevant leases; and having an 
engineering consultant assess and 
confirm that the retention of the illegal 
part will not have any negative effect on 
the overall safety of the building.
•	Interviewing with local competent 
authority to confirm that the retention 
of the illegal part will not have any 
negative effect on the grant of the title 
certificate or future operation of the 
project, and that no penalty will be 
imposed.
•	Communicating with the SFC in 
advance to confirm that the retention of 
the illegal part will not have any material 
adverse effect on the REIT listing.


100
No.
Items
Special key points
Legal due diligence 
approach
Solutions
5
Restrictions 
on property 
imposed by 
mortgage 
and other 
restrictive 
agreements 
or 
arrangements
REITs are required to 
hold “good marketable 
legal and beneficial 
title” in the pooled 
assets in accordance 
with the Code. It is 
necessary to consider 
whether there are 
any restrictions on 
the property that 
may affect the above 
advice.
•	Examining and retrieving 
the real estate registration 
information or the other 
rights stated in the real 
estate title certificate; and 
examining the guarantee 
contracts performed by 
the project company.
•	Reviewing shop leases, 
advertising space leases 
and other contracts to 
verify whether there are 
rights arrangements such 
as right of first refusal and 
early termination clauses 
that conflict with future 
transaction arrangements.
•	Property mortgaged after the 
effectiveness of the Civil Code may 
be transferred in principle unless as 
prohibited by the mortgage contract or 
the related real estate register. Property 
mortgaged before the effectiveness of 
the Civil Code may not be transferred 
without the consent of the mortgagee. 
Therefore, most of the mortgages or 
other security created on the pooled 
property before the effectiveness of the 
Civil Code will be released or replaced 
before the REIT listing. 
•	The existing clauses on the underlying 
assets in conflict with any future 
transaction arrangement should be 
modified or released by a supplementary 
agreement or otherwise in advance.
6
Transfer 
restrictions
The investment 
agreement, land 
grant contract and 
other documents of 
the project or local 
regulations may 
contain restrictions on 
the transfer of the land 
use right (especially 
industrial land) of the 
project (including 
transfer of assets, 
change of equity in 
the project company, 
change of control of 
the project company).
Searching local 
regulations, making 
enquiries with the 
project company 
and reviewing the 
investment agreement, 
land grant contract and 
other documents with 
government authorities.
A written consent to the transfer 
must be obtained from the party 
that restricts the transfer if there is 
any restriction on the transfer in the 
investment agreement, land grant 
document or local regulations.
7
Property 
lease 
registration 
and filing
In accordance with the 
law, upon conclusion 
of a property lease 
contract, the parties 
to the lease shall 
complete the property 
lease registration 
and filing formalities 
with the real estate 
administrative authority 
at the location of the 
leased property.
Checking the lease 
registration and filing 
certificate of the project; 
making further enquiries 
with the local real estate 
administrative authority 
to confirm whether 
the project properties 
require mandatory lease 
registration and filing.
•	The project company completes the 
lease registration and filing formalities as 
soon as possible.
•	The company undertakes that it will fully 
compensate the REITs / project company 
for any losses suffered by the REITs as a 
result of any historical lease registration 
and filing issues.
8
Transfer of 
employees 
of the project 
company
In the REIT listing, 
the project company 
as the owner of the 
pooled properties 
should keep its tile 
clear and its legal 
relationship simple and 
may manage its real 
estate assets through 
the REIT manager.
Examining the existing 
employment contracts 
and employees of the 
project company to 
distinguish between key 
employees who will be 
retained with the project 
company and other 
support staff.
Terminating the employment contracts 
signed by project company with those 
other than the key employees to the 
extent possible and transferring such 
employment contracts to other light-
asset companies in the group.
IPO & LISTING


101
No.
Items
Special key points
Legal due diligence 
approach
Solutions
9
Review 
of special 
industry 
qualifications
In accordance with 
Item 36 of the Decision 
of the State Council 
on Establishing 
Administrative License 
for Administrative 
Approval Items Really 
Necessary to Be 
Retained (2016), the 
hotel industry requires 
special industry 
license issued by 
the public security 
authority of the local 
people's government 
at or above the county 
level. Therefore, the 
special industry license 
is also required for 
commercial properties 
such as hotels.
Reviewing the 
credentials provided by 
the company
•	Those who carry out business without 
appropriate qualification certificate should 
apply for and obtain such certificate.
•	An interview should be conducted with 
and a certificate of compliance should be 
obtained from the competent authority in 
the case of carrying out business without 
a qualification certificate.
From the above key due diligence points, it can be seen that the due diligence of real estate assets and the project 
company in the REIT listing is more detailed and stringent than the due diligence of an overseas IPO of a general real 
estate developer. The former exercise focuses more on clear property ownership, compliance of the use of the buildings 
and the stability of the lease relationship. In addition, the former due diligence should also focus on common legal issues 
for general real estate developers, including idle land, late commencement and completion of construction, construction 
before approval, inspection and acceptance of civil air defence and fire protection works, and failure to pay social 
security contributions and housing funds in full.
(II) Special key points for A-share companies
If an A-share listed company intends to issue a REIT outside China, based on the characteristics of the REIT product, 
when assets are injected into the REIT from a subsidiary of the A-share company, such assets will no longer be 
recognised in the consolidated financial statements of the A-share company. Therefore, such transaction involves 
internal approval and disclosure of information relating to the sale of assets of the A-share listed company.
As required by the CSRC’s Administrative Measures for Information Disclosure of Listed Companies as amended in 
2021 and the applicable listing rules of the relevant stock exchange, when the amount of the asset sale reaches the 
threshold that requires approval by the board of directors or the shareholders’ meeting, the A-share listed company shall 
comply with the approval procedures and make the required information disclosure in a timely manner. If the asset sale 
constitutes a major asset restructuring, the listed company shall also comply with the required approval and disclosure 
procedures in accordance with the Administrative Measures for the Restructuring of Major Assets of Listed Companies 
and other applicable regulations.
Thanks to intern Xiao Bin for his contribution to this article.
* For the purpose of this article only, China means the China Mainland only and excludes the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, the Macao Special Administrative 
Region and the Taiwan region. Any reference to Hong Kong or the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region should be construed as the Hong Kong Special Administrative 
Region of the People’s Republic of China.


102
On 21 August 2020, The Stock Exchange of 
Hong Kong (the “HKEx”) published amendments 
to the rules governing the listing of debt securities 
to professional investors to more closely align 
the rules with current market practice and to 
enhance the debt listing regime. The changes are 
made to Chapter 37 of the Main Board Listing 
Rules (the “Listing Rules”), which had last been 
updated in 2011, and are the result of a public 
consultation process culminating in the 21 August 
2020 document titled Consultation Conclusions 
and Guidance
1. The document summarises the 
rule changes and simultaneously promulgates 
a guidance letter
2 (the “Guidance Letter”) on 
disclosure that primarily addresses disclosure 
considerations for debt instruments with 
special features.
3 Market participants and legal 
practitioners, including King & Wood Mallesons, 
provided commentary during the consultation 
process.
The most significant changes in our view are (1) 
the tightening of the rules applicable to listing 
eligibility for regional and local state-owned 
enterprises; (2) the amendment of the definition 
of “Professional Investor”, obviating the need for 
a professional investor waiver; (3) the requirement 
to publish the listing documents on the website of 
the HKEx; and (4) the addition of new continuous 
reporting requirements relating to defaults and 
insolvency.
The amendments, which became effective on 
1 November 2020, include the following key 
changes:
•	 Eliminate the need to apply for a professional 
investor waiver by amending the definition of 
“Professional Investor” to include high net worth 
individuals and other professional investors.
•	 Increase the minimum net assets requirement 
for issuers (other than State corporations) from 
HK$100 million to HK$1 billion.
•	 Narrow the definition of “State corporation” so 
as to exclude regional and local State-owned 
enterprises.
•	 Establish a minimum issuance size of HK$100 
million (with an exception for tap issuances).
•	 Require issuers to publish listing documents 
(e.g., offering circulars, pricing supplements, 
among others) on the HKEx website on the 
listing date.
•	 Require disclosure of the intended investor 
market in the Hong Kong SAR (e.g., 
Professional Investors only) on the cover of the 
listing document.
•	 Establish new continuing obligation rules to 
require issuers and guarantors to disclose 
events of default, insolvency proceedings and 
winding-up applications and to make quarterly 
announcements following any suspension of 
trading.
Further details are set forth below.
HKEx publishes consultation conclusion and 
guidance to amend the Listing Rules on the 
listing of debt securities offered to professional 
investors
Hao Zhou, Richard Mazzochi, Minny Siu, Michael Lu, Song Yue, Jason Kuo
1Available at https://en-rules.hkex.com.hk/sites/default/files/net_file_store/new_rulebooks/u/p/Update_129_Attachment.pdf.
2Guidance on Disclosures in Listing Documents and Continuing Obligations under Chapter 37 – Debt Issues to Professional Investors Only. 
See https://www.hkex.com.hk/-/media/HKEX-Market/Listing/Rules-and-Guidance/Other-Resources/Debt-Securities/20200821.pdf.
3Special features refer to the non-exhaustive list of special features of certain debt securities that render such debt securities complex. Such 
securities include perpetual or subordinated debt securities, or those with variable or deferred interest payment terms, extendable maturity 
dates, or those which are convertible or exchangeable or have contingent write down or loss absorption features, or those with multiple credit 
support providers and structures. See https://www.sfc.hk/web/EN/rules-and-standards/suitability-requirement/non-complex-and-complex-
products/.
IPO & LISTING
Hao Zhou
Richard Mazzochi
Minny Siu
Michael Lu
Jason Kuo


103
I. Applicants’ and securities’ qualifications for 
listing
The new rules include higher standards for listing. 
These higher standards are intended to ensure that only 
issuers with financial capacity and proven track records 
of supporting debt issuances of significant amounts will 
be eligible and to bring the quality of listings in line with 
other popular debt listing venues including the Singapore, 
Luxembourg and Ireland exchanges.
•	 Under the amended Rule 37.04, applicants no 
longer need to provide documents evidencing valid 
incorporation or establishment. Instead, applicants may 
provide written confirmation of valid incorporation and 
establishment, thus simplifying the application process.
•	 Under the amended Rule 37.05, issuers are now 
required to have minimum net assets of HK$1 billion, an 
increase from the previous HK$100 million.
•	 Under the amended Rule 37.09A, the minimum 
issuance size is set at HK$100 million, with the 
exception of tap issuances.
•	 Perhaps most notably, the definition of “State 
corporation” has been amended so as to exclude 
regional and local authorities. The effect of this change 
will be to force unlisted companies controlled by 
regional or local authorities to fulfil the listing eligibility 
requirements of net assets of at least HK$1 billion 
and issue size of at least HK$100 million rather than 
qualifying for the State corporation exemption from 
those minimums. Issuers who do not meet those 
standards will need to rely on a guarantor that does 
meet those criteria, thus potentially forcing many 
local SOEs who might otherwise have used keepwell 
structures to select a guarantee structure, or, failing 
that, seeking listings in other exchanges.
II. Application procedures
Application procedures have been simplified and, in some 
cases, more closely aligned with the practice in other 
exchanges.
•	 The repeal of Rules 37.35(e) – (i) and introduction 
of Rules 37.35 (k) – (m) modifies the application 
procedures in relation to the change from the provision 
of evidentiary documents to written confirmations set 
forth in the amended Rule 37.04.
•	 New Rule 37.39A requires issuers to publish listing 
documents on the HKEx website on the listing 
date, which is similar to requirements of other stock 
exchanges, such as the Singapore Stock Exchange.
•	 The definition of “Professional Investor” is revised to 
include high net worth and other professional investors 
prescribed by rules made under Section 397 of the 
Securities and Futures Ordinance (Cap. 571), thus 
eliminating the need to apply for a professional investor 
waiver.
III. Listing document
Although under the new rules the listing document must 
now be published, the overall “light-touch” approach to 
disclosure standards in Chapter 37 has not changed. 
Similar to other leading debt-listing exchanges, the HKEx 
only requires that a listing document contain certain 
disclaimers and “the information that the investors an 
issuer is offering the securities to would customarily 
expect it to contain”. It need not comply with the detailed 
requirements contained in Appendix 1, part C
4 (which 
applies to retail securities).
However, for instruments that fall within the HKEx’s 
definition of products with special features (which follows 
the SFC’s definition of complex products), the Guidance 
Letter provides detailed considerations specific to certain 
products, which include:
•	 perpetual or subordinated debt securities;
•	 those with variable or deferred interest payment terms, 
extendable maturity dates;
•	 those which are convertible or exchangeable;
•	 those with contingent write down or loss absorption 
features; or
•	 those with multiple credit support providers and 
structures.
This guidance is likely to lead to additional language 
being added to the listing document, perhaps in a 
new paragraph in the Notice to Investors section or 
within a risk factor.
Specific amendments to the rules governing the 
listing document include the following:
•	 Under new Rule 37.39A, an issuer must publish on 
the HKEx’s website the listing document (e.g., offering 
circular, offering memorandum, pricing supplement), 
in English or Chinese, on the listing date. This change 
brings the HKEx in line with its main competitor 
exchanges in Singapore, Luxembourg and Ireland 
which have historically required the publication of the 
listing document, although the allowance to publish the 
document only in Chinese is unique and differentiates 
the HKEx from its competitors.
•	 Under new Rule 37.31A, the front cover of listing 
documents must explicitly disclose that the intended 
4Appendix 1, part C, available at https://www.hkex.com.hk/-/media/HKEX-Market/Listing/Rules-and-Guidance/Listing-Rules-Contingency/Main-Board-Listing-
Rules/Appendices/appendix_1C.pdf?la=en


104
investor market in Hong Kong is professional investors 
only. This disclosure alerts retail investors in Hong Kong 
that they are not the intended class of investors. The 
HKEx has in practice been requiring such a statement 
when reviewing disclosure documents, but it is now 
expressly stated in the rules.
IV. Continuing obligations
Another major change to the rules is the addition of new 
requirements to assert increased oversight over, and 
expand the continuing disclosure obligations of, issuers 
and guarantors.
•	 New Rule 37.46A expands on the existing Rule 37.47(b) 
that requires the issuer, after consultation with the 
HKEx, to announce information necessary to avoid a 
false market in its listed debt securities. The new rule 
establishes an enquiry regime whereby the Issuer must 
make an announcement if requested by the HKEx. 
The Issuer may make an announcement that it does 
not believe a false market exists only if (i) the directors 
have completed an enquiry; (ii) all inside information 
has been disclosed; and (iii) the HKEx requests such an 
announcement.
•	 New Rule 37.47D imposes an obligation on issuers 
to publish quarterly announcements in the event 
that trading in their listed debt securities has been 
suspended.
•	 New Rule 37.47E requires issuers to announce as soon 
as reasonably possible information in relation to (i) a 
default on its listed debt securities; (ii) any appointment 
of a receiver or manager in respect of the business or 
any part of the business of the issuer or the property 
of the issuer; (iii) the presentation of any winding-up 
petition or order or the equivalent against or in respect 
of the issuer; or (iv) the passing of any resolution by 
the issuer that it be wound up by way of members’ or 
creditors’ voluntary winding-up, or equivalent action. 
Although previously issuers may have been obligated 
to provide such disclosure under Rule 37.47A, which 
requires an announcement of “any information” which 
may have a material effect on an issuer’s ability to meet 
the obligations of its listed securities, the new rules 
make it an explicit requirement to disclose these default, 
insolvency and winding-up events. Of note, because the 
HKEx defines “listed debt securities” as securities listed 
on the HKEx, the first prong requiring announcement 
of any default on “its listed debt securities” may be 
interpreted to mean that an issuer must announce 
defaults across multiple stock codes if it has multiple 
listed debt securities, but it would not automatically be 
required to announce defaults of securities listed on 
other exchanges (although such default may still be a 
material event that should be announced pursuant to 
Rule 37.47A).
Conclusion
The amendments to the rules governing the listing of debt 
securities to professional investors will accomplish four 
overlapping objectives:
(i)	 more closely align the rules with current market 
practice;
(ii)	 streamline the listing application process;
(iii)	 enhance eligibility requirements; and
(iv)	 enhance the reporting obligations of issuers and 
guarantors.
The authors would like to thank Paul Marks, Anlei Zuo and Edward Ku 
for their contributions to this article.
IPO & LISTING


105
Introduction 
The U.S. further tightened its regulation against Chinese companies seeking to 
be listed in the U.S. in 2020. On 21 April 2020, the U.S. Securities and Exchange 
Commission (“SEC”) and the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board 
(“PCAOB”) issued a joint statement warning investors to beware of financial 
risks of Chinese companies. On 20 May 2020, the Senate passed the Holding 
Foreign Companies Accountable Act, providing that a Chinese company will be 
barred from listing on a U.S. stock exchange or continuing to trade in securities 
if the company does not allow the PCAOB to review its audit records.  
Due to the high cost and uncertainty of the timing of privatisation and delisting 
from a U.S. stock exchange, Chinese companies already listed overseas 
(“Overseas-Listed Chinese Companies”) tend to seek a secondary listing in the 
Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of China instead. For instance, the 
secondary listings of Alibaba in 2019 and JD.com and NetEase in 2020 in Hong 
Kong SAR provide a valuable reference for other Chinese companies. The return 
of such companies to the Hong Kong stock market will help boost its trading 
volume and consolidate Hong Kong's leading position in the global equity 
financing market. In addition, with the upgrading of the Shanghai-Hong Kong 
Stock Connect and Shenzhen-Hong Kong Stock Connect mechanisms and the 
inclusion of new economy companies in the Hang Seng Index, more mainland 
capitals will flow southward to gradually improve the valuation of the Chinese 
companies in the Hong Kong market. 
Prior to 15 December 2017, U.S. listed Chinese companies applying for a 
second listing in Hong Kong SAR were viewed as Grandfathered Greater China 
Issuers. Such Chinese Companies are automatically exempted from some of 
the requirements of the Rules Governing the Listing of Securities on the Stock 
Exchange of Hong Kong Limited (“Hong Kong Listing Rules”). For instance, 
an Overseas-listed Chinese Company may submit a prospectus to the Stock 
Exchange of Hong Kong Limited (“HKEX”) in confidence, whereas a normal 
listing applicant is required to disclose the A1 form (listing application form) on 
the HKEX's website at an early stage.
Such issuers of China concepts stocks (“Chinese Issuers”) may also apply for 
additional exemptions under the Hong Kong Listing Rules. For example, an 
applicant may apply to retain the existing VIE and weighted voting right (WVR) 
One of the drivers for seeking secondary 
listing in Hong Kong SAR - exemption from 
the Hong Kong Listing Rules 
Sam Huang
Sam Huang


106
structures, and may also apply to be exempted from 
various requirements of the Hong Kong Listing Rules 
relating to internal organization, corporate governance, 
ways of listing, trading and restricted transfer of shares, 
connected transactions, annual report disclosure, 
appointment of auditors and compliance advisors, share 
option schemes, among others. 
If an Overseas-listed Chinese Company is exempted 
from the above listed requirements, it will take a shorter 
time for the company to complete its secondary listing 
smoothly. The three aforesaid Overseas-listed Chinese 
Companies completed their listings in Hong Kong SAR 
in approximately three to five months. Additionally, 
exemptions from the Hong Kong Listing Rules or the 
Codes on Takeovers and Mergers and Share Buy-backs 
(the “Takeovers Code”) would simplify the approval 
procedures for refinancing and M&A of Overseas-listed 
Chinese Companies after their return to the Hong Kong 
market. 
This article will introduce the exemptions granted by the 
HKEX and the Securities and Futures Commission (“SFC”), 
and discuss what can be taken as the possible reasons 
for Overseas-listed Chinese Companies to apply for 
exemptions.
I. Not viewed as a public company in Hong Kong 
SAR
The Corporate Finance Division of the SFC is responsible 
for the implementation of the Takeovers Code. Anyone 
who contravenes the Takeovers Code may be subject to 
private reprimand, public censure, disciplinary action or 
suspension of licence or revocation of registration by the 
SFC. In accordance with paragraph4.1 of the Takeovers 
Code, the Takeovers Code applies to takeovers, mergers 
and share buy-backs affecting public companies in Hong 
Kong SAR, and companies with a primary listing of their 
equity securities in Hong Kong SAR. If an Overseas-
listed Chinese Company meeting the requirements of 
Rule 19C.01 of the Hong Kong Listing Rules seeks a 
secondary listing on the HKEX, it will not be viewed as a 
Hong Kong public company under paragraph 4.2 of the 
Takeovers Code.  
If an Overseas-listed Chinese Company is granted an 
exemption by the SFC, it will not be required to comply 
with the Takeovers Code for mergers or acquisitions 
following a secondary listing in Hong Kong SAR, which 
will significantly reduce the approval time and cost 
required for such transactions and lower the uncertainty of 
transactions.
II. Simplified obligations for equity disclosure
Pursuant to Part XV of the Securities and Futures 
Ordinance (“SFO”), the HKEX's Practice Note 5 and 
paragraphs 41(4) and 45 of Part A of Appendix 1 to the 
Hong Kong Listing Rules, listed issuers are required to 
disclose the interests of shareholders and directors in the 
prospectus.
The Chinese Issuers are advised to apply for an exemption 
from the above disclosure obligations. Subject to the U.S. 
Securities Exchange Act, any person (including directors 
and officers) of any U.S. listed Chinese company who 
acquires more than 5% of the equity or voting rights is 
required to file a beneficial owner report with the SEC. 
Such person is also required to notify the SEC promptly of 
any material changes to previously reported data (including 
the acquisition or disposition of more than 1% of the 
equity or voting rights). In view of the above fact, such 
Chinese company may explain to the SFC that additional 
disclosure under the SFO will result in double reporting 
by insiders. This will not only bring excessive burden and 
additional costs, but also be of little significance to the 
protection of Hong Kong investors. 
III. Protection of shareholders' interests
In accordance with Rule 19.30(1)(b) of the Hong Kong 
Listing Rules, an Overseas-listed Chinese Company 
seeking a secondary listing in Hong Kong SAR is required 
to provide at least the equivalent level of protection for 
shareholders’ interests as that provided in the Hong Kong 
market. In addition, Rule 19C.06 of the Hong Kong Listing 
Rules provides that Appendix 3 and Appendix 13 of these 
rules do not apply to a Chinese Issuer if the issuer is a 
Grandfathered Greater China Issuer and can prove that it 
has met the eight shareholder protection requirements set 
out in Rule 19C.07. This means that HKEX may exempt 
such issuers from the said Rule 19.30(1)(b).
IV. Protecting minority shareholders’ rights to 
convene and propose at general meetings 
In accordance with Rule 19C.07(7) of the Hong Kong 
Listing Rules, minority shareholders of a listed company 
have the right to convene and propose at an extraordinary 
general meeting (“the right to request a meeting”). On 
a one vote per share basis, the minimum proportion of 
shareholders required for the convening of such a meeting 
may not be greater than 10% of the voting rights of the 
issuer's share capital.
Many Hong Kong listed companies have controlling 
shareholders who, together with the persons acting 
in concert, are entitled to exercise more than 30% of 
the voting rights at general meetings. This makes the 
controlling shareholders the de facto decision-makers 
of the company, thereby rendering the right to request 
a meeting meaningless. A Chinese Issuer without a 
controlling shareholder and having a more decentralized 
shareholder structure will in fact provide a higher level 
IPO & LISTING


107
of protection for minority shareholders. In addition, as 
the majority of Overseas-listed Chinese Companies are 
entities incorporated in the Cayman Islands and are 
viewed as foreign private issuers, minority shareholders 
have the right to bring individual actions or derivative 
actions directly against the company. Given that minority 
shareholders enjoy adequate indirect protection under 
the U.S. federal securities laws, Chinese Issuers are 
advised to apply to the HKEX for an exemption from strict 
compliance with the said Rule 19C.07(7).
V. Financial information on the targets of 
investments and acquisitions following disclosure 
of track records
Rules 4.04(2) and 4.04(4)(a) of the Hong Kong Listing 
Rules provide that for subsidiaries acquired, or proposed 
to be acquired after the latest audited financial statements, 
the issuer shall also provide the results and balance sheets 
of those subsidiaries for each of the three years preceding 
the publication of the prospectus.
There will be a large number of invested companies 
involved if an Overseas-listed Chinese Company made 
a significant number of equity investments in its day-
to-day operations prior to the listing. If such invested 
companies do not have historical financial data prepared 
in accordance with IFRS requirements, it will take a lot of 
time and resources to fully understand the management 
accounting policies of the target companies in order to 
prepare such financial documents. Thus, it will place 
a heavy burden on both the Overseas-listed Chinese 
Company and the invested companies. 
A Chinese Issuer may apply for an exemption from the 
above requirements on the following grounds:
(i)	 As an Overseas-listed Chinese Company does not 
exercise control over invested companies, nor does 
it have seats in the Board or interfere in the day-to-
day operations of these invested companies, it (as 
a minority shareholder) will not be in the position 
to compel the invested companies to prepare, and 
disclose in their prospectuses, the audited financial 
statements.
(ii)	 Disclosure of all equity investments is not required by 
U.S. securities laws.
(iii)	 Disclosure may be detrimental to the relationship 
between the Chinese Issuer and the invested 
companies and to their commercial interests; 
and as the invested companies are not public 
companies, disclosure of financial information may 
impair commercial sensitivity and place them at a 
disadvantageous position in competition.
(iv)	 The 5% threshold of the percentage of equity 
investment in the listed issuer's assets, profits, 
revenue, consideration and share capital (Rule 14.07 
of Hong Kong Listing Rules) determines whether 
such investment and the disclosure are material to 
investors.
(v)	 Whether it is possible to provide alternative 
information on outbound investment in accordance 
with Chapter 14 of the Hong Kong Listing Rules, 
such as a description of the main business, amount 
of investment and a statement indicating that no core 
connected person of a company is the controlling 
shareholder of any invested company. (To ensure 
confidentiality, the name of the specific invested 
company may be represented by letters or numbers.)
VI. Non-disclosure of directors’ residential 
addresses
In accordance with paragraph 33(3) of Part A of 
Appendix 1 to the Hong Kong Listing Rules, the 
information about the five natural persons who received 
the highest remuneration for the year shall be disclosed 
in the prospectus. In addition, paragraphs 6 and 45 
of Schedule 3 to the Companies (Winding Up and 
Miscellaneous Provisions) Ordinance (“Winding Up and 
Miscellaneous Provisions”) respectively provide that the 
residential addresses of directors shall be disclosed in the 
prospectus, and such addresses refer to the directors’ 
usual residential address. 
As many directors of Overseas-listed Chinese Companies 
are well-known figures both at home and abroad, 
disclosure of their addresses may expose them and their 
families to unnecessary disturbance and public attention. 
Given the increasingly stringent regulation over Overseas-
listed Chinese Companies in the U.S., their directors 
are subject to malicious allegations or abusive lawsuits 
from time to time. Therefore, it will effectively reduce the 
harassment against directors if Chinese Issuers may apply 
to not disclose the addresses of such directors in the 
prospectus.
VII. Non-disclosure of the options of subsidiaries 
or connected entities in the consolidated financial 
statement
Paragraph 27 of Part A of Appendix 1 to the Hong 
Kong Listing Rules requires listed issuers to disclose in 
their prospectus particulars of options of subsidiaries or 
connected entities in the consolidated financial statement, 
including the consideration for which the options have 
been or will be granted, the exercise price and exercise 
period of the options, and the name and address of the 
grantee. Additionally, paragraph 10 of Part I of Schedule 3 
to the Winding Up and Miscellaneous Provisions requires 
listed issuers to disclose information on the number and 
type of options, the period during which the options 


108
may be exercised, the price to be paid for the shares 
or debentures subscribed under the options, and the 
consideration paid or to be paid.
Most Overseas-listed Chinese Companies will develop 
an equity incentive plan, and disclose such plan in 
Form 20-F (annual report of a non-U.S. company) filed 
with the SEC. The disclosure in Form 20-F will also be 
consistent with that set out in the “Directors, Officers 
and Employees - Compensation - Equity Incentive Plan” 
section of the prospectus of Overseas-listed Chinese 
Companies seeking secondary listings in Hong Kong 
SAR. As Rule 19C.11 of the Hong Kong Listing Rules 
provides that Chapter 17 of the Hong Kong Listing Rules 
does not apply to exempt Chinese Issuers, such issuers 
are not required to disclose their equity incentive plans. 
In addition, details of options are not required to be 
disclosed in the Form 20-F filed with the SEC. As such, 
it will impose a considerable burden on Chinese Issuers 
if they are required to comply strictly with the Hong Kong 
disclosure requirements on options. As noted in the 
second point above, Chinese Issuers may apply to the 
SFC for an exemption from Part XV of the SFO in relation 
to disclosure of shareholders’ interests. Chinese Issuers 
are also advised to apply for an exemption from the strict 
compliance with the disclosure requirements in relation to 
options.
VIII. No printed prospectus required
Chinese Issuers may apply for an exemption from the 
strict compliance with the requirement of providing printed 
copies of the prospectus under Rules 12.04(3), 12.07 
and 12.11 of the Hong Kong Listing Rules. For the part of 
publicly offered shares selling to Hong Kong investors, an 
all-electronic application process is adopted and printed 
copies of its prospectus are not made available to the 
Hong Kong public.
IX. Exemption from providing company 
information to shareholders
Rule 2.07A of the Hong Kong Listing Rules provides 
that a listed company should, in principle, send printed 
copies of company information to holders of securities. 
Such information may be provided by the listed company 
via email, provided that the listed company has received 
prior express written confirmation from each holder of its 
securities or it has been approved at a general meeting.
This requirement often imposes a greater administrative 
burden and cost on Overseas-listed Chinese Companies. 
Such companies allocate a relatively small percentage of 
shares for subscription in Hong Kong SAR during their 
secondary listing, with more than 90% of their shares 
going to professional, institutional and other investors in 
the rest of the world. It is likely that there are over tens 
of thousands of holders of the ADSs of the Chinese 
companies worldwide and therefore it is not feasible to 
send printed copies of all company information to all 
securities holders. 
Also, such companies are required to file a variety of 
company information with the SEC, which are posted on 
the SEC’s Edgar. Regular reports set out in Form 20-F and 
Form 6-K are generally available on the investor relations 
pages of these companies.
X. No need to publish a monthly statement
Under Rule 13.25B of the Hong Kong Listing Rules, listed 
companies are required to publish monthly statements 
disclosing changes in the company’s equity securities, 
debt securities and other securitisation instruments during 
the monthly reporting period.
If Overseas-listed Chinese Companies have been 
exempted from Part XV of the SFO in relation to disclosure 
of shareholders’ interests (see the second point above 
on “Simplified obligations for equity disclosure”) in 
the secondary listing in Hong Kong SAR, they may 
apply for an exemption from Rule 13.25B at the same 
time, and will only be required to provide the SEC with 
quarterly earnings and disclose the information on share 
repurchases in Form 20-F.
XI. Non-disclosure of the offer price in the 
prospectus
Paragraph 15(2)(c) of Part A of Appendix 1 to the Hong 
Kong Listing Rules provides that the offer price of the 
securities must be disclosed in the prospectus. It is 
recommended that Chinese Issuers apply to the HKEX 
for an exemption from this requirement. In lieu of the offer 
price, only the highest public offer price will be disclosed 
in the prospectus.
As the securities offered in a secondary listing in Hong 
Kong SAR are fully fungible with the ADSs, the public offer 
price may be determined by reference to, for example, the 
closing price of the ADSs on the pricing date or on the last 
trading day prior to that date. Given the fact that Chinese 
Issuers could not control the market price of ADSs, setting 
a range of fixed prices or minimum international offer 
prices may have an adverse effect on the price of ADSs 
and Hong Kong-listed shares. 
XII. Permitting pre-listing trading of securities by 
core connected persons
In accordance with Rule 9.09(b) of the Hong Kong Listing 
Rules, no core connected person of the issuer shall deal 
in the securities of the proposed listed company from four 
business days prior to the date of hearing until the listing 
is approved.
Major shareholders, directors and officers (“insiders”) of 
Chinese ccompanies will establish a trading plan (“Rule 
10b5-1 plan”) in compliance with Rule 10b5-1 of the U.S. 
IPO & LISTING


109
Securities Exchange Act after listing in the U.S., to legally 
trade in the companies’ securities. Rule 10b5-1 plan is 
a written plan for trading in securities established with a 
broker. The plan:
(i)	 is entered into at a time when insiders do not possess 
material non-public information;
(ii)	 specifies in advance the number of securities to be 
purchased and sold, the selling price and date of sale; 
and
(iii)	 does not allow insiders to interfere with the method 
and timing of trading. A person who trades in the 
securities under Rule 10b5-1 will not normally be 
viewed as an insider trading participant under the U.S. 
securities laws.
Most U.S.-listed Chinese companies have numerous 
subsidiaries and connected entities and usually develop a 
Rule 10b5-1 plan. As many insiders do not have discretion 
over the purchase and sale of ADRs of U.S.-listed Chinese 
companies, they will not have a material impact on the 
global offering in the secondary listing in Hong Kong SAR. 
Therefore, we recommend that Chinese Issuers apply to 
the HKEX for an exemption from Rule 9.09(b).
XIII. Allowing existing shareholders to 
conditionally subscribe for shares
Pursuant to Rule 10.04 of the Hong Kong Listing Rules, 
the existing shareholders, directors and connected 
persons of an issuer may subscribe for securities sold 
by any listing applicant or its representatives, provided, 
however, that Rule 10.03 is satisfied. Under paragraph 
5(2) of Appendix 6 to the Hong Kong Listing Rules, a listed 
issuer shall obtain the prior written consent of the HKEX 
if it wants the directors, existing shareholders or close 
contacts of its subsidiaries to subscribe for or distribute 
securities. 
Even if Overseas-listed Chinese Companies have 
numerous subsidiaries and connected entities, the 
directors, officers and major shareholders of some of the 
non-material subsidiaries are unlikely to hold any non-
public inside information and thus they have no real 
influence over the listed issuer (e.g. they cannot appoint 
directors). These persons are in fact on the same footing 
as public investors in Hong Kong SAR. The HKEX may 
allow such persons to conditionally subscribe for shares 
if the listed issuer can undertake to the HKEX that the 
shareholding or voting rights of such persons in the listed 
issuer will not exceed 5%, that they will participate in 
the book-building process in the international placing 
as normal and that they will not be given any special 
treatment.
XIV. Requirements for audited statements 
between U.S. GAAP and IFRS  
The Hong Kong Listing Rules and the Winding Up and 
Miscellaneous Provisions, and the United States Generally 
Accepted Accounting Principles (“U.S. GAAP”) set out 
different requirements for the disclosures of historical 
financial information in the accountants' report. Rules 
4.05 and 4.13 of the Hong Kong Listing Rules require 
disclosure of specific details, including the company 
balance sheet; an ageing analysis of accounts receivable; 
an ageing analysis of accounts payable; and adjustments 
to profit for the track record period made according to the 
new accounting standards adopted in the most recent 
financial year.
U.S.-listed Chinese companies are required to apply the 
modified retrospective method or prospective method 
during the track record period in accordance with the U.S. 
GAAP to recognize the impact of the new accounting 
standards. The relevant accounting standards include 
ASU 2016-01, ASC 606, and ASC 842.  
After adopting the ASU 2016-01 standard, changes in 
the fair value of available-for-sale equity securities are 
recorded in the consolidated statements of income and 
changes in the fair value of securities are recorded in other 
comprehensive income in the fiscal year prior to adoption 
of the standard. In addition, equity securities previously 
accounted for under the cost method were reclassified as 
investments in securities under ASU 2016-01. As the fair 
value of these equity securities is not readily determinable, 
U.S.-listed Chinese companies generally choose to 
account for such equity securities in future periods using 
the simplified measurement method and record fair value 
adjustments (including impairments) in the consolidated 
statements of income. The U.S. GAAP does not permit full 
retrospective adjustments upon adoption of ASU 2016-
01, so no retrospective adjustments can be made to the 
consolidated financial statements for comparable periods.
After the adoption of ASU 2016-01 on a full retrospective 
basis, the adjustment of historical financial information 
for comparable periods will confuse investors in the U.S. 
market and may result in a misleading accountants’ 
report accompanying the prospectus of a secondary 
listing. Thus, a Chinese Issuer may apply for disclosure 
of new accounting standards effective for the most 
recent financial year (e.g. the impact of undistributed 
profits) only in accordance with the U.S. GAAP and also 
apply for the exemption from disclosure of information 
in the accountants’ report as required by Rules 4.04(3), 
4.05(2) and 4.13 of the Hong Kong Listing Rules and 
paragraph 31(3)(b) of Schedule 3 to the Winding Up and 
Miscellaneous Provisions.
XV. Permitting Spin-offs and listings within three 
years of listing
Paragraphs 1 to 3(b) and 3(d) to 5 of Practice Note 15 of 
the Hong Kong Listing Rules (i.e. the restriction against 
spin-offs of subsidiaries within 3 years of listing) do not 
apply to issuers seeking secondary listing. This is because 


110
parent companies’ initial listing was approved based 
on the market and investor expectations that they will 
continue to develop the business portfolios already existed 
at the time of listing.  As such, the Listing Committee of 
the HKEX will not consider an application for a spin-off if a 
parent company has been listed for less than three years.
Considering potential business opportunities and ever-
changing market conditions, parent companies should 
seize the opportunity for a spin-off and the listing on the 
HKEX as a subsidiary is likely to grow rapidly and stronger 
within three years.
We recommend that Overseas-listed Chinese 
Companies apply to the HKEX for an exemption from 
strict compliance with the three-year restriction on spin-
offs as set out in paragraph 3(b) of the Practice Note 15 
on the following grounds:
(i)	 The Articles of Association of Overseas-listed Chinese 
Companies, the U.S. regulations and the NASDAQ 
and Hong Kong Listing Rules do not provide any 
special requirements or restrictions on when the spin-
off and listing can be made;
(ii)	 Rule 19C.11 of Hong Kong Listing Rules has already 
granted an exemption and allowed a spin-off of a 
Chinese Issuer within three years of listing in Hong 
Kong SAR. If a spin-off is permitted, it makes little 
sense to restrict the listing of the spin-off business on 
the HKEX (the impact of the spin-off on shareholders 
is not dependent on where the listing takes place, 
except in relation to the pre-emptive rights of 
shareholders of the parent company); and 
(iii)	 The listing after the spin-off will still be subject to the 
financial requirements of Rule 19C.05 of the Hong 
Kong Listing Rules and the requirements of Practice 
Note 15.
Conclusion
The return of Overseas-listed Chinese Companies to 
the Hong Kong stock market may be able to raise the 
valuation of the Hong Kong listed shares of consumer 
discretionary and information technology sectors. 
The U.S.-listed Chinese companies that might seek a 
secondary listing in Hong Kong SAR are mainly from the 
new economy sector. Of the 23 companies with a market 
value greater than USD 3 billion, information technology 
and consumer discretionary companies collectively 
account for over 90% of the total market value. The 
Hong Kong listed shares of consumer discretionary and 
information technology sectors are currently valued at 
22.4 and 15.7 times respectively, while the shares of 
two leading U.S.-listed Chinese companies expected to 
seek secondary listing in Hong Kong SAR are valued at 
37.4 times and 19.8 times, respectively. Therefore, the 
successful secondary listing of the leading U.S. listed 
Chinese companies in Hong Kong SAR is expected 
to boost the valuation of the Hong Kong listed shares 
of consumer discretionary and information technology 
sectors and drive the development of the Hong Kong 
stock market.   
The HKEX has a more flexible discretion as to whether 
Mainland issuers and other issuers with a primary 
listing overseas can be granted an exemption from the 
Listing Rules. After a listed company’s application for an 
exemption has been approved, subsequent listed issuers 
may follow the precedent. For example, Hong Kong 
listed companies are required to appoint a member of the 
Institute of Chartered Secretaries, a solicitor or barrister, 
or a professional accountant as the company secretary. 
In 2016, the HKEX exempted Bank of China (Hong Kong) 
from the said requirement for a period of three years. For 
another example, the WVR structure in Hong Kong SAR 
originally provides that shares with super voting rights 
should be held by natural persons such as founders or 
directors of new economy companies. Following the listing 
of Meituan in December 2018, however, such shares may 
be held in the form of family trusts after being granted an 
exemption from the Rule 8A.18 of the Hong Kong Listing 
Rules by the HKEX.
As Overseas-listed Chinese Companies seeking a 
secondary listing in Hong Kong SAR have different 
information disclosure obligations, business and practical 
needs, we recommend that they communicate with the 
SFC and the HKEX as early as possible and apply for 
applicable exemptions from the Hong Kong Listing Rules, 
so as to reduce the uncertainty in listing and post-listing 
maintenance costs.
IPO & LISTING


111
Hong Kong has become the world’s second largest biotech financing centre since 
the Stock Exchange of Hong Kong (the “HKEx”) introduced Chapter 18A (the biotech 
chapter) of the Main Board Listing Rules in 2018. Biotech research features long R&D and 
investment cycles and biotech industry carries higher risks than traditional pharma and 
other industries. For this reason, the HKEx set up the Biotech Advisory Panel consisting of 
experienced international experts in the biotech industry. Listing departments may consult 
the Panel for advice relating to the field.
In recent years, the Hong Kong Securities and Futures Commission (SFC) has been 
taking frequent actions against sponsors for neglect of duty in listing applications, and has 
imposed penalties on a number of securities firms due to inadequate due diligence in the 
listing process. Given the SFC’s increasingly stringent regulation, negligence in performing 
due diligence may result in severe consequences. The key officers of sponsors should 
be involved and determine the breadth and depth of the due diligence review and the 
allocation of resources. They should assess the results and adequacy of the due diligence 
review to ensure that any issues identified are properly addressed. In the listing process 
of a biopharma company, the key officers are not allowed to delegate their duties as they 
are ultimately responsible throughout the entire due diligence process. Sponsors should 
take control of the due diligence process and be attentive and sensitive to attempts to 
ignore negative due diligence findings or resist further enquiries. They should perform their 
obligations under the Code of Conduct for Persons Licensed by or Registered with the 
SFC, the Corporate Finance Adviser Code of Conduct, the Management, Supervision and 
Internal Control Guidelines for Persons Licensed by Or Registered with the SFC, and the 
Additional Fit and Proper Guidelines for Corporations and Authorised Financial Institutions 
Applying or Continuing to Act as Sponsors and Compliance Advisers.
At the beginning of the listing process of biopharma companies, sponsors should work 
with their counsels to develop a comprehensive due diligence plan covering the following 
steps:
1.	Examining the fundamental principles of drugs
2.	Understanding the target market
3.	Enquiring about core issues
a.	Assessing clinical development plans
b.	Assessing the regulatory outlook
c.	Ensuring the authenticity and reliability of data
d.	Investigating the company’s manufacturing capabilities
4.	Takeaways from HKEx’s feedback on application review
Analysis of IPOs of biopharma companies 
in Hong Kong SAR (for sponsors)
Sam Huang
Sam Huang


112
Given the high degree of specialisation and entry barriers 
in the biotech and medical device sectors, sponsors 
should always seek independent, objective and verifiable 
advice during the due diligence process from, for 
example, key opinion leaders (KOLs), lead researchers, 
contract research organisations (CROs), manufacturers, 
and partners. They are expected to work with the counsel 
and the company’s management to select the proper 
participants and then conducts due diligence with the 
company’s management withdrawn.
I. Examining the fundamental principles of drugs
In accordance with the HKEx’s due diligence requirements, 
the sponsor should critically assess the fundamental 
scientific explanations and rationales. Not relying solely 
on presentations by the company’s management, the 
sponsor should also seek supporting statements from 
assessments of its deal team/pharmaceutical research 
analysts, interviews with KOLs and principal investigators, 
and third party scientific publications. In addition, the 
sponsor is required to critically assess clinical development 
plans and regulatory outlooks and conduct due diligence 
on clinical trials to ensure the authenticity and reliability of 
data from clinical trial protocols. The sponsor should also 
review clinical study reports, scientific papers, government 
and non-profit research publications, patent research and 
third party data sources to assess the authenticity of trials.
II. Understanding the target market
The sponsor should understand the target market for the 
drug or biologic, such as the patient population. It can 
conduct market research through a patient advocacy 
group, industry consultant, or even the engaged 
independent consulting firm. The sponsor can assess drug 
pricing and penetration estimates which are not disclosed 
in the prospectus. It should have a good knowledge of the 
competitive environment, such as other drugs approved or 
in development, comfort and satisfaction of doctors with 
current market leaders and standards of care, the efficacy 
of comparable drugs, the operability of the route of 
administration, pricing and subsidies. In disclosing barriers 
to commercialisation, the sponsor should present several 
aspects of how to penetrate the market, the company’s 
marketing strategy, the target number of doctors, the size 
of sales force required and pharmacoeconomics.
III. Enquiring about core issues
The sponsor should critically assess the company’s 
objectives, strategies, and required expertise, and ensure 
that the team is staffed with professionals with expertise in 
e.g. microbiology, genetics, pharmacokinetics, toxicology, 
and comparator selection. The sponsor should have an 
independent, objective assessment of the following core 
issues:
IPO & LISTING


113
•	 What analysis findings should be assessed?
•	 What are the possible routes of administration (e.g. oral 
vs. intravenous)?
•	 Inter-patient (horizontal vs vertical) differences;
•	 Half-life, plasma/urine concentrations, tissue 
distribution;
•	 Bioavailability and food interactions;
•	 Toxicity, safety and efficacy profile;
•	 All adverse and serious adverse events;
•	 Are the test methods and study design appropriate for 
the intended indication?
•	 Study design - open-label versus blind trial/placebo 
controlled? Randomised? Validated (e.g., approved by 
an institutional review board (IRB))?
•	 Does the study comply with applicable guidelines (e.g., 
the good laboratory practice (GLP) or good clinical 
practice (GCP))?
•	 Are the route of administration, clinical dose and 
duration of treatment continuously being improved?
(I) Assessing clinical development plans
The sponsor should understand the following issues: Is 
the company’s proposed trial focus acceptable to the 
regulator? Are there other drugs already approved on 
this endpoint? If it is a new endpoint, has the National 
Medical Products Administration (NMPA) provided any 
positive feedback or even agreed to a priority review or 
fast track? What is the company’s proposed development 
timeline? Does the timeline cover key milestones? Is the 
timeline realistic and achievable, or overly optimistic? 
What is the company’s clinical trial registration process? 
Is a recruitment centre required? Where are the target 
regions?
(II) Assessing the regulatory outlook
The sponsor should gain a thorough understanding of the 
following issues: What messages are conveyed from the 
communications between the company and the regulator? 
What is the next plan of communications, including 
minutes of meetings, informal communications, written 
correspondence and responses? Are there any regulatory 
issues with similar drugs in development? Are there any 
“clinical holds” or other warning signs? Has the regulator 
inspected the manufacturing facility to ensure compliance 
with the current good manufacture practices (cGMP)?
(III) Ensuring the authenticity and reliability of data
The sponsor is required to verify the data provided or cited 
by the company from multiple sources, such as scientific 
papers, government and non-profit research publications, 
search reports from intellectual property (IP) offices, 
independent third party data, clinical study reports (CSRs, 
published or unpublished, first draft or final version). As 
required by the HKEx, the sponsor should ensure that the 
prospectus disclosures accurately and in detail describe 
all adverse and serious adverse reactions, the adverse 
events, attributability of the adverse events to the design 
of the experiment, and the incidence of adverse events in 
comparable study designs.
(IV) Investigating the company’s manufacturing 
capabilities
The sponsor should conduct an investigation of the 
company about the following issues: Will the company 
manufacture the products independently or via an 
appointed third party contract manufacturing organisation 
(CMO) in the future? What are the technical challenges in 
manufacturing drugs, especially large molecule ones? 
Does the company rely on a single source supplier or is 
there any back-up supplier that can be a substitute? How 
will commercial scale-up (plant, land, personnel and local 
government financial support) be achieved after the drug is 
launched? Has the manufacturing facility been inspected or 
approved by the NMPA? Is the staffing for internal process 
development, chemistry, manufacturing and control (CMC) 
adequate?
IP due diligence is critical for a biopharma company. During 
the due diligence exercise, the sponsor should keep a 
variety of evidence, including written records (e.g., patents 
and related chain of ownership, IP agreements, employee 
invention transfer agreements, and IP-related decisions), 
due diligence interviews, patent protection status, duration 
and geographical scope, exclusivity or enforceability of 
proprietary ownership. If the company has an IPR dispute, 
the sponsor should understand the current status, the 
timing of key awards and settlements, etc. of the dispute. 
In addition, the sponsor should also understand whether 
there is any third party infringement of the company’s IPRs 
and the measures taken, whether the company is using 
rights of any government or university, and whether there 
are any issues in the protection of trade secrets.
IV. Takeaways from HKEx’s feedback on 
application review
In the past two years, when reviewing the prospectus of a 
biopharma company, the primary concerns shown in the 
HKEx’s feedback are as follows:
(I) Biotech
•	 Defined terms: The company should clarify the meanings 
of scientific and technical terms when first used.
•	 A complete and faithful disclosure of adverse reactions: 
The sponsor should ensure that the company has 
disclosed all the adverse and serious adverse reactions 
occurring during the clinical trials without omission and 
also explained the known and potential unknown side 
effects.


114
•	 A description of the clinical endpoint: How does the 
company assess the efficacy (based on, e.g., the 
presence of some biological activity, elimination of 
disease, symptom reduction, absence of symptoms, 
and life extension).
(II) Accounting
•	 Accounting for payments: How does the company 
account for the preliminary, annual, milestone and 
royalty payments under licensing and cooperation 
agreements?
•	 Breakdown of research and development costs. The 
costs should be recorded specifically to each core 
product and pipeline product and to each phase of 
trials. 
•	 Stock incentive mechanism: How does the company 
determine the fair value of shares issued to employees? 
The company is required to explain the difference 
between the recent common stock valuation and its 
estimated issue price.
•	 Use of proceeds: Does the estimated proceeds meet 
the requirement of the development plan? The HKEx 
requires the company to ensure it has available sufficient 
working capital to cover 125% of the costs for at least 
12 months from the date of listing. 
(III) IP legal advice
During the listing of a company under Chapter 18A, the 
sponsor should obtain legal advice from the international 
counsel and the in-house patent counsel of the company. 
The IP legal advice is to assist the sponsor in the due 
diligence of the company’s IP to confirm it. In addition to 
disclosures in the prospectus, patent legal advice usually 
covers the following: 
•	 The company is the registrant and exclusive owner of 
its patents;
•	 The company's main product candidates are protected 
by at least one patent that has been granted to the 
company;
•	 No facts have been found to show that the company’s 
patents are unpatentable, invalid or unenforceable;
•	 There are no IP related lawsuits, disputes or threats; 
and
•	 The IP related statement in the prospectus does not 
contain any major omissions or misstatements. 
1. IP due diligence. Due to the long research and 
development period and high investment, drugs rely 
heavily on IP and strong IP protection to maximise financial 
benefits. Since IP is one of the core assets of a biopharma 
company, it is important for the sponsor to carry out due 
diligence to evaluate the value and risks of the company’s 
patents in the IPO course. Given the high technology and 
complex legal requirements of drug patents, due diligence 
requires to cover many dimensions. Even the slightest 
omission may lead to a potential hazard in a post-IPO 
dispute or the investigation by the SFC. In-depth due 
diligence is time and cost consuming. In order to develop 
comprehensive findings within the IPO period of months, 
the sponsor is required to conduct due diligence step by 
step in order to balance effectiveness, efficiency and cost 
control. 
2. Background investigation of patented technologies. 
The sponsor can appoint a third party to find out the 
maturity of industry, the technological development 
path of key competitors, the hot spots and gaps of the 
technological development in the industry, and analyse the 
overall application trend, distribution and key technology 
of patents.
3. Investigation of potential patent ownership disputes. 
The sponsor should investigate agreements on ownership 
of inventions and creations in the employment contract 
between the inventor and the company and the transfer 
certification of the inventor’s patent application right. The 
investigation should focus on whether there is a written 
contract between the company and its third party partner 
and whether the contract contains a clear agreement on 
the IP ownership, so as to establish the integrity of the 
right chain. 
4. Investigation on the stability of patents. In 
pharmaceutical industry, even granted patents may be 
invalidated. As the criteria of review for drug patents 
change dynamically, patents are vulnerable to invalidation 
for some dosage forms and treatment methods. In recent 
years, an increasing number of requests for invalidation 
of drug patents has been accepted by China's Patent 
Reexamination Board. For a biopharma company, the 
stability of patents is of great importance. The sponsor 
should conduct investigation carefully to draw a reliable 
conclusion, taking into account the real-time regulatory 
review criteria.
5. Reliability of clinical data. The inauthenticity of clinical 
data or loss of clinical trial data will not only significantly 
increase the cost of data recovery and retrieval, but 
also lead to delay or failure in the approval process of 
regulatory authorities in serious cases. The sponsor 
should ensure that the company has records of data 
entry and change and appropriate detection, review 
and authorization procedures to prevent data from 
tampering. As any improper disclosure of confidential or 
patent information will give rise to legal liability, product 
development and commercialization may also be delayed. 
The sponsor should pay sufficient attention to the security 
of the company’s trial data. 
6. Investigation of third-party partners. The complex 
process of research and development, clinical trials 
to commercialisation requires sophisticated scientific 
research and technical capabilities. It is therefore crucial 
IPO & LISTING


115
1GCP includes regulations and guidelines implemented by the NMPA and foreign regulators in clinical development.
2GMP and GSP are issued and updated from time to time in accordance with the PRC Drug Administration Law of the People's Republic of China. The purpose of 
GMP and GSP is to maintain the quality of drugs by reducing pollution, cross-contamination and error risks in the manufacturing course, and ensuring that distributors 
comply with regulations in their distribution of drugs.
for the company to manage its clinical activities in an 
orderly manner. Failure of third party partners such as 
CROs, CMOs, sales and marketing agents or distributors 
to fulfil their obligations or terminate the cooperation 
agreements without cause will affect not only the business 
growth ability of the biotech company but also the 
regulatory approval and commercialization of its products. 
The sponsor should evaluate the biotech company’s 
mechanism and process for selecting third party partners, 
including co-outsourcing and outsourcing policies for 
prequalification evaluation, as well as their expertise and 
capabilities. The sponsor should also conduct sufficient 
feasibility studies, including preclinical studies, clinical 
trials, and the whole process from manufacturing to 
supply or distribution of drugs or medical devices. In 
addition, the biopharma company, its CROs, CMOs and 
designated distributors must establish internal control 
systems and comply with GCP
1, cGMP and good supply 
practice (GSP)
2. The sponsor should urge the biotech 
company to establish an ongoing performance monitoring 
mechanism, using key performance indicators (e.g. 
product development, clinical trial timelines, milestones 
and costs) to measure performance. 
7. Government regulation and compliance. The time 
required for a biopharma company to obtain approval from 
the NMPA and foreign regulators is unpredictable, usually 
long after the start of clinical trials and dependent on 
many factors. In addition, approval policies, regulations or 
the type and amount of clinical data required for approval 
may change in the of a product’s clinical development, as 
well as from jurisdiction to jurisdiction. The sponsor should 
ensure that biopharma company (i) has established and 
maintains a complete and up-to-date database of laws 
and regulations; (ii) actively verify these data to ensure 
timely updates of any changes in laws and regulations 
in the database and timely assessment and response 
to the impacts of those changes; (iii) has a preventive 
compliance programme, code of conduct, compliance 
policy and an appointed compliance programme owner 
for non-compliance, frauds or illegal activities; (iv) provides 
regular compliance trainings for employees; (v) develops 
a reporting mechanism to receive reports and complaints 
and protect whistle-blowers from retaliation; and (vi) 
formulates policies and procedures for investigating non-
compliance or misconduct. 
Conclusion
Among a series of reform measures taken by the HKEx, 
allowing unprofitable biotech companies to go public is 
one of the biggest highlights. This, however, does not 
mean lower threshold for listing. Sponsors are relatively 
unfamiliar with the business, products and expertise of 
biopharma companies, and the currently small number 
of companies listed under Chapter 18A provides 
few precedents and less comparable experiences. 
Therefore, sponsors may be subject to penalties such as 
disqualification by the HKEx or even post-IPO investigation 
by the SFC if they fail to conduct due diligence properly 
and assess the risks inadequately due to unfamiliarity the 
company’s business.
Before 2018, the United States is the only choice for 
biopharma companies to go public. Since the introduction 
of Chapter 18A, however, Hong Kong SAR is providing 
more advantages. Backed by the resources from China 
and attracting experienced private equity funds from 
Europe and the United States, the new potentially 
preferred destination sees a good prospect for its 
biotech industry. Due to the high risk of investing in 
biotech companies, it is difficult for investors to assess 
the company's value. When the number of such listed 
companies reaches 30, the HKEx will expand the range of 
products to include ETFs and structured products based 
on relevant representative indexes, so as to help retail 
investors diversify their risks. Sponsors play an important 
role in the listings of biopharma companies. Good due 
diligence and sophisticated IP legal advice will not only 
help sponsors thoroughly understand the expertise 
of biopharma companies and the ecosystem of the 
subindustry, but also meet the requirements of the listing 
rules of the HKEx and security laws and regulations.


116
Since 30 April 2018 when the Hong Kong Stock Exchange (HKEX) introduced the listing 
regime under Chapter 18A of the Main Board Listing Rules (Chapter 18A), pre-revenue 
biotech companies have been allowed to list on the HKEX’s Main Board. As of June 2020, 
18 biotech companies have been listed on the HKEX.
At the beginning of the listing system reform two years ago, the first batch of the listed 
shares did not perform well and did not show a premium as expected by investment 
banks. The current highly asymmetrical valuation of biotech companies listed in Hong 
Kong as well as long R&D cycles, high capital investment and low success rate of product 
launches facing biopharma companies have become investors’ key concerns. The 
difficulty for investors to assess the P/E ratios and valuations of companies has led to 
an overall low trading volume. In order to accurately and objectively assess the valuation 
of a company, investors need to understand the company’s chances of successfully 
Analysis of IPOs of biopharma companies in 
Hong Kong SAR (for issuers)
Sam Huang
Sam Huang
IPO & LISTING


117
developing products and the potential for future value 
growth that the products can bring to the company. As 
a result, comparing with companies in other industries, 
biopharma companies’ prospectuses are more important.
This article introduces the key elements that sponsors 
should consider in their due diligence for biopharma 
companies during the Hong Kong listing process.
In April 2020, the HKEX updated two guidance letters 
(HKEX-GL92-18 and HKEX-GL85-16) and issued a 
new guidance letter (HKEX-GL107-20) to clarify the 
HKEX’s position on the suitability of listing biopharma 
companies and the ability of existing shareholders to 
subscribe for shares in an IPO, and to refine the disclosure 
of prospectuses for biopharma companies. The IPO 
Review Group of the Listing Division of the HKEX has 
two dedicated teams to review biotech companies, 
both of which are staffed by personnel with professional 
backgrounds in biology, medicine and chemistry. 
In general, the HKEX’s guidance letters require that 
companies should use plain language to disclose accurate 
scientific data in the summary section of the prospectus 
to make the data more readable and easy to understand. 
In addition, companies are required to disclose the 
development timeline of their core products in an objective 
manner and warn investors of the risk that they may lose 
all their investment due to R&D failures.
A clear and easy-to-read prospectus needs to have a 
clear description of a company’s business and prospects 
and, in particular, an adequate elaboration on the following 
elements:
1. The company’s core products and pipeline;
2. Clinical development;
3. Description of competition pattern;
4. Commercialization plan for the approved products;
5. Intellectual property;
6. Assessment of regulatory approaches;
7. Cooperative development agreements;
8. Risk factors;
9. Financial disclosure.
I. A company’s core products and pipelines
The essence of a biopharma company is innovation. 
Whether such a company specialises in chemical entities, 
biologics, gene therapies, cell therapies or medical 
devices, its prospectus should show the differences 
between the company’s current products and previous 
or similar products. When describing innovation, a 
prospectus should cover what investors focus on, 
including new mechanisms of action (overall response rate 
(ORR) and complete response (CR)), new mechanisms, 
new targets, new clinical indications, new therapeutic 
principles (limitations of current treatments), undiscovered 
medical needs, new composition of substances, or new 
dosing regimens.
If a company’s core products are medicines or biologics, 
it should describe whether the products are going to 
be used for additional indications (e.g., hepatocellular 
carcinoma, colorectal cancer, renal cell carcinoma, and 
gynaecologic cancers) to maximize the commercial 
potential of its core products. Investors would like to know 
the company’s measures to obtain approval for marketing 
for candidate medicines in late clinical stages as soon as 
possible. For products in the preclinical pipeline developed 
by the company, investors want to know how many new 
products the company is able to put into clinical trials 
each year, whether it has sufficient localisation knowledge 
in designing clinical studies, and whether it has developed 
new candidate medicines in collaboration with research 
institutions.
II. Clinical development
Most prospectuses list product pipelines by pre-clinical, 
mid-clinical, and post-clinical stages in a table. The 
table should list the different phases (e.g. IND and NDA 
phases) of a product, the therapeutic area (subdivided 
into different indications) and the scope of a product’s 
commercialization rights (in China or globally). Obviously, 
medicines that are in or have completed Phase 3 clinical 
trials naturally have greater commercialization potential for 
investors.
For clinical trials, the HKEX requires companies to detail 
what indications a product is targeting, trial sites, the 
number of trial sites, the number of current patients, the 
number of patients planned to be recruited in the future, 
dosage, and the primary endpoint of each trial (overall 
survival or progression-free survival, dose-limiting toxicity, 
tumour response, and clinical and laboratory adverse 
events, etc.). Companies need to disclose how the results 
of clinical studies have helped to assess the safety and 
efficacy of the medicine.
In addition, investors pay attention to how companies 
accelerate the development of innovative medicines. 
As China has been struggling to develop innovative 
medicines through clinical development, most Chinese 
biopharma companies choose to partner with a 
globally renowned third-party CRO (Contract Research 
Organization) to conduct their trials. Whether a biopharma 
company regularly evaluates the CRO to ensure the safety 
of trial subjects, the integrity of trial data and regulatory 
compliance, as well as the achievement of key milestones 
(patient eligibility review, medical data review and serious 
adverse event review) need to be disclosed in the 
prospectus.
Investors will also assess companies’ clinical development 
plan, including the assessment of scientific rationale (e.g., 


118
mechanism of action, preclinical data, available clinical 
data, and study opportunities) and market value (the 
number of patients that can be treated, market analysis 
and competition profile). Companies should disclose the 
following details of the trial protocol: protocol design, 
study objectives and endpoints, study population (sample 
size and inclusion/exclusion criteria), study duration, 
randomization methods, adverse events and serious 
adverse events, quality control and quality assurance and 
data management; trial preparation (site selection and 
laboratory visits); patient recruitment (patient assessment 
according to the study design and obtaining their informed 
consent); patient dosing (daily measurements and adverse 
event monitoring) and outcome measurement (assessment 
of efficacy and safety endpoint data).
III. Description of competition pattern
It is critical to help investors understand and evaluate the 
competitive environment in which a company operates. 
The company can thus recognize product-related 
indications, new products in development, stages of 
development and company-sponsored development, as 
well as the types and progress of biosimilars.
Market research is the basis for evaluating the competitive 
environment. Market research on biopharma companies 
falls into the following categories: academic research, 
research by government agencies (e.g., FDA, CDC, 
and WHO), research on proprietary data (e.g., from 
independent research and data analysis providers such 
as AMR), research commissioned by companies (e.g., 
company-sponsored reports from third-party consultants), 
or research conducted by companies themselves. The 
HKEX requires issuers to include in the prospectus the 
differences between their products and competitive 
products in technology, indications, and target markets, 
and the competition facing their core products and other 
major pipeline products in the intended target markets 
(including the names, prices, patent expiration dates, and 
subsidy and medicine-grant arrangements of competitors’ 
pipeline products for the same indications).
When describing the industry to which its products 
belong, a company should cite industry reports describing 
the total incidence rate, cure rate, etc. for the indications 
related to their products, and may also project the 
market size in the next five years as well as the sales and 
compound annual growth rate of such products in the 
Chinese and foreign markets. Guidance Letter GL107-20 
requires companies to introduce the names, indications, 
and clinical trial stages of their competitors’ products. If 
there are marketed medicines, companies should disclose 
the current sales, subsidies, medicine grant arrangements, 
and patent expiration status of the medicine globally or in 
China.
IV. Commercialization plan for the approved 
products
Commercialization and potential market prospects are 
important indicators for investors to estimate the value of 
a company. The key to competitiveness of a biopharma 
R&D company lies in its ability to capture the market 
in time. Whoever can take the lead in successfully 
developing a product and getting it approved for 
marketing will win in this market and reap rich profits. 
Whether the product is a medicine, a biologic or a medical 
device, it is not easy to get a head start in the market. 
Take tumour immunotherapy (immune checkpoint) as 
an example: although different biopharma companies’ 
products are advertised for different indications, in fact, 
PD-1 medicines, as biological macromolecules, though 
for different indications, share the same mechanism 
of action and basic structure in principle, and they are 
only different in biological preparation and structural 
details. These differences, however, do not change the 
therapeutic nature of PD-1 medicines. In the context of 
medical insurance cost control, the domestic market for 
PD-1 medicines is shrinking to a certain extent. The PD-1 
market in China values at RMB 30.5 billion based on 
annual medical expenses of RMB 60,000 after medical 
insurance negotiations; if the price of PD-1 drops to 
RMB 30,000 on a full year basis, it is expected that the 
market size may shrink to RMB 23.6 billion. With a limited 
market size, market competition would become extremely 
intense. Therefore, in this case, if a company has a large 
number of existing competing medicines and candidate 
medicines, it will need to explain in great length why its 
products have an advantage over those of its competitors. 
However, considering risks and legal liabilities, most 
sponsors will not include in prospectuses studies on the 
penetration rate of patients with indications and price 
estimates or product models developed by companies 
based on these studies.
For biopharma companies that have yet to make a profit, 
the description of manufacturing can be relatively simple. 
Companies should ensure the source and availability 
of key supply chain, describing the infrastructure and 
future expansion plans designed to meet Chinese 
and international pharmaceutical standards, and 
manufacturing facilities that comply with international 
Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP).
For cost and risk management reasons, early-stage 
biologics companies do not typically have a large sales 
team. If commercialization is just within 12 months, or 
before launching the first product, a company should 
have a long-term plan to scale up the commercialization 
team and hire a commercial team with sales, marketing 
and market access. Investors generally believe that 
an experienced commercialization team will enhance 
IPO & LISTING


119
the company’s competitiveness. In addition, if the 
company has co-selling arrangements with international 
pharmaceutical enterprises, it can consolidate its 
competitive position in the market by leveraging these 
enterprises’ in-depth knowledge of the Chinese market 
and their long-established sales networks in the Chinese 
market.
Commercialization functions of biopharma companies 
typically include marketing, sales, medical affairs, 
and market access. If a company plans to begin 
commercialization within 12 months, it may provide 
specific steps, such as whether the company intends to 
build its sales team or to build one through partnerships. 
If the company is building its own team, it should describe 
the size of the sales team and the target institutions (e.g., 
specialty clinics, transplant centres, and tertiary hospitals). 
The commercialization plan should be developed based 
on the marketing strategy.
Most biopharma companies have since their inception 
benchmarked themselves against the world’s leading 
pharmaceutical giants and set out to create a fully 
integrated platform for the discovery, development, CMC 
and production and commercialization of candidate 
medicines to apply their products to multiple diseases. A 
fully integrated platform enables different functional teams 
to collaborate seamlessly across key links of a candidate 
medicine’s lifecycle, thereby increasing the speed and 
success rate of development and reducing development 
costs. If cooperating with a research institution or a 
pharmaceutical company, the company need to disclose 
the background of such cooperation, the details of 
material terms, the allocation of intellectual property, 
the markets targeted by the product, and whether the 
company is prioritizing the development of any products of 
strategic or commercial significance. For companies that 
have already commercialized, pricing, insurance coverage 
and exclusive sales need to be discussed in detail.
V. Intellectual property
The intellectual property of biopharma companies is 
of great importance. Under Chapter 18A, an applicant 
must have a registered patent, patent application or 
intellectual property right in respect of its core products. 
From the prospectuses of listed biotech companies, it is 
found that in addition to their registered patents or patent 
applications, such companies often enter into license-
in arrangements with other biotech companies involving 
their core products. Such biotech issuers have obtained 
exclusive licenses either to develop, manufacture and 
commercialize their core products or to market certain 
commercialized products.
When describing patents, the company should indicate 
the type and scope of protection of the patents, whether 
the patents have been issued or are pending, whether the 
company owns patents licensed to third parties, whether 
the patents are listed in the FDA’s Orange Book, the region 
in which the patents were filed and issued (whether patent 
protection is available in the company’s primary market for 
the product), and the duration of patent protection. 
In addition to intellectual property, trade secrets can 
also provide protection for biopharma companies. Trade 
secrets cover a wide scope, including confidential and 
unpatented proprietary technology (e.g., manufacturing 
know-how), confidentiality agreements, confidentiality 
agreements limiting disclosure, physical operational 
restrictions (e.g., restricted access, firewalls, access 
rights), and exclusive, non-competitive and other 
restrictive contracts.
VI. Assessment of regulatory approaches
Companies should disclose in the prospectus the phases 
of their core and pipeline products, including preclinical 
development, application and review of investigational 
new drug (IND), Phase I, II, III and IV (post-marketing) 
trials, new drug application (NDA), biologics license 
application (BLA) and approvals, accelerated development 
and review process, and abbreviated new drug application 
(ANDA). The HKEX requires companies to disclose a 
summary of oral or written communications with the 
competent authority (e.g., the National Medical Products 
Administration of the PRC, the “NMPA”) regarding 
clinical trials, including communications at the meeting 
before NDA, the competent authority’s approval for the 
next phase of clinical trials, and whether the product is 
included in the priority review process. If the competent 
authority raises significant concerns about the clinical trial, 
the company also needs to give a truthful statement. If 
the company’s product is classified as an orphan drug 
or an innovative therapy, the company needs to disclose 
the benchmarks for the drug to meet the regulatory 
pathway, the exemptions granted under that regulatory 
classification, and the benefits of obtaining approval under 
this pathway.
VII. Co-development agreements
Whether or not a biopharma company reaches the 
commercialization stage, its co-development of candidate 
medicines with major international pharmaceutical 
companies can not only reduce R&D costs and risks, but 
also help the company quickly gain market advantage. 
Investors are very interested in the terms of the company’s 
cooperation agreements with such pharmaceutical 
companies. Except for the details of candidate medicines 
restricted from disclosure by the company as set forth in 


120
the confidentiality terms of the cooperation agreement, 
the company should describe the scope and content of 
the cooperation, for example, whether it is an exclusive 
license (with or without geographic restrictions), co-
development, or a joint sales arrangement. Investors 
generally believe that cooperation agreements with top 
tier international pharmaceutical companies such as 
Lilly and Amgen reflect the high R&D level of biopharma 
companies. Strategic international partners can provide 
a strong boost to a company's expansion, including 
expertise and technology, speed, flexibility and a lower 
cost structure.
Most cooperation agreements stipulate whether the 
partners will share the costs of developing medicines 
in China and share the difference between net sales 
and expenses equally. International pharmaceutical 
companies make upfront payments to the company as 
consideration for medicine development and its rights and 
obligations under the agreement. If the net sales target 
is achieved, the biopharma company will be entitled to 
receive phased payments. Investors take notice of how 
the parties make decisions regarding the development 
and commercialization of the Chinese products, i.e., 
which party has the final say on the development of 
the Chinese products, or which party has the final 
decision on commercialization and development after 
regulatory approval of the products? Do the parties 
maintain ownership of the intellectual property under 
their respective development? Is there a one-way or two-
way grant of certain patents, know-how and licenses 
(non-exclusive or exclusive)? And what is the term of the 
agreements (X years after the first commercial sale, or 
according to the patent term, or renewed on a yearly basis 
by region, etc.)?
VIII. Risk factors
Article 18A.05 of the Main Board Listing Rules requires 
biotech companies to prominently disclose to investors 
a warning that the relevant core product may not 
ultimately be successfully developed and marketed. 
Companies should describe the risks and uncertainties 
that are common to biopharma companies, especially 
the sustained net losses in the foreseeable future for 
companies in the early stage of clinical or technological 
development. Second, a company’s operations and 
prospects are heavily dependent on candidate medicines 
or biologics that have not yet been brought to market (and 
the possibility that candidate products may never enter 
the market). Lastly, companies should remind investors 
that product development and commercialization are 
dependent on continued financing, which the companies 
cannot guarantee and which could result in significant 
share dilution.
(I) Risks related to development and commercialization
A company should describe in the prospectus the 
following aspects: First, the company’s operations, 
clinical development, regulatory approval and review, 
manufacturing processes and commercialization are 
all still in their early stages and have not yet matured. 
The company’s operations and prospects are heavily 
dependent on its capabilities to develop medicines and to 
commercialize and gain general acceptance for candidate 
products that are not currently approved or marketed. 
The company should explain that as market acceptance 
of a medicine is capricious and it is difficult to predict the 
pricing of a medicine, the company therefore is not able to 
control market fluctuations. As a result, even if a medicine 
in development receives regulatory approval, it may not 
gain the market acceptance from physicians, patients, 
third-party payers and other participants that would be 
required to win commercial success.
(II) Risks related to regulatory approvals and compliance
Companies need to clarify that the marketability and 
commercial success of their products depend almost 
entirely on regulatory review, which is unpredictable, and 
where a regulatory hold is sufficient to undo medicine 
development. Companies need to make clear that there is 
significant uncertainty about obtaining regulatory approval 
for reasons including: 1) the company cannot demonstrate 
the safety or efficacy of the medicine or biologic; 2) 
there are delays or difficulties in enrolling patients in 
clinical trials; 3) clinical trial sites cannot be successfully 
opened; or 4) there are potential adverse side effects or 
unexpected characters of the medicine. It is likely to take 
a lot of time for a candidate medicine to obtain regulatory 
approval from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA), the PRC National Medical Products Administration 
(NMPA), the European Medicines Agency (EMA) or other 
equivalent medicine authorities. And it is time-consuming 
for companies to comply with increasing new regulations 
and policies. Companies will also have to pay a significant 
amount of money to cope with such ongoing compliance 
obligations and regulatory scrutiny. Even after the costs 
are incurred, companies will be subject to significant 
penalties if they do not comply with healthcare, fraud and 
other laws.
(III) Risks related to manufacturing and third-party R&D
Whether conducting preclinical studies and trials with third 
parties or manufacturing medicines in development with 
CMOs, most biopharma companies rely to some extent 
on cooperation agreements. If these third parties fail to 
fulfil the contractual agreements or reach the expected 
targets, companies may not be able to obtain regulatory 
IPO & LISTING


121
approval for or commercialize their medicines, and their 
medicines in development and business may thus be 
impaired.
(IV) Risks related to intellectual property
Companies need to pay attention to deficiencies in IP 
protection or exclusivity, such as inadequate patent 
protection periods. If a company licenses out third 
party IP
, it should full consider the possible risks of non-
compliance with obligations under the license agreement. 
Companies need to point out to investors the risks posed 
by the differences in IP protection in different countries 
or regions. If IP protection is insufficient, competitors 
will develop and even commercialize in advance the 
products and technologies similar or identical to those of 
the company, and compete directly with the company, 
thereby undermining the company’s production prospects.
IX. Financial disclosure 
In response to the widespread concern of investors as to 
whether the proceeds from an IPO are sufficient to reach 
the next tipping point, the HKEX requires that the IPO 
proceeds need to cover at least 125% of the company’s 
costs (including general administrative costs, operating 
costs, and R&D costs) for at least 12 months after its 
IPO. In addition, the company is required to disclose the 
following information in the prospectus: (1) the valuation 
of each round of financing prior to the IPO, with an 
explanation of significant valuation fluctuations in previous 
rounds in light of product development and competitive 
advantages; (2) the background of senior investors and 
their performance record of investment in the biotech 
sector; (3) any net liability arising from significant changes 
in fair value during the performance record period as a 
result of the conversion of the convertible debenture to 
net assets at the time of listing; (4) capital consumption 
rate, i.e. the ability to survive with or without proceeds 
from listing during a reasonable period; and (5) a schedule 
for the next round of financing based on the capital 
consumption rate.
Biopharma companies rely on ongoing equity financing. 
Under international accounting standards, convertible 
and redeemable preferred shares and put options 
on the issuance of common shares are financial 
instruments and are calculated at fair value, and their 
changes are accounted for as other financial liabilities 
in the income statement. For changes in the fair value 
of financial instruments, in addition to the disclosure 
that the company should make based on the results of 
each evaluation round by private equity investors, it is 
sometimes necessary to refer to the valuation reports of 
international commercial valuers. Preferred shares will 
be automatically converted into shares at the time of the 
IPO and the company may need to revalue the preferred 
shares prior to pricing. Such changes (losses) in the fair 
value of the preferred shares may have a material impact 
on the company’s finance and performance and therefore 
need to be disclosed in the prospectus.
Most of biopharma companies’ products have not yet 
been approved for commercial sales and therefore the 
companies do not generate sales revenue. The vast 
majority of a company’s operating losses are incurred 
by R&D expenses, administrative expenses, business 
development expenses and financing costs. Investors 
pay close attention to the composition of the company’s 
significant expenses and operating losses in future years, 
which generally consist of further preclinical R&D for 
candidate medicines, continued clinical development and 
pursuit of regulatory approval, commercialization activities 
for the launch of pipeline products, and the hiring of 
additional personnel to operate a fully integrated platform 
with advanced pipeline products for clinical candidate 
medicines.
Conclusion
High barriers, big investment and long cycles pose 
opportunities and challenges to most biopharma 
companies when they list in Hong Kong. China’s biotech 
companies have great potential. Despite a considerable 
gap between China and developed countries in the R&D 
of innovative medicines, China is seeing an improving 
R&D environment and has released policies to support 
medicine R&D, such as encouraging innovation and 
opening up green channels for the approval of innovative 
medicines. The R&D and review period of innovative drugs 
has been further shortened, extending the effective life 
cycle of products. A large number of premium biopharma 
companies have been listed in Hong Kong. Since the 
release of Chapter 18A in 2018, Hong Kong has become 
the second largest biotech financing centre in the world. 
A good and readable prospectus can not only meet 
the requirements of Hong Kong listing rules and U.S. 
securities laws, but also fully demonstrate a company’s 
core competence and commercialization prospects.


122
I. Introduction
In recent years, how a company manages the long-term environmental and social 
impacts of its business activities (i.e. the environmental, social and governance or ESG 
concern) has received increasing attention from regulators and the community. This year, 
international tensions, global environmental issues such as climate change, and regional 
social issues such as community development have revealed their political sensitivity and 
strategic significance in economic development.
Accordingly, it is becoming increasingly significant for companies to make ESG 
disclosures. In China Mainland, under the current ESG disclosure framework and “green 
finance” policy, some companies listed on Shanghai and Shenzhen Stock Exchanges are 
required to make ESG disclosures, and enterprises in a particular industry or of a particular 
nature are also obligated to do so. The ESG performance is gradually becoming one of the 
factors influencing investment decisions in the capital market. MSCI, Dow Jones Industrial 
Average, FTSE Russell, and other international indices give China-listed companies ESG 
ratings based on their ESG disclosures when selecting their A-share components.
In Hong Kong SAR, the Environmental, Social and Governance Reporting Guide (the 
“ESG Guide”) attached as an Appendix to the Listing Rules of The Stock Exchange 
of Hong Kong Limited (“HKEx” or the “Exchange”), as amended in December 2019, 
has taken effect as of 1 July 2020. A company listed or to be listed in Hong Kong SAR 
(the “issuer”) is required to comply with the ESG Guide for ESG reporting for financial 
years commencing after 1 July 2020. In brief, the new ESG rules introduce mandatory 
disclosure requirements. To be specific, the ESG Guide requires disclosure of significant 
climate-related issues; amends some “Environmental” key performance indicators (KPIs) 
such as emissions, energy consumption, water efficiency and wastes reduction; upgrades 
the disclosure obligation of all “Social” KPIs to “comply or explain”; and introduces the 
“Supply Chain Management” and “Anti-corruption” KPIs.
In response, we introduce this series of articles to review the ESG Guide. The new 
mandatory requirements, including governance and reporting principles, provide guidance 
for the “Environmental” and “Social” reporting. In this article, we will first provide a brief 
introduction and explanatory notes of the mandatory ESG disclosures.
II. Introducing mandatory disclosure requirements with a focus on the 
process and approach
As stated above, it is the first time for the Exchange to introduce mandatory disclosure 
requirements in the ESG Guide. A brief review of the history of the ESG Guide: When 
ESG Guide in effect: key points of 
“mandatory disclosure”
Wang Jianxue, Anthony Wan, Luo Ai, Tang Xiaojing
COMPLIANCE
Wang Jianxue
 Anthony Wan  
Luo Ai 


123
the ESG Guide was issued initially in 2012, the ESG 
issues were all “recommended disclosures”; in the first 
amendment in 2015, some ESG issues were upgraded to 
“comply or explain”; in this second amendment, in addition 
to upgrading all ESG issues to “comply or explain”, 
mandatory disclosures are introduced. At present, 
the mandatory disclosures are about the ESG-related 
governance structure, reporting principles and reporting 
boundary, which mainly reflect the issuer’s governance 
process and reporting approach on environmental and 
social issues.
Under the mandatory ESG disclosure requirements, 
“reporting boundary” identifies which entities or operations 
are included in the ESG report, which can be selected and 
explained in regard to specific subject areas and aspects, 
as is not elaborated herein due to limited space. In this 
article, we will further explain the “Governance Structure” 
and “Reporting Principles” below.
(I) Governance structure reflecting “board-level 
engagement”
The mandatory disclosure of ESG-related governance 
structure supplements the existing mandatory disclosure 
requirements under the Corporate Governance Code and 
Corporate Governance Report attached as an Appendix to 
the HKEx Listing Rules. In the ESG Guide, the governance 
structure refers specifically to the board’s governance 
mechanism for ESG issues, which requires a statement 
in the name of the board, emphasising the board’s role of 
leadership and “full responsibility” for the ESG issues. In 
support of the new disclosure requirements, the Exchange 
released an updated step-by-step guide to ESG reporting 
titled “How to Prepare an ESG Report” (the “Guide to 
ESG Reporting”) and a new guide for board and directors 
titled “Leadership Role and Accountability in ESG” in 
March 2020, demonstrating the importance the Exchange 
attaches to board-level governance.
1. Elements of the statement from the board
Specifically, in an ESG report, a statement from the board 
contains the following elements:
(i)	 the board’s oversight of ESG issues, which embraces 
the strategy and organisational structure of the issuer;
(ii)	 the board’s ESG management approach and strategy, 
including the process used to evaluate, prioritise and 
manage material ESG-related issues (including risks 
to the issuer’s businesses) and to identify strategic 
priorities in managing ESG issues for the short and 
medium-term; and
(iii)	 how the board reviews progress made against ESG-
related goals and targets.
2. Form of the statement from the board 
The statement from the board on ESG governance 
may either stand alone or be disclosed across various 
sections of the ESG report, so long as it is abundantly 
clear for readers to understand the board’s governance 
of ESG issues, according to the official response to Query 
7 contained in FAQ Series 18 - Questions Relating to 
Environmental, Social and Governance Reporting. In other 
words, the ESG governance structure can be presented 
in a separate section or disclosed in other sections as 
appropriate, e.g. disclosing the board’s ESG materiality 
assessment when explaining how the materiality principle 
is applied; reflecting the board’s governance elements 
in the disclosure of environmental or social issues; and 
disclosing the details of the ESG committee in the “Board 
Committees” section and the board’s management of 
ESG risks in the “Risk Management and Internal Control” 
section in the corporate governance report.
3. Requirements for IPO applicants
In addition to issuers already listed in Hong Kong SAR, 
companies to be listed there are also advised to follow the 
Guidance Letter HKEX-GL86-16 (the “Guidance Letter”) 
updated in July 2020. The Guidance Letter highlights that 
the boards of IPO applicants are required to ensure that 
the required corporate governance and ESG mechanisms 
are in place during the IPO process and that additional 
disclosure is made in the prospectus to promote 
sustainable development, good corporate governance 
and diversity. In the E. “Business” section, paragraphs 3.2 
and 3.7(a) and (b) specifically provide that the applicants 
should: i) include a statement on their compliance culture; 
and ii) put in place mechanisms that enable them to meet 
the Exchange’s requirements on corporate governance 
and ESG well in advance. Directors are expected to be 
involved in the formulation of such mechanisms and 
related policies. Applicants are therefore recommended 
to appoint directors (including independent non-executive 
directors) as early as possible so that directors can 
engage in the formulation of the necessary mechanisms 
and policies on corporate governance and ESG.
(II) Application of reporting principles
The ESG Guide sets out four principles of reporting - 
materiality, quantitative, balance and consistency, and 
requires a description of the application of the materiality, 
quantitative and consistency principles in the preparation 
of the ESG report. The application of the materiality 
principle imposes substantive requirements on the ESG 
governance process, as further explained below.
Materiality is defined as the threshold at which ESG 
issues determined by the board are sufficiently important 
to investors and other stakeholders that they should be 
reported. An issuer is now required to explain how the 
materiality principle is complied with and should disclose: 
i) the process to identify and the criteria for the selection 
of material ESG factors; ii) if a stakeholder engagement 
is conducted, a description of significant stakeholders 


124
identified, and the process and results of the issuer’s 
stakeholder engagement—the stakeholder engagement 
is intended to seek the views of the stakeholders; and 
iii) for the “comply or explain” environmental and social 
issues under the ESG Guide, if a certain aspect or KPI 
is not material to the issuer’s business or operations, 
the issuer may withhold disclosure and explain the non-
disclosure on the grounds of “immateriality”, stating that 
the relevant data is not material based on the nature of 
its own business and operations, rather than deliberately 
disclosing the irrelevant information, which also reflects 
the application of the materiality principle.
1. “Materiality assessment” mandatory
At the core of mandatory disclosure is the process of how 
an issuer identifies material ESG issues, or “materiality 
assessment”. Systematic materiality assessments, which 
were once good industry practice, are now considered 
mandatory. Issuers who have conducted materiality 
assessments will need to improve the steps, for example, 
from identifying relevant issues, prioritising identified issues 
to identifying material issues, and to disclose the details of 
implementation, while those who have not yet done so will 
need to put it on the agenda.
For the issues to be assessed, issuers can screen out 
irrelevant issues against all “comply or explain” issues 
- or, of course, against other more stringent reporting 
standards and by adopting the usual issues of their 
peers - and conduct internal and external materiality 
assessments for each issue. Internal materiality refers to 
the impact on the business; and external materiality refers 
to the importance to stakeholders other than investors. 
Internal materiality is generally assessed by senior 
managers and/or key employees; and external materiality 
can be assessed through stakeholder engagement as 
recommended by the Guide to ESG Reporting.
2. “Stakeholder engagement” recommended
The “stakeholder engagement” for materiality assessment, 
unlike “board-level engagement”, is not mandatory and 
is a recommended tool for identifying material issues. 
In addition, stakeholder engagement may already be 
part of a company’s day-to-day operations, and many 
Hong Kong companies have voluntarily disclosed their 
stakeholder engagements that cover ESG issues in their 
ESG reports in previous years. The ESG Guide makes it 
clear that if a stakeholder engagement is conducted, a 
description of significant stakeholders, and the process 
and results of the stakeholder engagement should be 
disclosed.
Stakeholders are groups or individuals who are expected 
to affect or rely on the company, such as shareholders, 
investors, customers (including potential customers), 
suppliers, business partners, employees, government and 
regulators, NGOs and lobby groups, local communities, 
competitors, peers, and experts and specialists. Of these, 
those with a high degree of influence and reliance on 
the company are the key stakeholders and the company 
may conduct stakeholder engagement only with the key 
stakeholders.
Effective and feasible forms of stakeholder engagement, 
or stakeholder consultation, are flexible and diverse. It 
does not have to be a large on-site event, but can be 
either an all-employee meeting, a representative meeting 
or individual interviews, a workshop, a round-table or a 
panel discussion, or simply a telephone interview, a written 
consultation, or an online questionnaire. Companies can 
even collect stakeholder views in their daily contact with 
customers (including potential customers), suppliers, 
employees, and other stakeholders.
Conclusion
It is easy to see that the Exchange is pushing for “board-
level engagement” and “stakeholder engagement” 
through the mandatory disclosure requirements under the 
ESG Guide in order to build good corporate governance 
and market confidence. This motive and movement were 
already indicated in the Analysis of Environmental, Social 
and Governance Practice Disclosure in 2018 released by 
the Exchange at the end of 2019. The ESG disclosure 
review, besides “comply or explain” issues, paid special 
attention to the sample issuer’s disclosure in respect of 
any assessment of materiality and the overall approach 
to ESG reporting. The focus of the recommendations 
has been on board-level engagement and materiality 
assessments. 
For Mainland companies, their ESG management or 
reporting generally does not meet the Exchange’s 
requirement aligning with international best practice. 
Their ESG reporting is more a matter of public relations, 
being prepared based on a more casual standard and 
form that do not comply with the four reporting principles. 
With regard to mandatory disclosure requirements, it is 
advisable for the Mainland enterprises listed in Hong Kong 
SAR, at the beginning of the financial year commencing 
from 1 July 2020, to start collecting reporting materials 
early, build the required infrastructure or take the 
necessary actions to produce an ESG report that meets 
the requirements in both substance and form.
COMPLIANCE


125
In recent years, environmental-related policies and regulatory requirements are becoming 
increasingly stringent. The environmental risks not only have an impact on a company’s 
social responsibility or reputation, but may also directly and adversely affect its financial 
position. In addition, with the rising environmental awareness and tightened regulation, a 
company’s attitude towards environmental issues also influences investors’ evaluation of 
its growth potential. Environmental issues are increasingly relevant to the development of 
companies.
Against such backdrop, investors are increasingly concerned about how well companies 
are identifying and managing their environmental risks. The rating of ESG indexes, such 
as the MSCI ESG Ratings, Dow Jones Sustainability Indexes and FTSE Russell’s ESG 
Ratings, for a company’s ESG profile, also influences the investment decisions of a 
growing number of investors. ESG refers to Environment, Social and Governance, which 
are the three main aspects related to corporate sustainability and are the main non-
financial factors that investors consider when making investment analysis and decisions. 
ESG drives companies to maximize both their own interests and the social value. Data 
proves that companies with good ESG performance tend to perform well in their operation 
and finance. Such companies are able to anticipate and manage current and future 
economic, environmental, and social opportunities and risks, and attach importance to 
innovation in quality and productivity, environmental protection, energy conservation and 
emission reduction. They are also able to reduce operating costs, and create competitive 
advantages and long-term value. 
To guide companies listed or to be listed in Hong Kong SAR (“issuers”) to make more 
standardized and appropriate disclosure of ESG risks, the Stock Exchange of Hong Kong 
Limited (the “HKEx”) published the new ESG reporting requirements in the Consultation 
Conclusions on Review of the Environmental, Social and Governance Reporting Guide 
and Related Listing Rules (the “Consultation Conclusions”) on 18 December 2019. The 
new requirements would be implemented for financial years commencing on or after 1 
July 2020. 
We have sorted out the 2019 edition of the Environment, Social and Governance 
Reporting Guide (the “ESG Guide”), the Consultation Conclusions, the How to Prepare An 
ESG Report- A Step-by-Step Guide to ESG Reporting dated March 2020 (the “Guide”) 
and its Appendices, and made the following recommendations regarding environmental-
related disclosures and the preparation of reports by issuers:  
How should companies report on 
environmental matters under the new ESG 
reporting regulations of the HKEx?
Wang Jianxue, Luo Ai, Pan Faluan, Huang Yueyuan  
Wang Jianxue
Luo Ai 


126
I. Learning about the adjustment of environmental-related disclosures in the new regulations 
The environmental-related disclosures are subject to “comply or explain” provision as set out in the amendment to the 
ESG Guide made by the HKEx in December 2015. Based on the 2015 edition of the ESG Guide, the 2019 edition has 
additionally raised the following requirements for environmental-related disclosures:
•	 Disclosing direct (Scope 1) and energy indirect (Scope 2) greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions separately;
1
•	 Describing the targets set in terms of reducing emissions, waste, and improving energy use and water efficiency;
•	 Describing the steps taken by the issuers to achieve the targets set in terms of reducing emissions, waste, and 
improving energy use and water efficiency; 
•	 Making climate change related disclosure, including the policies on identification and mitigation of significant climate-
related issues which have impacted, and those which may impact, the issuers.
The adjustments in the 2019 edition of the ESG Guide place a higher disclosure burden on companies listed or to be 
listed in Hong Kong SAR. For example, in terms of the climate change related disclosure requirement, the issuer may 
collect relevant data for the first time, and therefore it will take more time to set up the relevant system and accordingly 
more preparation work is required.
II. Preparing the ESG report by considering the issuer’s reality and geographical location 
(I) The ESG report should be prepared “on a case-by-case basis”
While the ESG Guide provides basic guidance on how to present the report, the HKEx has further encouraged issuers to 
prepare the ESG report based on their own reality in various documents it has issued.
1. The report may refer to standards of the relevant industry
As the relevant reporting standards of an industry are made for that specific industry, the guidance on disclosure of 
specific ESG-related risks in such industry is more relevant to the actual situation of companies in the industry. In Article 
8 of the ESG Guide, HKEx encourages companies to refer to industry reporting guidelines that are more relevant to their 
own reality on the basis of meeting the requirements of the ESG Guide.
Example:
•	A pastoral company, while preparing its 2019 Corporate Annual ESG Report in accordance with the ESG Guide of 
the HKEx, referred to the Sustainability Reporting Standards of Global Reporting Initiative (GRI) and its supplementary 
guidance for the industry relevant to the company.
“Basis of preparation - The report is prepared in accordance with the ESG Guide of the HKEx, with reference to the 
disclosure indicators set out in the GRI Sustainability Reporting Standards and its supplementary guidance for the food 
processing industry.”
2. The reporting boundary should be determined according to the business and reality of the company
The ESG Guide does not set criteria for issuers to identify the entities or operations that “should be included in the ESG 
report”. Companies are expected to determine their own guidelines for defining their reporting boundary based on their 
own business, including but not limited to:
•	 Being consistent with that disclosed in the annual report;
•	 Financial thresholds, such as the subsidiaries or operations contributing to a certain percentage of the issuer group’s 
total revenue or more; and
•	 Risk level, such as the operations exceeding a certain risk level despite being a non-major business sector of the 
issuer’s group.
1In accordance with the Reporting Guidance on Environmental Key Performance Indicators (KPIs), Scope 1 refers to direct GHG emissions, which mainly includes 
GHG emissions from fuel combustion and refrigerator and air conditioning equipment of the issuer; Scope 2 refers to energy indirect GHG emissions, which mainly 
includes GHG emissions from the production of electricity or gas.
COMPLIANCE


127
The Guide further clarifies that an issuer may adopt a different reporting boundary at different levels or under different 
provisions in certain circumstances.
Example:
•	In determining the reporting boundary of its 2019 ESG Report, a major mining company specifies that “the report 
disclosures (i.e. the scope of data) are consistent with the company’s annual report, with some data being specifically 
explained”. Combined with the company’s 2019 annual report, the consolidation scope of the statements of the 
company is determined on the basis of control.
In addition, the issuer uses the major business as a guideline to determine the scope of GHG emission data disclosure, 
making it clear that the scope only includes its holding or wholly-owned mining and smelting enterprises, and excludes 
hotels, property companies, construction companies and office buildings of headquarters and other units.
3. The depth and breadth of disclosing environmental KPIs should depend on the company’s reality
In identifying the reporting boundary of environmental-related matters, the ESG Guide states that, in addition to the 
matters contained therein to which the “comply or explain” principle applies, the HKEx encourages issuers to disclose 
environment-related matters that they believe have a material impact on the environment or stakeholders. In the Analysis 
of Environmental, Social and Governance Practice Disclosure in 2018, the HKEx explicitly encourages companies to 
make good use of the “comply or explain” principle to withhold disclosure of immaterial matters. 
The Guide further provides a table of the materiality of different sectors at various levels for the reference of issuers, and 
states that issuers should determine the extent and scope of disclosure according to their own reality.
Example:
•	 A decorating company explains, with regard to the KPI of total packaging materials used for manufactured goods 
reported in its 2020 ESG report, that its major business is “providing a wide range of interior decorating solutions” and 
that “packaging materials are not material to our group’s operation as the group does not manufacture such materials. 
Therefore, the relevant data have not been disclosed.”
4. The reporting method should be relevant to the industry in which the company operates or to its business
HKEx encourages issuers to adopt a reporting method that is relevant to their industry or business. For example, with 
respect to reporting hazardous and non-hazardous waste, the Environmental Key Performance Indicator Reporting 
Guidance (“Environmental KPI Reporting Guidance”) suggests that, if possible, issuers should “report hazardous waste 
split by waste streams that are relevant to its sector, e.g. construction waste, electronic waste, general office waste, 
etc.”.
Example:
•	In its 2019 ESG report, a large mining company uses its industry-related approach to report general solid waste (non-
hazardous waste) categorized as tailings, waste rock and domestic waste.
(II) The ESG report should be prepared “according to local conditions”
In the Guide, HKEx specifies that issuers should collect, calculate and report on environmental KPIs taking into account 
the geographical location of their business and referring to other information, specifically:
1. Definitions related to air emissions and hazardous waste should be adjusted in accordance with the regulations 
of the country where the business is located


128
The ESG Guide specifies that air emissions include “NOx, SOx, and other pollutants regulated under national laws and 
regulations”, incorporating pollutants regulated by the countries where the business is located in the reporting boundary.
Example:
•	 In its 2019 ESG report, an investment company, in addition to the nitrogen oxides and sulfur oxides explicitly required 
to be disclosed under the ESG Guide, also made a disclosure on the regulated soot in accordance with the Emission 
standard of air pollutants for thermal power plants (GB13223-2011) of the People's Republic of China, where the 
company’s thermal power business is located.
In addition, the Environmental KPI Reporting Guidance states that hazardous waste includes waste that is “considered 
to be hazardous by domestic legislation” , which specifies that hazardous waste should be determined with reference to 
the definition of “hazardous waste” in the relevant national laws and regulations of the region where the issuer operates.
2. Indirect GHG factors should be determined with reference to those of the country/region where the business is 
located 
The Environmental KPI Reporting Guidance specifies that issuers operating outside Hong Kong should apply the relevant 
emission factors in those countries/regions. The Questions relating to environmental, social and governance reporting 
provides calculation methods of emissions from operations in some other countries.
Example:
•	In its 2019 ESG report, a major real estate company uses different emission factors based on the location of emissions 
when calculating its total indirect (Scope 2) GHG emissions. 
“The Environmental KPI Reporting Guidance of HKEx serves a  reference for GHG emission factors of the grids in 
Mainland of China and Hong Kong SAR; for emission factors of the grids in Australia, please refer to the Australia 
Government National Greenhouse Accounts Factors Australian National Greenhouse Accounts 2019 by Australian 
Government Department of the Environment and Energy; for U.S. grid emission factors, please check the EGRID 
Summary Table 2018 of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency; and for other overseas countries’ grid emission 
factors,  the CO Emissions from Fuel Combustion issued by the International Energy Agency in 2019 is an available 
reference.
3. Water consumption should be reported by considering the extent of water scarcity in the location of the company
The Environmental KPI Reporting Guidance states that since subsidiaries or operations in water-scarce areas may be 
more sensitive to changes in water consumption, issuers should, to the extent practicable, specifically provide data on 
water consumption for subsidiaries or operations in water-scarce areas. 
II. Making appropriate use of the disclosure principle of “comply or explain”
As the ESG Guide covers a wide range of environmental, social and governance issues, and the business and 
geographical locations of the issuers are different, the ESG Guide does not establish “an approach suitable for all 
companies”. The “comply or explain” principle is not mandatory. After careful consideration of the size and complexity 
of their operations and the risks and challenges they face, issuers may deviate from the ESG Guide and explain in their 
ESG reports why they have not reported on the matters required by the relevant provisions.
In the Analysis of Environmental, Social and Governance Practice Disclosure in 2018, HKEx makes it clear that if some 
of the provisions of the “comply or explain” principle are not material to an issuer for reporting purposes, it may be better 
for the issuer to explain such situation. “Explanation” is not a less preferred or secondary option. Indeed if an issuer 
collects data and make disclosure all based on the principle of “compliance”, it may be considered to have not properly 
considered its own situation, and have not fully thought through the identification and management of ESG risks.
COMPLIANCE


129
The issuer should note the following points when explaining the reasons for not disclosing required information: Not 
material, confidentiality constraints, specific legal prohibitions and information not available. Further, the Guide requires 
the issuer to make further elaboration:
•	 Not material  - Specify the reason(s) why this disclosure is considered to be not material; 
•	 Confidentiality constraints - Describe the specific confidentiality constraints prohibiting this disclosure; 
•	 Specific legal prohibitions - Describe the specific legal prohibitions; and 
•	 Information not available - Explain why the relevant information is not available and describe the specific steps being 
taken to obtain the information and the expected timeframe for doing so.
Example:
•	In its 2020 ESG report, a decoration company explained the failure to disclose its total water consumption as a KPI out 
of the reason that “the water consumption data for the major business activities is provided by the client/property and it 
is not provided to our group.”
The major business of the issuer is “providing various interior decoration solutions”, and the projects can be broadly 
classified as rough house decoration, redecoration, restoration, design, etc. With its business mainly carried out in 
houses and properties under the control of the clients, the issuer cannot know the water consumption data in an 
objective manner, and thus effectively explained the reason for not owning such information.
Conclusion
Companies listed or to be listed in Hong Kong SAR should prepare their reports in accordance with the 2019 edition 
of the ESG Guide in order to meet the disclosure requirements of the HKEx. In preparing the report, issuers are 
recommended to seek professional advice on content planning, which will also enable investors to better understand the 
efforts made by the company in ESG matters and other aspects.
We understand that it is indeed important for companies to prepare ESG reports to disclose their environmental matters 
in compliance with the requirements of the Listing Rules. They should also, however, pay attention to governance 
and reflection on environmental matters. Therefore, only by fully examining the identification and management of their 
environmental risks or opportunities can companies truly avoid negative impacts of environmental risks on themselves 
and thus seize opportunities for growth, and achieve a win-win situation for both company development and 
environmental protection. 


130
Compliance is a prerequisite for stable corporate development and a solid guarantee for 
enterprises to improve their international competitiveness. With growing awareness of the 
importance of compliance, enterprises are gradually implementing an integrated global or 
Asia-Pacific compliance system in their internationalization process. Hong Kong SAR and 
the Mainland are two important jurisdictions.
This article mainly covers the following issues: 1) the similarities and differences between 
the competition law of Hong Kong SAR and the anti-monopoly law of the Mainland; 
2) anti-competitive practices regulated by these two competition law regimes; and 3) 
investigation and enforcement approaches of the competition enforcement agencies of 
the two jurisdictions, the consequences of violations and the compliance tips. This article 
is intended to provide reference for enterprises to build their anti-monopoly compliance 
systems in the Asia-Pacific region.
I. Overview of Hong Kong SAR’s competition law regime
The Competition Ordinance (the “Ordinance”), the first cross-sector competition law in 
Hong Kong SAR, was introduced in June 2012 and came into force on 14 December 
2015. The Ordinance mainly contains three “competition rules” aiming at prohibiting anti-
competitive behaviours in Hong Kong SAR:
The Competition Commission (the “Commission”) is the principal competition authority 
in Hong Kong responsible for enforcing the Ordinance through enforcement proceedings 
before the Competition Tribunal (the “Tribunal”). Therefore, the decisions made by the 
Tribunal and other courts are also important sources of law for the competition regime in 
Hong Kong.
How to carry out anti-monopoly compliance in 
the Asia-Pacific Region? 
- Comparison between Hong Kong SAR’s 
Competition Ordinance and the Mainland’s AML
Susan Ning, Chai Zhifeng, Song Xueying, Zhang Xian
Competition 
rules
Content
Application scope
First Conduct 
Rule
Prohibition of anti-competitive 
agreements
The First Conduct Rule and 
the Second Conduct Rule are 
applicable to all industries in 
Hong Kong SAR.
Second 
Conduct Rule
Prohibition of the abuse of 
market power
Merger
Rule
Prohibition of anti-competitive 
merger and acquisition 
arrangements
At present, the Merger Rule only 
applies to mergers involving 
undertakings holding carrier 
licences issued under the 
Telecommunications Ordinance 
(Cap. 106) of Hong Kong SAR.
Susan Ning
Chai Zhifeng
COMPLIANCE


131
1Including the Guideline on the First Conduct Rule, the Guideline on the Second Conduct Rule, the Guideline on the Merger Rule, the Guideline on Complaints, the 
Guideline on Investigations, the Guideline on Applications, etc.
2Including the Enforcement Policy, the Leniency Policy, the Cooperation and Settlement Policy for Undertakings Engaged in Cartel Conduct, the Policy on 
Recommended Pecuniary Penalties, etc.
3See the definition of “serious anti-competitive conduct” in Article 2 Interpretation of the Ordinance.
The Ordinance
The AML
Serious anti-competitive conduct
•	Fixing price
“Fixing, maintaining, increasing or controlling the price for 
the supply of goods or services”;
•	Allocating markets
“Allocating sales, territories, customers or markets for the 
production or supply of goods or services”;
•	Limiting production
“Fixing, maintaining, controlling, preventing, limiting or 
eliminating the production or supply of goods or services”;
•	Bid-rigging, i.e., collusion in bidding.
Other anti-competitive conduct
Horizontal monopoly agreements
•	Fixing or changing commodity prices
•	Restricting the production volume or sales volume of commodities 
•	Allocating the sales market or the purchasing market for raw 
materials
•	Restricting the purchase of new technologies or equipment, or 
the development of new technologies or products
•	Group boycotts
•	Other monopoly agreements recognized as such by the anti-
monopoly enforcement agency of the State Council
Vertical monopoly agreements
•	Fixing the resale prices of commodities to a third party
•	Restricting the minimum resale prices of commodities to a third 
party
•	Other monopoly agreements recognized as such by the anti-
monopoly enforcement agency of the State Council
Comments and analysis
•	Fixing price, allocating markets, limiting production
Under the Ordinance and the AML, price fixing, market allocation and production limitation are all conducts that seriously harm competition. 
In addition, the Commission clarifies in its Guideline on the First Conduct Rule that serious anti-competitive conduct may be presumed to be 
illegal, and that the general exclusion for agreements enhancing economic efficiency is in general unlikely to apply to such conduct. This is 
consistent with the enforcement approach towards such conduct of the anti-monopoly agencies in the Mainland.
•	Bid-rigging
The Ordinance clearly identifies bid-rigging as serious anti-competitive conduct.
The AML does not explicitly list bid-rigging in horizontal monopoly agreements. It is noteworthy that in the Shanghai Anti-Monopoly 
Compliance Guide for Undertakings issued by the Shanghai Municipal Administration for Market Regulation on 26 December 2019, the 
“bid-rigging” is separately listed for the first time as a parallel to other typical conduct of horizontal monopoly agreements such as “fixing 
commodity prices”, which provides some guidance for anti-monopoly compliance of local enterprises. 
The Commission provides a series of detailed guidelines
1 and policy documents
2 on how to interpret and give effect to 
the provisions of the Ordinance, providing practical suggestions and guidance for corporate compliance.
II. First Conduct Rule: Prohibition of anti-competitive agreements
In terms of content, the First Conduct Rule prohibits undertakings (whether competitors or not) from entering into 
arrangements (including agreements, decisions, and concerted practices, collectively “agreements”) that prevent, restrict 
or distort competition in Hong Kong. This is substantially the same as a monopoly agreement under the Anti-Monopoly 
Law of the People’s Republic of China (the “AML”).
In terms of form, the First Conduct Rule and the AML differ in the way they classify anti-competitive agreements. The 
First Conduct Rule categorises specific conduct into “serious anti-competitive conduct”
3 such as fixing price, allocating 
market, limiting production and bid-rigging, and other anti-competitive conduct based on the severity of the harm 
to competition. Both categories of conducts may include horizontal monopoly agreements and vertical monopoly 
agreements. The AML classifies relevant conducts into horizontal monopoly agreements and vertical monopoly 
agreements from the perspective of whether there is a competitive relationship between participants.


132
III. Second Conduct Rule: Prohibition of the abuse of market power
In accordance with the Ordinance, an undertaking that has a substantial degree of market power must not abuse that 
power to harm competition.
The Ordinance
The AML
An undertaking that has a substantial degree of market power in 
a market must not abuse that power by engaging in conduct that 
has as its object or effect the prevention, restriction or distortion of 
competition in Hong Kong:
•	If the conduct involves predatory behaviour towards competitors; 
or
•	If the conduct involves limiting production, markets or technical 
development to the prejudice of consumers.
Undertakings holding dominant market positions are prohibited 
from doing the following by abusing their dominant market 
positions：
•	Selling or buying commodities at unfairly prices;
•	Selling commodities at prices below cost;
•	Refusal to deal;
•	Exclusive/Designated dealing;
•	Tying or imposing other unreasonable trading conditions;
•	Differential treatment; or
•	Other acts of abuse of dominant market positions recognized 
as such by the anti-monopoly enforcement agency of the State 
Council.
Comments and analysis
While the AML uses the concept of “dominance”, the Ordinance adopts the concept of “a substantial degree of market power”. The Ordinance 
does not specify how to assess whether an undertaking has a substantial degree of market power, but instead lists a number of factors to 
be considered, including: “the market share of the undertaking”, “the undertaking’s power to make pricing and other decisions”, “any barriers 
to entry to competitors into the relevant market” and any other relevant factors. The AML provides that an undertaking is presumed to hold a 
dominant market position if its market share reaches a certain percentage (e.g. 50%), whereas there is no similar provision in the Ordinance or 
the Guideline on the Second Conduct Rule.
COMPLIANCE
Comments and analysis
•	Group boycotts
The Ordinance does not explicitly list “group boycotts” as a serious anti-competitive conduct. The Commission, however, clarifies in the 
Guideline on the First Conduct Rule that the Commission will consider it a serious anti-competitive conduct of “fixing, maintaining, controlling, 
preventing, limiting or eliminating the production or supply of goods or services” under the Ordinance when a group of competitors by 
engaging in group boycott agree to exclude an actual or potential competitor
4. However, the AML lists “group boycotts” and “restricting the 
production volume or sales volume of commodities” respectively as two different types of horizontal monopoly agreements.
•	Fixing the resale price; restricting the minimum resale price
In the Ordinance, fixing the resale price to a third party or restricting the minimum resale price is not an explicit example of serious anti-
competitive conduct. However, the Commission explicitly states in the Guideline on the First Conduct Rule that vertical price restraints such as 
resale price maintenance (the “RPM”, which means suppliers establishing a fixed or minimum resale price to be observed by the distributors 
when reselling the relevant products)5 may be considered as serious anti-competitive conducts in certain cases. The AML explicitly prohibits 
such vertical resale price restraints as fixing the resale price or restricting the minimum resale price. It can be seen that the enforcement 
agencies in both Hong Kong and the Mainland take a strict enforcement stance against vertical price restraints.
•	Exemptions
Small and medium-sized enterprises (“SMEs”) with an annual turnover not exceeding HK$200 million are exempted from the non-serious anti-
competitive conduct in the First Conduct Rule.
The AML also provides exemptions for SMEs. Unlike the Ordinance, the exemptions for SMEs under the AML do not have a specific 
turnover threshold or restriction on the scope of application, which means the exemptions could apply to all horizontal and vertical monopoly 
agreements. Nonetheless, the criteria for the application of the exemptions for SMEs under the AML are relatively strict: firstly, the purpose of 
such agreements should be to increase the efficiency and competitiveness of SMEs; and secondly, SMEs should prove that the agreements 
reached will not substantially restrict competition in the relevant market and that they can enable consumers to share the benefits derived 
therefrom.
4See paragraph 6.5 and footnote 33 of the Guideline on the First Conduct Rule.
5See paragraph 6.71 of the Guideline on the First Conduct Rule.


133
Comments and analysis
Although the Ordinance does not specifically list abuses of market power, the Commission gives the following examples of conducts that may 
constitute an abuse of market power in the Guideline on the Second Conduct Rule: predatory pricing, tying and bundling, margin squeeze 
conduct, refusals to deal, and exclusive dealing. These acts may also constitute abuses of dominant market position under the AML.
•	Exemptions
SMEs with an annual turnover not exceeding HK$40 million are exempted from the Second Conduct Rule. There is no such exemption for 
abusive conduct under the AML.
IV. Merger Rule: Prohibition of anti-competitive merger and acquisition arrangements
The Ordinance prohibits mergers that have, or are likely to have, the effect of substantially lessening competition in 
Hong Kong. Currently, the Merger Rule only applies to mergers between undertakings that directly or indirectly hold a 
carrier license under the Telecommunications Ordinance (Cap. 106), and there is no mandatory reporting obligation for 
such undertakings. In addition, undertakings in other industries are not obliged to report to the Commission for merger 
approval.
The AML stipulates that when the proposed concentration meets the merger filing thresholds as set by the State 
Council, concentrating parties shall notify in advance to the anti-monopoly law enforcement agency of the State Council, 
and shall not implement the concentration in the absence of such notification and approval.
Unlike the voluntary notification requirement stipulated in the Merger Rule that only applies to telecommunications 
industry, the mandatory merger filing system provided in the AML is applicable to all industrials.
V. Brief Summary
Both the Ordinance and the AML essentially regulate monopoly agreements (including horizontal and vertical monopoly 
agreements) and abuse of dominant market positions or substantial degree of market power. However, the two differ in 
stylistic arrangement, application of exemptions, and criteria for determining specific acts. The merger filing requirements 
of the Merger Rule are also significantly different from those under the AML. The above comparison will provide a better 
understanding of the anti-competition conducts regulated in the two jurisdictions.
VI. Investigation and law enforcement
(I) “Dawn raids”
Competition/anti-monopoly enforcement agencies in both Hong Kong SAR and the Mainland may conduct on-site raids 
on undertakings without prior notice (i.e. “dawn raids”).
In the event of a “dawn raid”, some undertakings may take chances and refuse to cooperate with the enforcement 
agency and even obstruct the investigation. However, refusal to cooperate or violent resistance to enforcement will not 
bring about the desired result, but may lead to increased penalties and even criminal liability.


134
COMPLIANCE
The Ordinance
The AML
•	Acceptance of commitments
Undertakings may make a commitment to the 
Commission to rectify its misconduct. If the Commission 
accepts the commitment, it agrees not to commence or 
continue an investigation or initiate proceedings before 
the Tribunal.
•	Suspension of investigation
With respect to the suspected monopolistic conduct which is under 
investigation by the anti-monopoly law enforcement agency, if the 
undertakings under investigation commit themselves to adopt specific 
measures to eliminate the consequences of its conduct within a certain 
period of time which is accepted by the said authority, the anti-monopoly 
law enforcement agency may decide to suspend the investigation.
•	Termination of investigation
Where the anti-monopoly law enforcement agency decides to suspend 
investigation, it shall oversee the fulfilment of the commitments made 
by the undertaking. Where the undertaking fulfils its commitments, the 
anti-monopoly law enforcement agency may decide to terminate the 
investigation.
The Ordinance
The AML
Penalties for failure to comply with the investigative power 
of the Commission:
•	A person who, without reasonable excuse, fails to 
comply with a requirement or prohibition imposed on that 
person by the Commission under its investigative powers 
commits an offence. Offenders are liable to a fine of up to 
HK$200,000 and to imprisonment for 1 year;
•	A person who provides false or misleading documents or 
information
6, destroys, falsifies or conceals documents
7, 
obstructs a search
8, discloses confidential information 
received from the Commission
9 commits a criminal 
offence, and may be liable to a fine of up to HK$1 million 
and to imprisonment for 2 years.
Where, during the review and investigation conducted by the anti-monopoly 
law enforcement agency, an entity or individual refuses to provide relevant 
materials or information, or provides false materials or information, or 
conceals, or destroys, or transfers evidence, or refuses to submit to or 
obstructs investigation in any other manner:
•	The anti-monopoly law enforcement agency shall instruct the entity/
individual to rectify, and a fine of not more than RMB 20,000 shall be 
imposed on the individual and not more than RMB 200,000 on the entity；
•	If the circumstances are serious, a fine of not less than RMB 20,000 but not 
more than RMB 100,000 shall be imposed on the individual and not less 
than RMB 200,000 but not more than RMB 1 million on the entity; and
•	If a crime is constituted, criminal liability shall be investigated for in 
accordance with the law.
6 Article 55 of the Ordinance.
7Article 53 of the Ordinance.
8Article 54 of the Ordinance.
9Article 128 (3) of the Ordinance.
Both the Ordinance and the AML establish fines for refusal to cooperate with enforcement agencies. In particular, the 
Ordinance expressly makes it an offence to “fail to comply with a requirement or prohibition imposed by the Commission 
under its investigative powers without reasonable excuse”, to “provide false or misleading documents or information,” 
and to “destroy, falsify or conceal documents”. It can be seen that the Ordinance takes a tougher enforcement stance 
on these acts.
It is worth noting that the Draft Amendment to the Anti-Monopoly Law (for Public Comments) (the “Draft AML 
Amendment”) issued by the State Administration for Market Regulation on 2 January 2020 significantly increases 
the fines for refusal to cooperate with law enforcement, raising the fines for an entity to a maximum of 1% of its sales 
revenue of the previous year (in the absence of sales revenue in the previous year or if it is difficult to calculate the sales 
revenue, the anti-monopoly enforcement agency may impose a fine of not more than RMB 5 million on the entity); In the 
case of an individual, a fine of not more than RMB 1 million may be imposed. In addition, the Draft AML Amendment 
specifically states that entities or individuals shall not threaten the personal safety of law enforcement officers during the 
investigation process, and that public security organs shall, when necessary, assist in the investigation in accordance 
with the law. Although the AML is still under revision, the foregoing provisions reflect the increasingly severe punishment 
for refusal to cooperate with law enforcement in the Mainland, which will be of guidance for future practice.
(II) Acceptance of commitments
The Ordinance and the AML both grant their respective enforcement agencies the power to accept commitments to 
terminate investigations.


135
The Ordinance
The AML
Commission may apply for pecuniary penalty
11
•	The Commission may apply to the Tribunal for a pecuniary 
penalty to be imposed on any person12 it has reasonable cause 
to believe has “contravened a competition rule” or “has been 
involved in a contravention of a competition rule”.
Tribunal may impose pecuniary penalty
13
•	The amount of a pecuniary penalty imposed in relation to 
conduct that constitutes a single contravention may not exceed 
in total 10% of the turnover of the undertaking in Hong Kong 
concerned for each year in which the contravention occurred, 
for a maximum of 3 years. If the contravention occurred in more 
than 3 years, 10% of the turnover of the undertaking concerned 
for the 3 years in which the contravention occurred that saw the 
highest, second highest and third highest turnover.
Monopoly agreements
•	The anti-monopoly law enforcement agency may impose a fine 
of not less than 1% but not more than 10% of the undertaking’s 
sales generated in the preceding year.
•	If such monopoly agreement has not been implemented, the 
undertaking may be fined not more than RMB 500,000.
Abuse of dominant market position
•	The anti-monopoly law enforcement agency may impose a fine 
of not less than 1% but not more than 10% of the undertaking’s 
sales generated in the preceding year.
Implementing concentration in violation of laws
•	The anti-monopoly law  enforcement agency of the State Council 
may impose a fine of not more than RMB 500,000.
Comments and analysis
•	Agencies determining the amount of the fine and making the fine decision
While the AML grants the anti-monopoly enforcement agency the power to directly determine the amount of fines and make decisions 
on fines, the Ordinance does not give the Commission the authority to make direct decisions on fines. The Commission must apply to 
the Tribunal for the imposition of a fine and recommend to the Tribunal at the appropriate stage the amount it considers appropriate (the 
“Recommended Fine”), and the Tribunal has the final authority to determine the appropriate amount of the fine.
On 29 April 2020, the Tribunal issued the first fine ruling on a case involving ten renovation and engineering companies who allocated the 
market and conspired to fix prices (the “Renovation Case”)14. All these ten construction companies were fined, with seven of them being 
fined the maximum penalty. In determining the amount of fines, the Tribunal basically adopted the calculation method proposed by the 
Commission and clarified the four steps to be followed in determining the amount of fines: (1) determining the basic amount of fines; (2) 
making adjustments based on aggravating and mitigating factors; (3) applying the statutory cap on fines; and (4) granting reduction on 
account of cooperation.
On 22 June 2020, the Commission published the Policy on Recommended Pecuniary Penalties, which outlines the general principles and 
calculation methods that the Commission uses when recommending amount of fines to the Tribunal15. These principles and methods are 
generally consistent with the Tribunal’s four-step approach in the Renovation Case.
•	Amount of fines 
The Ordinance provides for different upper limits of fines according to the duration of the violation and specifies that the amount of fine can 
be up to 10% of the total turnover of three years, but no minimum lower limit is set. In the AML, fines for monopoly agreements and abuse of 
dominant market position are calculated on the basis of the undertaking’s turnover of the previous year, and 1% is set as the minimum rate.
10See the press release on the Commission’s official website: Competition Commission accepts the commitment of online travel agencies (13 May 2020).
11See Article 92 of the Ordinance.
12According to Article 2 of the Ordinance, “Person” includes an undertaking and an individual who is not an undertaking.
13See Article 93 of the Ordinance.
14See CTEA2D/2017 COMPETITION COMMISSION V. W. HING CONSTRUCTION CO LTD AND OTHERS (Date of judgement: 29 April 2020). The Tribunal 
rendered a judgment in the Renovation Case in May 2019, ruling that all ten companies involved in the case had engaged in market allocation and collusive pricing 
practices when providing renovation services at On Tat Village (Phase I), a public housing estate located in Kwun Tong, Kowloon, Hong Kong SAR, and therefore 
violated the First Conduct Rule of the Ordinance.
15See the Policy on Recommended Pecuniary Penalties, https://www.compcomm.hk/en/legislation_guidance/policy_doc/files/Policy_on_Recommended_Pecuniary_
Penalties_Eng.pdf 
Neither the Ordinance nor the AML clearly defines the scope of anti-competitive conduct to which the acceptance 
of commitments applies. It is noteworthy that in accordance with Article 22 of the Interim Provisions on Prohibition of 
Monopoly Agreements of the Mainland, the anti-monopoly law enforcement agency shall not accept the application 
for suspension of investigation in the case of price fixing, production volume restriction or market allocation. Due to the 
limited enforcement cases of the Commission (there is only one enforcement case in which a commitment was accepted 
under Article 60 of the Ordinance
10), the enforcement attitude of the Commission on whether the commitment rules 
apply to the aforementioned three serious anti-competitive conducts remains unclear.
VII. Consequences of violations
(I) Penalties


136
(II) Disqualification orders
16:
Under Article 101 of the Ordinance, if the Tribunal determines that a company of which a person is a director has 
contravened a competition rule and considers that the person’s conduct as a director makes the person unfit to be 
concerned in the management of a company, it may disqualify the person from: being or continuing to be a director of 
a company; being a liquidator or provisional liquidator of a company; or being a receiver or manager of a company’s 
property, etc. Such disqualification orders could last for a period of up to 5 years.
It is worth noting that although the first two decisions announced by the Tribunal have not mentioned disqualification 
orders, the Commission has applied for disqualification orders against directors of companies involved in conspiracy in a 
number of recent cases instituted before the Tribunal, such as the ongoing IT conspiracy case
17 and the Textbook cartel 
case
18. We will continue to follow up on these cases.
The disqualification order as we understand is an enforcement measure specific to the Ordinance and that there is no 
similar order under the AML. The application of disqualification orders means that individuals who engage in conduct 
that violates the competition rule will also face legal sanctions. This increases the deterrent effect of the Ordinance on 
violations to a certain extent.
VIII. Compliance tips
Since the release of the Ordinance, we have been seeing increasingly active law enforcement activities. In April 2020, 
the Tribunal issued the first fine, and in June, the Commission issued the Policy on Recommended Pecuniary Penalties. 
In addition, the Commission applied for director disqualification orders in a series of cases brought before the Tribunal. 
With the full application of the Ordinance and the issuance of a number of landmark decisions and policy guidelines, the 
Commission and the Tribunal’s competition enforcement efforts will intensify.
Given the differences between the competition law of Hong Kong and the AML of the Mainland, it is advisable that 
in the process of building their compliance system in the Asia-Pacific region, enterprises pay close attention to the 
interpretation and enforcement developments in Hong Kong SAR and the Mainland, timely review and update their 
internal compliance manuals, and provide regular competition training to enhance the compliance awareness of 
their employees. It should be noted that this series of articles only provides a general overview of the similarities and 
differences between the Ordinance and the AML. Enterprises are recommended to regularly seek expert advice on 
competition compliance and implement tailored plans.
16See Article 101 of the Ordinance.
17See the press release on the Commission’s official website: Competition Commission appeals Competition Tribunal in IT Conspiracy Case and issues the First 
Notice of Infringement, 22 January 2020.
18See the press release on the Commission’s official website: Competition Commission takes Textbook cartel case to Competition Tribunal, 20 March 2020.
COMPLIANCE


137
Introduction
On 12 May 2020, Guangzhou Intellectual Property Court (the “Guangzhou IP Court”) 
decided that parallel importation did not constitute trademark infringement or unfair 
competition for the first time.
Parallel importation generally refers to the act of “importing the products lawfully 
manufactured in foreign countries into China without the consent of the IP owner”. China 
has no clear regulations on the legality of such act. In the above case, both the first- and 
second-instance courts - Guangzhou Nansha Primary People’s Court and Guangzhou IP 
Court - held that parallel importation did not constitute trademark infringement or unfair 
competition, as the parallel imports were genuine products lawfully manufactured aboard. 
The opinions of the courts are summarized as follows:
I. The first-instance judgement
(I) Trademark infringement
The function of a trademark is to identify the source of a product or service and denote 
quality assurance. In another word, a trademark conveys the message to consumers that 
the products or services bearing the same trademark have the same quality. If a parallel 
import and a domestically distributed product are not different in terms of the mark on 
the product and the product characteristics, and if the parallel importer does not change 
any product characteristics or the mark, or disassemble, alter or damage the product, 
then the parallel importation neither cut off the connection between the product and the 
trademark owner, nor damage the identification function of the trademark. In terms of the 
quality assurance function, it is necessary to determine whether the parallel import has the 
same quality as the domestically distributed product by examining whether their quality 
is substantially different and whether they are completely substitutable. Specifically, it is 
necessary to consider the marks on the products, their product characteristics, quality 
levels and other elements. Finally, according to the principle of exhaustion of trademark 
rights, if the trademark owner has realised the commercial value of the trademark in the 
“first” sale of the products, the owner should not be entitled to prevent others from making 
“secondary” sales.
(II) Unfair competition
In this case, the plaintiff alleged unfair competition on the same factual basis as the 
alleged trademark infringement. The Anti-Unfair Competition Law supplements other 
relevant laws and regulations, and the special intellectual property law shall prevail if 
applicable in dispute resolution. The Anti-Unfair Competition Law is aimed at coordinating 
and balancing the interests of the public, business operators and consumers rather than 
maximizing a certain interest. In applying the Anti-Unfair Competition Law, the concept of 
tolerance and prudent intervention should be followed to encourage fair competition and 
promote healthy development of the market.
The first parallel importation case in 
Guangzhou IP Court closed: no trademark 
infringement; no unfair competition
Jiao Hongbin, Liu Yuxin
Jiao Hongbin


138
II. The second-instance judgement
(I) Trademark infringement
From the perspective of protecting trademark rights, trademark is a mark to distinguish the business subjects. What is 
recognized and protected by the law is not the mark itself, but the unique and definite relationship between the mark 
and the business subject. The parallel importation does not damage the trademark function of identification, quality 
assurance or bearing goodwill.
From the perspective of protecting the interests of consumers, the fundamental purpose of trademark rights is to 
establish and consolidate the specific connection between products and consumers. If parallel imports lawfully sourced 
from the trademark owner are truly and clearly marked with quality guaranteed, the parallel importation will not harm the 
rights or interests of consumers. Instead, it will provide more choices for consumers and stimulate market competition 
due to the increased varieties of products. In the long run, parallel importation will benefit consumers.
From the perspective of promoting the development of market economy, the Trademark Law protects trademark rights 
by combating infringement and thus creating a fair and competitive market economic order, rather than restricting free 
competition by granting monopoly rights to trademark owners. When the trademark owner has already realised financial 
benefits through sales, parallel importation will cause limited damage to the trademark owner. It is inappropriate to grant 
more monopoly benefits to the trademark owner in the subsequent distribution of the product.
With regard to the application by the first-instance court of the principle of exhaustion of rights, however, Guangzhou 
IP Court pointed out that the principle has not become a common or generally recognized academic view in the field of 
trademark law. Further considering that neither the Trademark Law nor any judicial interpretation has explicitly adopted 
the principle, it is inappropriate to cite it directly as a ground for justification.
(II) Unfair competition
Guangzhou IP Court also held that parallel importation was not in violation of the principle of good faith or the generally 
accepted business ethics. The court concluded that the parallel importation did not constitute unfair competition after 
analysing the parallel importation from the root cause of its formation, the reasonable care duty of the parallel importer, 
the legitimacy of the parallel importer’s behaviour, the protection of consumers’ rights and interests, and the damage to 
the interests of the domestic right holder.
Finally, Guangzhou IP Court particularly emphasised that the allegedly infringing product was a typical parallel import 
which was of the same quality as the domestically distributed product and was of proper origin. In addition, the parallel 
importer had performed a high degree of care by transacting in a relatively standard manner, making the transaction 
process clear and well documented, and entering into agreements to avoid legal risks. However, whether parallel 
importation constitutes infringement cannot be generalised by merely analysing this case. It is advisable to carefully 
examine the quality and origin of the product and the legitimacy of the importation based on the facts. Any replacement 
or cover-up of the trademark, change in the product quality or improper seizure others’ business opportunities or free 
ride should be regulated in accordance with the Trademark Law and the Anti-Unfair Competition Law.
COMPLIANCE


139
Declared by the World Health Organisation as a “public health emergency of international 
concern” on 30 January 2020, the outbreak of COVID-19 posed great challenges to employers 
and employees in various sectors in Hong Kong SAR. In this article, we look at the legal 
implications, rights and obligations of employers and employees from an employment law 
perspective.  
I. Protection under the Employees’ Compensation Ordinance (ECO)
The ECO applies to all full-time or part-time employees who are employed under contracts of 
service or apprenticeship as well as employees employed in Hong Kong by local employers 
injured while working outside Hong Kong. 
Under the ECO, no employer shall employ any employee in any employment unless there is in 
force a policy of insurance to cover its liabilities under the laws for injuries at work in respect of all 
employees, irrespective of the length of employment contract or working hours, full-time or part-
time employment (section 40). An employer who fails to comply with ECO to secure an insurance 
cover would be liable to prosecution and, upon conviction, to a maximum fine of HK$100,000 
and imprisonment for two years.
However, subject to individual insurance coverage, having an insurance in place does not 
automatically relieve the employer from all liabilities and potential claims from employees for 
compensation. Under section 32 of the ECO, an employee suffering incapacity arising from an 
occupational disease is entitled to receive compensation from his/her employer, if the disease 
is (i) due to the nature of any occupation in which he was employed
1 (ii) at any time within the 
prescribed period immediately preceding the incapacity caused. The occupational diseases 
covered and the prescribed period are specified in the Second Schedule annexed to the ECO. 
While some call for the Hong Kong Government to include COVID-19 as an “occupational 
disease” within the meaning of the ECO, the Labour Department, on 10 February 2020, issued a 
press release
2 stating that it was looking into the issue. No changes to the ECO has been made 
thus far.
Obligations and issues from an employment 
law perspective in Hong Kong SAR after 
COVID-19 outbreak
Ricky Lioe, Crystal Luk
Crystal Luk
Ricky Lioe
1Note in the case of severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS), while it is categorised as an “occupational disease”, it is only 
applicable to occupations involving close and frequent contacts with a source or sources of SARS infection by reason of employment 
of very specific scenarios (see B11 of Schedule 2 of the ECO).
2https://www.info.gov.hk/gia/general/202002/10/P2020021000730.htm?fontSize=1


140
That stated, an employee may still claim compensation 
under section 5 of the ECO for a disease outside the 
Second Schedule if it is certified to be a personal injury by 
accident arising out of and in the course of employment.  
For the contraction of COVID-19 to amount to a personal 
injury “by accident”:
(i)	 there would have to be a causal connection between 
the accident and the injury (or disease);
(ii)	 the "accident" should be distinct from the injury (or 
disease); and
(iii)	 the accident must have been at least a contributory 
cause of the injury.
The phrase “arising out of and in the course of 
employment” means arising out of the work the employee 
is employed to do and what is incidental to it, in other 
words, out of his/her service. It is not necessary to prove 
that the accident arose directly out of employment. All 
that is necessary to show is that the employee was doing 
something which happened as part of the employment 
or is incidental to it even if he/she might be under no 
duty to do it
3. This is a question of fact and degree. The 
paramount principle in law remains that an employee 
travelling on the street will be acting in the course of 
employment if, and only if, at the material time going 
about the employer’s business or in pursuance of a duty 
owed to the employer
4. 
Note that the minimum amount of insurance cover 
specified in the ECO is not the maximum liability that the 
party concerned is required to bear under the law. The 
party concerned should therefore carefully assess the 
possible risk and consult insurers for professional advice 
on whether an insurance policy for an amount more than 
the minimum under the ECO should be taken out. To 
minimise potential loss, employers should also be aware 
of their respective obligations and take precautionary 
measures as discussed in the sections below.
II. A reminder of employers’ obligations, 
precautions and possible issues
•	 Obligation to take reasonable care of employee’s 
health and safety
Employers bear a general common law obligation to 
3See Charles R Davidson & Co v M’ Robb [1918] AC 304 at 314; and R v National Insurance Commissioner, ex p Michael [1977] 2 All ER 420, [1977] 1 WLR 109 (CA), 
both followed in Lau Kam Nui v Sau Kee Co Ltd [1998] 4 HKC 612, [1999] 1 HKLRD 163 (CA).
4An employee, however, is not considered to be in the course of her employment when she has finished work after leaving her place of employment, and was on the 
road as a member of the public and not as an employee of her employer: see Check Chor Ching v Wik Far East Ltd [1991] HKDCLR 71 (DC); [1991] 1 HKC 296, [1991] 
2 HKLR 224 (CA). On the contrary, in Chow Shu Ki v Osram Prosperity Co Ltd (unreported, DCEC 1059/2000, 21 November 2001) (DC), the deceased employee 
sustained fatal injury while on a bus trip one evening after leaving his office. As the Court was satisfied on the evidence that the deceased was on his way to visit 
customers, it was held that at the material time the deceased was still acting in the course of employment and an award of compensation was made. 
Note also section 5(4) of the ECO which details circumstances of which an accident to an employee resulting in injury or death is deemed to arise out of and in the 
course of his employment.
take reasonable care regarding their employees’ health 
and safety, including a duty to provide and maintain a 
reasonably safe workplace. Failure to comply with such 
obligation may expose employers to potential tortious 
and/or contractual claims.
Alongside the common law obligation, under the 
Occupational Safety and Health Ordinance (OSHO), 
employers must, so far as reasonably practicable, 
ensure the safety and health at work of all employees. 
Given the common law and statutory obligations, 
employers are reminded that they should not compel 
employees to attend the workplace if they cannot 
provide a safe working environment. Upon complaint 
or request, employers are reminded to conduct 
examination/evaluation as to the safety of the work 
environment. If, however, an employee persistently 
refuses to return to office without valid reason, this may 
amount to a breach of the employment contract. 
•	 Duty to pay wages
We note media reports that some corporations have 
taken out measures regarding unpaid leave and 
reduction in wages. The duty to pay wages pursuant 
to employment contracts and/or the Employment 
Ordinance (EO) continues during the COVID-19 
outbreak. In general, employers also have an implied 
duty to provide work and employees have an implied 
right to work. As such, a decision requiring employees 
to take unpaid leave without their prior consent may 
be a breach. Similarly, unless genuine operational 
requirements of the business can be demonstrated, 
a unilateral reduction in wages without employees’ 
consent may constitute an unreasonable variation of 
employment terms. In essence, while balancing the 
various business considerations during this difficult 
climate, employers should remain aware of potential 
claims and legal risks if such measures are implemented 
unilaterally without their employees’ consent.
•	 Request for medical consultation  
If an employer reasonably suspects that a certain 
employee may have contracted COVID-19 (e.g. that 
the employee has developed symptoms such as 
fever and coughing), in the context of the overriding 
duty to ensure the health and safety of employees, 
COMPLIANCE


141
the employer may reasonably request the employee 
to see a doctor. In addition, the employer will have a 
contractual basis if the employment contract allows for 
such a request.
•	 Data privacy 
Attention is drawn to the issue of data privacy, where 
employers may want to take preventative measures 
such as temperature checks or medical screening. 
Given the sensitive and personal nature of health-
related data, employers should explain the purpose, 
the recipient(s) of such data to employees, as well as 
how long it will be held. Any data collected should be 
limited to information showing whether an employee 
has symptoms of COVID-19. Employers are reminded 
to comply with the data protection obligation under the 
Personal Data (Privacy) Ordinance and that any records 
should be properly kept and only be accessed on a 
need-to-know basis. 
III. Alternative work arrangements
It is important to note employers’ and employees’ duty 
when Work From Home (WFH) is in place. Though a 
special arrangement, WFH should be treated similar to 
work at the place of employment. Employers still need to 
pay wages and employees must still perform their work 
duties to the extent practicable. There have been incidents 
where employees were found not to be “at work” during 
their usual work hours when working from home. Some 
form of disciplinary measures or the issuance of warning 
letters may be carried out if employees are found to be 
neglectful in their duties. However, employers should be 
careful not to terminate employees hastily, as summary 
dismissal (being a serious disciplinary action) should only 
be considered in exceptional cases, such as very serious 
misconduct.
It is advisable for employers to communicate clearly their 
WFH policy and provide proactive support (such as IT 
support) to make WFH accessible and convenient. 
IV. Things to note if an employee contracts 
COVID-19
If an employee contracts (or is suspected of contracting) 
COVID-19, it is prudent for the employer to require them 
to stay at home and refrain from coming to the workplace 
in order to minimize the risk of other employees getting 
infected. This is in line with the employer’s general 
obligation to provide a safe working environment as 
outlined above. 
Whilst an employee is on paid sick leave, the employer 
shall not dismiss the employee. This will expose the 
employer to claims under the EO and possibly complaints 
or claims under the Disability Discrimination Ordinance. 
V. Final note
Employers should be aware of any quarantine restriction 
imposed or advised by the Hong Kong Government. Since 
early 2020, the Hong Kong Government has imposed 
compulsory quarantine requirements upon people entering 
Hong Kong (subject to certain exemptions). 
This is indeed a difficult time for both employers and 
employees – intertwined with issues and concerns of both 
business and a personal nature. With more understanding 
and consideration, including the perspective of employers’ 
reputational and corporate images, we trust challenges 
can be overcome by the joint effort of employers and 
employees.


142
Introduction: Business environment in Macau SAR
Since its return to China, Macau SAR has enjoyed steady economic development in a 
stable socio-political environment. As a free port and separate customs territory, Macau 
SAR has been implementing simplified low-tax systems and policies. It has a privileged 
geographical location as well as a well-developed infrastructure. The Hong Kong-Zhuhai-
Macau Bridge, a major cross-sea passage linking Hong Kong SAR, Macau SAR and 
Zhuhai, was officially opened to traffic in 2018. The construction of Macau Light Rapid 
Transit (LRT) has also been in full swing, with the Taipa Line officially opened for operation 
in December 2019. Supported by the policy of “one country, two systems”, the status as 
an international free port and its natural ties with Portuguese-speaking countries, Macau 
SAR further expands its development by participating in the Belt and Road construction. 
In addition, the deepening cooperation in the GBA has also brought new opportunities 
for Macau’s development. At present, Macau SAR is entering a new stage of rapid 
development in its economic cooperation with Hong Kong SAR and China Mainland, 
including the entire Pan-Pearl River Delta region.
I. Main types of companies in Macau SAR
With the deepening of economic cooperation between China Mainland and Macau SAR, 
more and more Mainland enterprises and investors set up companies, joint ventures, 
subsidiaries, permanent representative offices, etc. in Macau SAR to improve their 
strategic layout while also enjoying a series of preferential policies and industrial support 
policies.
The two most common types of companies established in Macau SAR are limited 
liability companies (LLC or “Sociedade por Quotas) and joint stock companies (JSC or 
“Sociedade Anónima”). Establishing an LLC, although relatively low in cost and simple in 
establishment procedures, requires share transfer registration. By contrast, the transfer 
of shares of a JSC is not subject to registration and the confidentiality of shareholders’ 
information can be guaranteed.
In terms of registered capital and the number of shareholders, there are different legal 
requirements for LLCs and JSCs as follows:
New investment insights: how to set up 
a company in Macau SAR
James Zeng, Zhang Chengcheng
James Zeng
INVESTMENT FRONTIER
Registered capital
Number of shareholders
LLC
Not less than MOP 
25,000
An LLC shall have at least one  shareholder (if there 
is only one shareholder, the company’s name shall 
bear the words “one-person limited company”)
JSC
Not less than MOP 
1,000,000
At least three shareholders


143
 A JSC is usually established for specific business activities, 
such as real estate development, energy (e.g. electricity, 
water, and gas) business or regulated activities (e.g. 
banking and finance, insurance, and telecommunications). 
In accordance with the law, financial companies (credit 
institutions), investment fund management companies, 
property management companies, venture capital 
companies, insurance companies domiciled in Macau SAR 
and other companies of the kind must established in the 
corporate form of a JSC.
II. Main steps to set up a company in Macau SAR
Procedures for setting up a company in Macau SAR 
include:
(i)	 Application for a certificate of admissibility of trade 
name;
(ii)	 Execution of a company establishment notarial 
certificate/deed;
(iii)	 Registration of a corporate business owner with the 
Commerce and Movable Property Registry; and
(iv)	 Filing a Business Tax - Form M1 at the Financial 
Services Bureau to declare the opening of the 
business.
Local and foreign individuals or institutions intending to 
establish a company in Macau SAR are required to follow 
the same legal or administrative procedures.
For companies carrying out regulated business, such 
as financial companies (credit institutions), investment 
fund management companies, property management 
companies, venture capital companies, insurance 
companies domiciled in Macau SAR and other companies 
of the kind, they are also required to register with the 
Monetary Authority of Macau SAR before opening for 
business.
Companies in Macau SAR also have a tradition of setting 
up company secretaries. Company secretarial services 
usually include the following: organizing shareholders’ 
and board meetings and processing minutes and related 
documents; providing registered addresses; handling 
company deregistration; recruiting local and overseas 
employees; employment and termination of employment 
declarations; occupational tax declarations; social security 
fund payments and other personnel services.
III. Significance of establishing a company in 
Macau SAR
Advantages of Macau’s business environment: Macau 
SAR enjoys political stability and social harmony, and 
has a favorable business environment with simple tax 
types, low tax rates and free inflow and outflow of capital. 
Investment and business procedures are simple in Macau 
SAR. Enterprises may consider setting up logistics service 
bases and local offices in Macau SAR to obtain tax 
exemptions.
Access to international markets through Macau SAR: 
Macau SAR has strong ties with Portuguese-speaking 
countries and its role as a service platform for Sino-
Portuguese trade cooperation is increasingly recognized 
and affirmed by many parties. In addition, as one of the 
most open trade and investment economies in the world, 
Macau SAR has established stable economic and trade 
relations with more than 120 countries and regions. As 
a member of 30 international economic organizations, 
Macau SAR has woven itself into an extensive network of 
international markets. An increasing number of Mainland 
enterprises see Macau SAR as an ideal entry point and 
financing platform to enter the international market.
Prospects for the development of Macau’s finance 
industry: In order to support the further development of 
Macau SAR, the Central Government has introduced a 
series of supportive policies for Macau’s finance industry. 
Guangdong will also work with Macau SAR to deepen 
financial construction and cooperation in the GBA in 
accordance with the Central Government’s planning 
and deployment, especially to help establish a RMB-
denominated and settled securities market in Macau SAR. 
Macau’s finance industry continues to develop rapidly and 
will become a new economic growth driver for Macau 
SAR in the future.
Policies of Hengqin, Zhuhai: In the first 2020 policy 
address of the new Chief Executive of Macau SAR, it is 
mentioned that, Combining Macau’s advantages, such as 
the principle of “One country, two systems” and its status 
as an international free port, with Hengqin’s advantages 
in terms of resources and space, the government will 
establish  a Guangdong-Macau in-depth cooperation 
zone in Hengqin, and extend some of the policies and 
measures of Macau’s free port to Hengqin. We believe 
that Hengqin will continue to expand its openness in the 
future, form an international business environment, and 
open up a broader space for enterprises to “go global” 
through Macau SAR and Hengqin.
At the same time, Macau enterprises are also able to enter 
China Mainland through Hengqin to carry out business 
activities. In April 2020, Hengqin issued the first permit for 
Hong Kong and Macau construction enterprises to enter 
the Mainland market - China Construction Engineering 
(Macau) Company Limited officially obtained a business 
license from the Administration for Industry and Commerce 
of Hengqin New Area, Zhuhai City. The company plans to 
launch its main business in the Macau market and expand 
outward to the GBA market. More and more Hong Kong 
and Macau enterprises plan to enter the GBA market, and 
Macau’s advantageous position will be further highlighted.


144
The outbreak of COVID-19 has had a significant impact on the global aviation industry. 
Airlines globally have been forced to reduce their flight operations and the International 
Air Transport Association (“IATA”) reported a 65.9%
1 drop in air travel globally in 2020 
(year on year). Until countries around the world remove their current quarantine and travel 
restrictions, the overall impact of COVID-19 on the aviation industry remains unknown. 
Nevertheless, aviation is a resilient industry and has previously managed to overcome the 
challenges posed by 9/11, SARS and the 2008/9 financial crisis and thrive.  
Whilst it is difficult to predict how quickly the aviation industry as a whole will re-emerge 
from this crisis, the aviation industry in the Guangdong-Hong Kong-Macao Greater Bay 
Area (the “GBA”) may be a step ahead having the benefit of a recovering domestic market 
in the China Mainland. In addition, new measures have been announced by the People’s 
Bank of China, together with the China Mainland’s banking, securities and foreign 
exchange regulators in April 2020 (the “2020 Guidance”), which provide the potential for 
the aviation industry to adapt to the new economic/global environment and to explore 
new opportunities in the GBA. This article recaps the Outline Development Plan for the 
Guangdong-Hong Kong-Macao Greater Bay Area released on 18 February 2019 (the 
“Outline”), highlights certain developments in the GBA since the publication of the Outline 
and identifies new opportunities from the 2020 Guidance, each with a focus on the 
aviation sector.
I. A brief overview of the GBA and the Outline in the context of aviation
2 
The GBA consists of Hong Kong SAR, Macao SAR, as well as the municipalities of 
Guangzhou, Shenzhen, Zhuhai, Foshan, Huizhou, Dongguan, Zhongshan, Jiangmen 
and Zhaoqing in the Guangdong Province, with a combined population of approximately 
86.17 million at the end of 2020.
3 As one of the most open and economically vibrant 
regions in China
4 with an aggregated GDP of US$1,668.86 billion and a GDP per capita of 
US$19,367 in 2020, the GBA plays a significant strategic role in the overall development 
of China.
The Outline was jointly prepared by the relevant departments of the central government 
of China together with the governments of the Guangdong Province, Hong Kong SAR 
and Macao SAR. The Outline set out an economic development plan for the GBA, 
including a vision of developing an international innovation and technology hub, expediting 
infrastructural connectivity, promoting ecological conservation, and jointly developing 
Guangdong-Hong Kong-Macao cooperation platforms. As part of these development 
objectives, the Outline sets out a vision for developing an international aviation hub in the 
GBA.
The Outline also sets out a goal for each of the key GBA cities, several of which are 
Developments in the aviation industry in the 
Greater Bay Area
Ashley Wong, Adam Smart 
1Reference: https://www.iata.org/en/pressroom/pr/2021-02-03-02/ 
2Reference: https://www.kwm.com/en/hk/knowledge/downloads/law-and-practice-in-the-greater-bay-area-ii-20190920
3Reference: https://research.hktdc.com/en/article/MzYzMDE5NzQ5
4Reference: https://research.hktdc.com/en/article/MzYzMDE5NzQ5
Ashley Wong
INVESTMENT FRONTIER


145
focused on the development of the aviation industry in the GBA: Hong Kong SAR should position itself as an international 
financial centre, an international aviation hub and an international legal and dispute resolution hub in the Asia-Pacific 
region; Shenzhen should position itself as a national core economic city and innovation hub; whilst Guangzhou should 
position itself as an integrated transportation hub.
II. The aviation sector in the GBA
Even before expansion pursuant to the Outline, the GBA was already a significant aviation hub both in China and the 
wider Asia-Pacific region. There are ten civil airports in the GBA, with Hong Kong International Airport (“HKIA”), Macau 
International Airport (“MIA”), Shenzhen Bao’an International Airport (“SBIA”), Guangzhou Baiyun International Airport 
(“GBIA”) and Zhuhai Jinwan Airport (“ZJA”) being the most significant airports in the region (the “GBA A5”).


146
(I) Comparison of the GBA A5
5 
HKIA, GBIA and SBIA are the most significant airports amongst the GBA A5, with notably higher annual traffic (in terms 
of both passenger traffic and cargo throughput). HKIA, GBIA and SBIA are therefore key focus airports for development 
by the regions of the GBA. As can be seen from the figures below (and the number of international routes noted above), 
SBIA is currently relatively underdeveloped compared to its neighbours. In light of the Outline’s specific requirements for 
developing SBIA (such as enhancing its competitiveness as an international hub and building a demonstration zone for 
Shenzhen’s general aviation industry), SBIA has significant room for potential growth in the near future.
5Reference: https://www.mot.gov.cn/tongjishuju/minhang/202104/t20210419_3573714.html; https://www.camacau.com/en/OurBusiness/TrafficStatsPassengers; https://
www.camacau.com/en/OurBusiness/TrafficStatsCargo; https://www.hongkongairport.com/iwov-resources/file/the-airport/hkia-at-a-glance/facts-figures/2020e.pdf 
6Reference: https://www.mot.gov.cn/tongjishuju/minhang/202104/t20210419_3573714.html
7Reference: HKIA - https://www.threerunwaysystem.com/en/three-runway-system/project-overview/; MIA - https://www.macau-airport.com/en/media-centre/news/
news/23932; SBIA -http://www.sz.gov.cn/en_szgov/news/latest/content/post_6989831.html; GBIA - https://www.gbiac.net/byairport-web/menu/index?urlKey=airport-
basic-facts_en; ZJA -http://www.caacnews.com.cn/1/5/201911/t20191129_1286621.html.
INVESTMENT FRONTIER
(II) Significance of the GBA A5 in China
6 
HKIA, GBIA and SBIA also play key roles in the overall Chinese aviation sector, both in relation to passenger and 
cargo traffic. HKIA, GBIA and SBIA account for approximately 33% of the number of passengers handled by the top 
10 airports in China, whilst HKIA, GBIA and SBIA account for approximately 51% of the cargo handled by the top 10 
airports in China. With the resurgence of the China Mainland domestic market following the COVID-19 crisis, it can be 
expected that airports in the GBA (in particular GBIA and SBIA) will recover faster than competitor airports in the Asia-
Pacific region.
(III) Planned developments of the GBA A5
7 
In addition to the completed expansion of passenger terminals at both SBIA and GBIA, each of the GBA A5 are taking 
significant steps to expand their physical infrastructure over the coming years, as encouraged in the Outline.


147
Airport
Plan
HKIA
Increase the number of runways from 2 to 3 
MIA
Construct a south extension of the passenger terminal building 
SBIA 
Increase the number of runways from 2 to 3 
GBIA
Increase the number of runways from 3 to 5 and construct a third passenger terminal building 
ZJA
Construct a second passenger terminal building 
8Reference: https://www.info.gov.hk/gia/general/201907/30/P2019073000632.htm.
9Reference: https://www.thb.gov.hk/eng/blog/index_id_10.htm.
10Reference: https://www.info.gov.hk/gia/general/201802/01/P2018020100693.htm?fontSize=1 and https://www.info.gov.hk/gia/general/201902/19/P2019021900578.
htm?fontSize=1.
These planned infrastructure developments will necessitate the growth of related industries in the GBA, including ground 
services, logistics, air traffic control, aircraft maintenance and crew training facilities.
8 In addition, technology companies 
may also have a role to play as airports in the GBA, in particular HKIA, aim to become smart airports.
9 The COVID-19 
crisis is likely to mean that the development of technological advances in airports occurs faster than it may otherwise 
have done, given the need to minimise interaction amongst passengers and between passengers and staff.  
III. Developments since the publication of the Outline
(I) Expansion of the intermodal code-sharing services between the China Mainland and Hong Kong SAR
10 
As highlighted above, one of the Outline’s focuses is on building a modern comprehensive transportation system in the 
GBA, including developing a world-class airport cluster. Chapter 5 of the Outline also aims to ensure the smooth linkage 
of different modes of transportation within the GBA and raise the standards of passenger and cargo transportation 
services, with the goal of reducing the travel time between any two major cities in the GBA to one hour or less. Effort 
has already been made by cities in the GBA to implement this aspect of the Outline. One example is the expansion of 
“intermodal code-sharing” between transportation companies in the China Mainland, Macao SAR and Hong Kong SAR.
The intermodal code-sharing scheme allows a passenger travelling by air to take another mode of transport (e.g. cross-
boundary buses or high-speed ferries) using the same air ticket, which helps to make travel planning more convenient 
and efficient for travellers and encourages the use of multiple forms of public transportation by passengers in the GBA.
Prior to the introduction of the Outline, designated airlines were only permitted to operate air-to-land intermodal services 
in conjunction with cross-boundary buses running between Hong Kong SAR and Shenzhen. However, following the 
issuance of the Outline, designated airlines are now allowed to enter into code-sharing arrangements with operators 
of all kinds of land transportation (including railway services, passenger vehicles and coaches) to all cities in the China 
Mainland. In addition, airlines are permitted to enter into air-to-sea intermodal code-sharing arrangements. The China 
Mainland and Hong Kong SAR now have increased sea transportation options between HKIA and cities in the GBA, 
including Macao SAR, Fuyong, Humen, Jiuzhou, Lianhuashan, Nansha, Shekou and Zhongshan. This includes airport 
check-in facilities at Shenzhen Shekou Cruise & Ferry Terminal, Zhuhai Jiuzhou Port and Guangzhou Lianhuashan Port, 
allowing passengers to go directly to the departure hall upon arrival at HKIA.   
Separately, measures have been introduced to streamline boundary crossing rules within the GBA. Check-in facilities for 
HKIA have also been introduced at the Hong Kong Port of the Hong Kong-Zuhai- Macao Bridge and at West Kowloon 
Station. Cross-boundary helicopter services are now also permitted between Hong Kong SAR and the rest of the GBA. 
 
 
 
 
The expansion of the intermodal code-sharing services allows airlines operating from HKIA to offer seamless air-to-
land and air-to-sea connections with other destinations in the GBA, further enhancing Hong Kong SAR’s position as an 
international aviation hub within the GBA. This offers significant growth potential for airlines in Hong Kong SAR, given 
that GBA passengers (excluding Hong Kong SAR passengers) accounted for less than 10% of one major Hong Kong 
SAR based airline’s passenger numbers in 2019. A more comprehensive transportation system in the GBA will naturally 
also provide increased opportunities for other aviation/transportation related businesses to grow, both at HKIA and also 


148
at the other airports in the GBA (in particular GBIA and SBIA). This might even include a helicopter ride-hailing service 
and electric pilotless aircraft in the GBA if Airbus’ plans come to fruition.
11 
(II) Introduction of the 144-Hour Transit Visa Exemption Policy
12 
In order to encourage tourism in the GBA and the development of GBIA and SBIA as international aviation hubs, from 
May 2019 foreign visitors from 53 countries can visit Shenzhen, Guangzhou or any other city in Guangdong without the 
need for a visa for 144 hours (this includes visitors from countries in the European Union, the United Kingdom, Australia 
and the United States).
In order to do so, visitors need to hold a valid international travel document and a connecting ticket to a third country or 
region. Hong Kong SAR and Macao SAR are considered as a third regions from the China Mainland under this policy. 
Visitors need to enter the GBA via GBIA, Jieyang Chaoshan Airport or SBIA. This policy makes transiting at GBA airports 
more convenient and gives visitors the ability to explore the GBA without the need for a visa.
From the perspective of airlines based at GBIA and SBIA, including China Southern Airlines and Shenzhen Airlines, this 
policy offers the opportunity to increase their share of valuable international transfer customers transiting at GBIA and 
SBIA. Currently this market is underdeveloped by airlines and airports in the GBA, other than by Cathay Pacific at HKIA, 
given most international traffic is either currently point-to-point in nature or limited to international-to-domestic transfers 
within the China Mainland. The physical expansion of both at GBIA and SBIA should provide the capacity needed for the 
growth of transit passengers to take place.
(III) Aircraft leasing in the Nansha Free Trade Zone and Hong Kong SAR
13
Another key focus of the Outline is to develop the China Guangdong Free Trade Zone (the “GFTZ”). The Nansha Free 
Trade Zone (the “Nansha FTZ”) in Guangzhou is one of the three areas of the GFTZ. The Outline aims to develop 
financial services within the Nansha FTZ, including fintech, aviation finance and aviation leasing. The Outline also 
advocates close cooperation between Hong Kong SAR and Nansha FTZ, in order for Nansha FTZ to become a gateway 
to the China Mainland.
11Reference: https://asiatimes.com/2019/09/airbus-eyes-hail-a-copter-service-for-greater-bay/.
12Reference: http://gdga.gd.gov.cn/xxgk/zcjd/wjjd/content/post_2286867.html and https://www.chinadiscovery.com/shenzhen-tours/shenzhen-144-hour-twov.html.
13Reference: http://nansha.guangdong.chinadaily.com.cn/2019-07/05/c_386186.htm and http://www.chinadaily.com.cn/a/201904/01/WS5ca1d166a3104842260b3bd6.
html.
INVESTMENT FRONTIER
Market participants have begun structuring their transactions with China Mainland airlines (as lessees) via both Hong 
Kong SAR (at the owner level) and Nansha FTZ (at the lessor level), with a similar lease-in and lease out structure in 
other free trade zones in the PRC. By transacting through the Hong Kong SAR plus Nansha FTZ cross-border leasing 
structure, aviation leasing companies can enjoy the advantages of access to the international financial markets in Hong 
Kong SAR and the dedicated concessionary tax regime for qualifying aircraft lessors. The dedicated tax regime in 
Hong Kong SAR provides a concessionary tax rate of 8.25%, which is 50% of the current profits tax rate of 16.5%, for 
both qualifying aircraft lessors and qualifying aircraft leasing managers. Only 20% of the tax base (gross rentals minus 
deductible expenses (but excluding depreciation)) of qualifying aircraft lessors will be subject to profits tax, resulting in a 
net tax rate of 1.65% (that is, 20% x 8.25%). Furthermore, the double taxation agreement between the China Mainland 
and Hong Kong SAR offers a lower withholding tax rate of 5%, making Hong Kong SAR the jurisdiction with the lowest 


149
withholding tax applied on lease rentals paid by China 
Mainland lessees, followed by Singapore and Ireland with 
a rate of 6% withholding tax.
14
The Nansha FTZ company can also benefit from 
preferential import duty and customs clearance policies 
in the Nansha FTZ. To date more than 120 commercial 
aircraft have been bought into the Nansha FTZ (within 
the past five years), including aircraft operated by China 
Southern Airlines.
15 In terms of leasing companies set 
up in the Nansha FTZ, the number of financial leasing 
companies in the Nansha FTZ has increased from about 
30 at the beginning of 2015 to more than 2,100 in 2019, 
including Skyco International Financial Leasing Company 
and China Southern International Leasing. Many of the 
state-owned enterprises have also set up financial leasing 
operations in the Nansha FTZ.
16
As part of the development of the GBA as an aviation 
hub, it is expected that Nansha FTZ/Hong Kong SAR will 
further develop as a key leasing structure into the China 
Mainland for aviation transactions, in particular for airlines 
based in the GBA.
(IV) 2020 guidance on financial support for the GBA
17
In April 2020, the People’s Bank of China, together with 
the China Mainland’s banking, securities and foreign 
exchange regulators announced several new measures to 
encourage the growth of the GBA in the 2020 Guidance. 
One of the key principles included in the 2020 Guidance 
is to encourage financial co-operation between the 
China Mainland, Hong Kong SAR and Macau SAR 
and to enhance the position of Hong Kong SAR as an 
international financial centre.
18
In addition, the 2020 Guidance encourages the growth 
of cross-border lending in the GBA, both from China 
Mainland banks to entities in Hong Kong SAR and Macau 
SAR and from branches of Hong Kong SAR and Macau 
SAR banks in the China Mainland to entities in the GBA. 
The 2020 Guidance also suggests increased support for 
other non-banking cross-border businesses, including 
financial leasing companies.
The 2020 Guidance, since its implementation, has further 
enhanced financial co-operation within the GBA. From 
an aviation leasing perspective, the advantages of the 
Nansha FTZ / Hong Kong SAR leasing structure may 
become even greater if lending costs are reduced or if 
14Reference: https://www.ird.gov.hk/eng/tax/bus_ala.htm; http://www.hkala.com.hk/docs/Event%20Presentations%20-%20Taxation%20workshop.pdf (see slide 7); and 
https://www.kwm.com/en/cn/knowledge/insights/hk-s-proposed-dedicated-tax-regime-for-offshore-aircraft-leasing-20170306.
15Reference: http://subsites.chinadaily.com.cn/guangzhou/nansha/2019-08/23/c_398934.htm.
16Reference: http://nansha.guangdong.chinadaily.com.cn/2019-01/02/c_312574.htm.
17Reference: http://www.cnbayarea.org.cn/policy/policy%20release/policies/content/post_258474.html.
18Reference: https://kwm.com/en/hk/knowledge/downloads/new-plans-to-support-gba-unveiled-20200608.
19Reference: http://global.chinadaily.com.cn/a/201906/17/WS5d06f2eba3103dbf143288e6.html.
20Reference: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2351978918300222.
further financial or tax incentives are offered by authorities 
in the GBA.
(V) Development of related industries in the GBA
It is reported that China’s maintenance, repair, and 
overhaul (“MRO”) market stood at RMB 128.68 billion 
in 2018, generating a compound annual growth rate of 
9.32% between 2010 and 2018.
19 With the development 
of aviation industry in the GBA, in particular, with 
increasing demand for aircraft in the GBA in order to 
support increased air traffic, there is a significant market 
for aircraft MRO businesses.
One example of this is Guangzhou Aircraft Maintenance 
Engineering Co., Ltd. (“GAMECO”), jointly owned by 
China Southern Airlines, Hutchison Whampoa (China) 
Ltd., which is investing and building a third hangar, a 
component repair centre and a composite centre in the 
GBA. The building of the third hangar is expected to be 
finished in 2021, and it is located near GBIA and can 
accommodate six wide-body aircraft and five narrow-
body aircraft for heavy maintenance at the same time. 
GAMECO’s new component repair centre and the 
composite centre, which are located in Guangzhou, are 
expected to come into service in 2022.
It is anticipated that additional MRO operators will open, or 
existing MRO operators will expand, within the GBA in the 
foreseeable future. Given one of the aims of the Outline 
is to develop the GBA as a centre for technology and 
innovation, this expansion may also involve the increased 
use of augmented and virtual reality technologies, both 
in relation to training and possibly remote maintenance 
and inspection of aircraft.
20 Both MROs and technology 
companies may therefore have a role to play in the 
expansion of this area.
Besides MRO services, the GBA can also develop other 
aviation-industry related services, including ground 
handling service, airport infrastructure, pilot training, 
airport management training and aviation business 
management training etc with a view to creating an 
integrated development of the aviation industry supply 
chain.
The authors would like to thank Ma Feng, Yan Qiong, Alison Chan and 
Sunny Wong for their assistance on this article.


150
About King & Wood Mallesons
Recognised as one of the world’s most innovative law firms, King & Wood 
Mallesons offers a different perspective to commercial thinking and the client 
experience. With access to a global platform, a team of over 2,900 lawyers in 
29 locations around the world, works with clients to help them understand local 
challenges, navigate through regional complexity, and to find commercial solutions 
that deliver a competitive advantage for our clients.
As a leading international law firm headquartered in Asia, we help clients to open 
doors and unlock opportunities as they look to Asian markets to unleash their full 
potential. Combining an unrivalled depth of expertise and breadth of relationships 
in our core markets, we are connecting Asia to the world, and the world to Asia.
We take a partnership approach in working with clients, focusing not just what 
they want, but how they want it. Always pushing the boundaries of what can be 
achieved, we are reshaping the legal market and challenging our clients to think 
differently about what a law firm can be.
KWM Institute is a non-profit research organization co-sponsored and -founded 
by KWM and KWM Pro Bono Foundation. Since its establishment, KWM Institute 
is committed to building a new type of think tank with Chinese characteristics 
and international influence. Over the recent 25 years, KWM has accumulated 
extensive practical experience and professional insights in the course of providing 
services for the national economic and legal development. With such experience 
and insights, KWM Institute analyzes and studies the major issues that businesses 
may come across in implementing their “going global” strategy, so as to provide 
constructive and pragmatic policy recommendations and advice.