Late Imperial China Vol. 41, No. 1 (June 2020): 113–157
© 2020 by the Society for Qing Studies and Johns Hopkins University Press
Exiled Gods: Territory, History, Empire, and 
a Hunanese Deity in Xinjiang*
Eric Schluessel, The George Washington University
In the mid-nineteenth century, in the city of Changsha, Hunan, a local 
deity burst onto the stage of Qing imperial history. That deity was 
Dingxiang Wang, and he was known as the city god (chenghuang) of 
Shanhua county. Typically, a city god such as Dingxiang Wang was an 
object of veneration only within its limited domain, in this case a county 
that covered one half of the prefectural city of Changsha. However, in 
1852, Dingxiang Wang received significant credit for breaking the city’s 
three-month-long siege at the hands of the Taiping, the millennialist 
Christian sect that sought to topple the Qing and nearly did. Forty-five 
years later, Dingxiang Wang’s power and fame reached from one end of 
the Qing Empire to the other, as he was worshipped from Kashgar to 
Fuzhou. This “king who pacifies the Xiang River,” as we may translate 
his name, became known for calming more distant waters, in the oases of 
Chinese Central Asia.
The exceptional geographical reach of Dingxiang Wang’s cult resulted 
from the involvement of his worshippers in a series of conflicts that raged 
across the Qing in the latter half of the nineteenth century. This city god 
became the common object of worship of the soldiers of the Xiang Army, 
the celebrated fighting force usually known in English as the Hunan 
* Earlier versions of this article were presented at the AAS-in-Asia Conference in Kyoto 
in 2016, the Lockridge Workshop at the University of Montana, and the Montana East Asia 
Workshop. It builds on initial findings presented in Schluessel, “Cong chenghuang dao shuzu.” 
Thank you to two anonymous reviewers and to William Ma, Steven Miles, Tobin Miller-
Shearer, Onuma Takahiro, and Qiu Yuanyuan, who greatly enriched this article with their 
comments. A very special thanks goes to Katherine Alexander, who very kindly shared not 
only her great insight, but also the 1885 image of Dingxiang Wang reproduced here.
启发
arguments
学习叙事
新帝国史:
地方的agency 
对于殖民地：帝国与殖民地的双边关系 到 全球范围内的视角
新清史:
Traditons:冲击回应范式passsive 
-
-
without conflicts,we can abandon dynastic history.
New:在中国发现历史 不只有西方人建立现代国家 反西方中心论 
Chinese emperor/passive dilemma of narratives
流动表面下的权力博弈 底层人的声音流传得更广且可持续 信仰
精英的维度 50年 100年
改变人的衣食住行 时间拉长 底层群体的力量影响力更大
Land of Starangers -
the civilzing project of Qing Central Asia原著
精英政治文化与底层叙事
庶民受约束 impact and respond
basic human nature
1 庶民的研究价值
2 研究者的意愿
3 读者的共鸣
为什么要研究政治精英
落脚点在于解构神话
历史三调 事件、经历与神话
民族国家是制造神话的车间


114  eric schluessel
 
Army. What became the Xiang Army had likewise emerged in Hunan 
in the early 1850s, as activist gentry organized local militias (tuanlian) 
into larger and more sophisticated fighting forces meant to combat the 
Taiping.1 The army’s formation and maintenance thus depended on local 
social networks and collocal identity. In 1853, when Zeng Guofan (1811–
72) reformed these militias as the Xiang Army (Xiangjun), it was not only 
a fighting force, but a community rooted in common experiences and 
practices, among them the worship of this deity. The name “Xiang Army” 
also emphasized its specific association with Hunan, metonymized by the 
name of the river Xiang that ran through Changsha. After all, the army’s 
members came overwhelmingly from a small area around Changsha and 
had grown up near the Xiang River. Moreover, the name carried a natural 
resonance with the name Dingxiang Wang, which included the same 
character “Xiang.” Nevertheless, soldiers and deity roved far beyond 
those provincial boundaries: As the Xiang Army fought the Taiping 
(1850–64) and Nian (1851–68), marched northwest into Shaanxi, Gansu, 
and Xinjiang during the Muslim uprisings (1862–77), and fought foreign 
invaders in the Sino-French War (1884–85), its soldiers carried his statue 
with them.
 
Where Dingxiang Wang’s Hunanese worshippers settled far from 
home, his story and identity changed along with the new community’s 
estrangement from its homeland. This deity’s story is thus one of war, 
memory, and reconstruction in late Qing China. In the following pages, 
I explore the case of Dingxiang Wang and his worshippers in Xinjiang. I 
argue that demobilized Xiang Army soldiers and their descendants retold 
this deity’s story in ways that naturalized and justified their presence 
as settlers. Dingxiang Wang — in some places renamed “Fangshen” — 
marked Xinjiang as a Hunanese space. His legends demonstrated that 
common soldiers had transformed that space through self-sacrifice, 
both on the battlefield and through irreversible separation from their 
homeland. Dingxiang Wang became the deity that mediated across that 
1. Kuhn, Rebellion and its Enemies, 140–42, 145–48. Most histories of the Xiang Army end 
with the departure of Zeng Guofan from its leadership in 1864 following the victory over the 
Taiping. More recent scholarship takes a more nuanced view of its history. See Platt, Autumn 
in the Heavenly Kingdom, 24, 357; Wang Jiping, “Lun Xiangjun jituan”; and Zhao Weixi, 
Xiangjun jituan, 18–19. Indeed, modern historians of the Xiang Army place the Northwest 
and Xinjiang campaigns in the army’s “middle period,” following the Taiping defeat but 
preceding its role in the Sino-French War. Wang Dun, Xiangjun shi, 248–49.
国民党军队
浙江广东
潮商
流动不
是移植
根植在
当地情
境的再
创造
炒粿条
relations


exiled gods 
115 
distance, making life in “exile” intelligible and creating a persistent link 
with the homeland that also served as a reminder of its unbridgeable 
distance.
Few have taken note of this storied protector, probably because the 
leadership of the Xiang Army itself wrote Dingxiang Wang out of history. 
His presence and story undermined the leadership’s own heroic narrative 
of Xinjiang’s reconquest by robbing them of some degree of agency. 
The way that his legends articulated the soldiers’ claim to Xinjiang, as a 
horizontal movement of heroic commoners, threatened the leadership’s 
project to transform this Inner Asian borderland into a Chinese province 
through the imposition of a top-down hierarchy of temples.
That tension surrounding Dingxiang Wang reflected the fact that he, 
as a city god, was worshipped by many constituencies, and was both 
a member of the imperial hierarchy of spirits and a “popular” deity. 
In that sense, Dingxiang Wang embodied two different propositions 
about the relationship between time and space, or history and territory. 
The anthropologist Safet HadžiMuhamedovi´
c, borrowing a category 
of Bakhtinian literary analysis, characterizes such a proposition as a 
“chronotope”: a “discernible alliance of time and space, a time ‘thickened’ 
in a landscape and a set of practices and relationships, a space articulated 
through a time of specific quality.”2 Put differently, people create, 
maintain, and negotiate relationships between history, place, and identity 
through ritual. In the Chinese context, worship of a deity means telling 
and retelling that deity’s story, which in turn indicates the nature of the 
connection between a community of worshippers and the places where 
they live.
Such an idea is hardly unfamiliar to Chinese history. Steven Sangren 
describes two different ways in which deities are mobilized in the 
creation of territory: The first is the “bounding of uncivilized territory,” 
a historical act for which many Chinese living in former frontier zones 
venerated their deities.3 The narrative of a deity’s movement into a 
new space represented the inclusion of that space within the imperial 
pale. It implied not just the horizontal movement of imperial borders, 
but the vertical integration of frontier deities into a hierarchy that 
paralleled the bureaucracy. While we know this “imperial metaphor” to 
2. HadžiMuhamedovi´
c, Waiting for Elijah, 58.
3. Sangren, History and Magical Power, 157.
历史片段
被遗忘、
改写、压
制背后的
机制
editing
forgetting
传说与
领导权
印度土著
雅利安女神
把女神加入印度
教的神话
构筑神仙体系


116  eric schluessel
be an incomplete representation of the world of Chinese belief, it was 
nevertheless a powerful way of thinking about the relationship between 
spirits and worldly power, and a means to talk about absorbing and 
conquering new or unruly elements at the margins.4 As we will see, Xiang 
Army veterans reinvented their god as Fangshen, a boundary-expanding 
deity, and tried but failed to have him recognized as a part of that 
hierarchy.
The second way in which deities territorialize is by marking the 
boundaries of the community of worshippers, in part through the deity’s 
processional tour (youjing). During such tours, the deity’s image is 
carried through the space in which its community of worshippers lives. 
Its movements and stops reinscribe those boundaries on the landscape. 
Along the way, the deity, as it inhabits the image, often watches 
performances of dramas, some of which entertain the worshippers, while 
others are meant for the spirit’s eyes only. Dramas recount the deity’s 
legend and reassert the intimate connection between spirit, community, 
and territory through history. Such practices resemble how Rian Thum 
characterizes pilgrimage in his study of history and memory in Muslim 
Xinjiang.5 In Thum’s case, a shrine marking the real or imagined body of 
an Islamic saint serves as a “fulcrum of history,” a place where the social 
constructions of memory (history) and space (geography) connect at a 
fixed point through the recitation of the saint’s legend. Oral performance 
reasserts a common historical memory of the arrival of Islam in a place 
through the saint’s travel and death. In Pierre Nora’s terms, a shrine is 
a kind of lieu de mémoire in which the social discourse of memory is 
mediated by the sacred.6 Dingxiang Wang served the same purpose for 
Xiang Army soldiers as they crossed China and settled in Xinjiang.
Dingxiang Wang’s accomplishment, as it was retold in sacred legend 
and at his temples in Xinjiang, was dissonant with the dominant politics 
of commemoration, which favored the celebration of heroism at “manifest 
loyalty shrines” (zhaozhong ci).7 In the Taiping era and after, control 
of those shrines to imperial martyrs passed from the bureaucracy into 
the hands of provincial elites such as those who led the Xiang Army. 
4. Shahar and Weller, “Introduction,” 11.
5. Thum, Sacred Routes, 96–97.
6. Nora, “Between History and Memory.”
7. Bonk, “Chinese Military Men and Cultural Practice,” 145; Meyer-Fong, What Remains, 
139–45.


exiled gods 
117 
In Xinjiang, the army’s leadership first became the region’s provisional 
government and staffed the “reconstruction agencies” (shanhou ju) until 
1884, when Xinjiang became a province, and the same officers moved 
into its new government. Those officers-turned-officials staked their 
own claims on the landscape by memorializing its leaders in such shrines 
and even casting army leader Zuo Zongtang (1812–85) as the province’s 
protecting spirit. The leadership in Xinjiang did not simply promote its 
own narrative of heroism and territorial recovery but erased those of 
others.
The first part of this article tells the story of Dingxiang Wang from 
his adoption as the deity of the Xiang Army, to the spread of his cult 
to Xinjiang, and finally to his abandonment by the elite but persistent 
worship by Chinese in the borderland. The second part plunges into 
history to discern the origins of Dingxiang Wang’s legend and how it was 
adapted in his community’s self-fashioning as heroic exiles. The third part 
draws out the contradictions between his territorialization and that which 
the army leadership attempted to impose.
This elite process of producing the frontier as an object of knowledge 
and political project — including phenomena that Laura Newby has 
described as the “literati conquest of Xinjiang” and James Millward as 
“coming onto the map” — obscured the social processes of settlement and 
placemaking among ordinary Chinese.8 I will argue for greater attention 
to Qing empire as a multilayered process in which differences of class 
and belief remained significant even as those of ethnicity came to the 
fore. After all, Albert Memmi reminds us that colonialism does violence 
not only to the colonized, but to the colonials, those agents who are 
allied with the colonial project but remain its instruments.9 Attending to 
such experiences requires us to consider sources and perspectives that fit 
awkwardly into present historiographical paradigms but that ultimately 
serve to fulfill the promise of Qing imperial history.
The Ever-Securing: From City God to God of Exile
Dingxiang Wang was worshipped first in Changsha, then in the Xiang 
Army, and later in Xinjiang and across China. The following history 
of Dingxiang Wang connects his social and cultural role in Xinjiang 
8. Millward, “Coming onto the Map”; Newby, “The Chinese Literary Conquest of 
Xinjiang.”
9. Memmi, The Colonizer and the Colonized, 10–14.
spirits
and
politics
narative
of
spirits/
Xiang 
army
argument
abandonment
spirits and leadership
argument


118  eric schluessel
to his origins in Hunan. This connection has surprisingly remained 
underexplored in the historiography, which tends to focus on either 
end of the god’s journey.10 Moreover, this section places his worship in 
the context of the “Xiang Army community” (Xiangjun jituan).11 This 
understanding of the Xiang Army as a sociocultural formation bound 
together by common origins, practices, and beliefs draws our attention 
from the lives of the army’s famous leaders to those of ordinary soldiers. 
This shift of perspective will illuminate the interrelationship between the 
community, the deity, and the sites of worship that joined them together.
The history of Dingxiang Wang may begin in September 1852, when 
the Taiping army besieged Changsha.12 At the time, Changsha was home 
to a number of deities who could have rendered aid to its overwhelmed 
defenders. They included three different city gods (chenghuang): one for 
Changsha Prefecture, and one each for the two counties — Changsha and 
Shanhua — that shared jurisdiction of the prefectural city. According 
to a theory then espoused by Chinese scholars and repeated in many 
gazetteers, a place or territory — such as a county, prefecture, or 
province — is the “double” or “repetition” (fu) of its city god.13 For 
this reason, the first emperor of the Ming dynasty (1368–1644) had 
mandated that city god temples be established for every administrative 
unit, along with official rites仪式for their worship. This theory of doubling 
was included in the canon of the so-called statecraft (jingshi) school of 
Neo-Confucianism, which was compiled in Changsha by a community of 
scholars who also formed the core group of the Xiang Army leadership. 
However, other stories present an alternative image of city gods as more 
active forces who are made manifest during moments of crisis, often 
10. There are a number of short articles in Chinese on Dingxiang Wang in either Changsha 
or Xinjiang, including Liu Hua, “Cong ‘Dingxiang Wang’ xinyang kan zongjiao de shehui 
gongneng.” For a particularly comprehensive and subtle examination of religion in turn-of-
the-century Dihua, and one that bears on this argument, see Wang, “Chongjian fenghua.” The 
one work in Chinese to address the phenomenon comprehensively is Tang Juan, “Dingxiang 
Wang xinyang de qiyuan ji qi zai Xinjiang diqu chuanbo yanjiu.”
11. For this analysis, see Wang Jiping, “Lun Xiangjun jituan”; Zhao Weixi, Xiangjun jituan.
12. Kuhn, Rebellion and its Enemies, 139–40; Wu and Zhang, Shanhua xian zhi, 14:214–18.
13. Goossaert, “The Shifting Balance,” 7–8; “Managing Chinese Religious Pluralism”; 
Johnson, “City-God Cults,” 365–68, 373, 388–91; Qin Huitian, “Chenghuang kao,” in 
Huangchao jingshi wenbian, 55:14b–15a; Rong Zhen, Zhongguo gudai minjian xinyang yanjiu, 
179–86.
研究后代
的信仰-
无文本
精英叙事
为何大行
其道


exiled gods 
119 
as ghostly warriors defending their city from atop its walls. Such a 
bifurcation between official and popular conceptions and worship of the 
city god reflected a widespread understanding of the complementarity 
of earthly and spiritual power. The chief administrator of a territory, 
for example the magistrate of a county, was the city god’s partner in the 
visible world: where the magistrate tended to his flock in life, the city god 
would guide them in the afterlife through the courts of the underworld.
The least among Changsha’s city gods was Dingxiang Wang, of 
Shanhua County, to whom the defenders of Changsha turned when all 
else failed.14 According to the Shanhua Gazetteer, when the Taiping had 
besieged Changsha for several weeks, Magistrate Wang Baosheng led 
a group of gentry to Dingxiang Wang’s temple, which was at the base 
of the city wall. They then carried his statue to the top of the wall and 
faced it southward to view the battle. Suddenly, the tide of battle turned: 
the Taiping troops, who had been using explosives in an attempt to 
undermine the walls, instead burned themselves up, while their rockets 
and cannonballs fell all but harmlessly onto empty houses. Those scaling 
the walls were pushed away from it by some unseen force and tumbled 
through the air like so many drops of rain. The siege was broken. While 
historians may attribute the lifting of the siege of Changsha to the 
resilience of its defenders and a poor tactical choice on the part of the 
Taiping commanders, the people of Shanhua celebrated their god’s timely 
intervention and reported sightings of him keeping watch on the walls 
or planning the defense. On May 2, 1853, Governor Luo Bingzhang 
(1793–1867) officially requested a title for the city god in recognition of 
his contribution. The Board of Rites named him the “Ever-Securing” 
(yongzhen) Dingxiang Wang.
 
The Xiang Army was formally created that year, and Dingxiang Wang 
probably entered it along with worshippers from Changsha. The army 
was not merely a military unit, but rather a social formation constructed 
around collocal identity, ties of blood and patronage, oaths of loyalty, a 
moral code, and the common experience of battle against the Taiping.15
Worship of Dingxiang Wang was a further source of social cohesion, and 
one that seems to have strengthened following the army’s reorganization 
14. Platt, Autumn in the Heavenly Kingdom, 116; Wu and Zhang, Shanhua xian zhi, 14:214–
18; Xie Bin, Xinjiang youji, 132.
15. Kuhn, Rebellion and its Enemies, 147–48; Wang Jiping, “Lun Xiangjun jituan.”
earthly
and
spiritual


120  eric schluessel
in 1864 under the leadership of Zuo Zongtang. While Zuo’s new, smaller 
army was technically named the Chu Army (Chujun), its members 
consistently referred to it as the Xiang Army, and I follow their self-
description here.
For a decade, as the campaign dragged on across China, Zuo Zongtang 
ordered the worship of Dingxiang Wang before every battle. Worship 
resembled that given to him in his role as a city god: “Whenever the 
Hunanese go to fight in other provinces,” declared a memorial in 1888, 
“they always carry with them a statue of Dingxiang Wang… which they 
worship at a ‘temporary residence’ (xinggong).”16 The term “temporary 
residence” is normally used for the places where city gods stopped 
overnight during tours of their territory when they could not shelter in a 
shrine, and it reflects the word used for the mobile encampments where 
earthly rulers stayed in similar circumstances. In these residences, the city 
gods often watch dramas while facing south, much as Dingxiang Wang 
had watched the battlefield in Changsha. Perhaps he continued to observe 
combat along the march. That a local deity was operating far beyond his 
usual territory, and yet retained his identity as a city god, attracted the 
notice of Chinese observers. “The city god of our Changsha does not 
only orient inward, but can also orient outward,” wrote the Hunanese 
literatus Yi Baisha (1886–1921). “Not only does he stay in Hunan — he 
goes on campaign to other provinces, as well!”17 Dingxiang Wang was 
simultaneously the inward-facing “double” of Shanhua and an outward-
facing deity who reclaimed and expanded territory.
This dual identity was embodied in Dingxiang Wang’s image. A block-
printed book from 1885 depicts him as a scholar-official with a serene 
expression and long beard.18 His long-sleeved robe is covered in cloud 
16. Chen Zuolin, “Bingzhu li tan,” in Jinling suozhi jiu zhong (xia), 311; Sangren, History 
and Magical Power, 50, 157; Wei Rongguang, GX 14.9.3, “Zou wei Hunan Shanhua xian 
chenghuang yongzhen Dingxiang Wang, Zhejiang Zhaobaoshan Guanyin dashi xuan zhu ling 
ying, qing zhi ge banbian jia fenghao shi,” FHA 03–5548–108; Dai, Xiyu beiming lu, 496–97; 
Peng Mingjun et al., comps., Hunan Dingxiang Wang Nanjing xinggong zhilüe, 3–6.
17. Yi Baisha, Diwang chunqiu, 89.
18. Yu Zhi, Deyi lu. I am very grateful to Prof. Katherine Alexander for sharing this work 
with me, and to Prof. William Ma for advice on interpreting the image. My points of reference 
are Wang Qi, San cai tu hui, and Doré, Researches into Chinese Superstitions, Vol. X: Boards of 
Heavenly Administration. Dingxiang Wang’s images closely resemble that of the guardian of 
the Huai River in Doré, 92 (facing).


exiled gods 
121 
Figure 1. Image of Dingxiang Wang from Yu Zhi, Deyi lu (Baoshan tang, 1885), preface, 2a.


122  eric schluessel
patterns, pointing to his place in the celestial realm. In his left hand, he 
holds a hu scepter. His right hand rests in his lap, covered by a sleeve. 
About his waist is a girdle. Overall, Dingxiang Wang appears the picture 
of an upright scholar-official who has crossed into the spirit world, and 
he resembles in dress and comportment certain members of the heavenly 
bureaucracy, including the headdress of a king (wang) with tassels 
hanging down, which marks his rank. His image is similar to those of the 
guardian gods of rivers, also enfeoffed as “kings,” as they were depicted 
in nineteenth-century Jiangnan; however, the throne on which he sits is 
draped with the skin of a tiger, pointing to his newfound identity as a god 
who accompanied an army on a mission of reconquest. In the 1980s, a 
team of researchers investigating the remains of Dingxiang Wang’s temple 
in Manas, Xinjiang, which had been destroyed in the 1950s, ran across 
a statue and noticed the same curious mixture of imagery.19 Members 
of the community, when asked about the martial aspects of this civil 
figure, responded that Dingxiang Wang had been a soldier, and then an 
official. That same duality of upright official and brave soldier appears in 
the legends of Dingxiang Wang, which we will discuss in the following 
section.
The temporary residences of Dingxiang Wang served a range of 
functions for Xiang Army soldiers.20 Soldiers suffering from illness 
sought healing from him, while commanders confirmed their strategic 
decisions by consulting the god through spirit writing, much as nervous 
young scholars had done in Shanhua on their way to the provincial 
examinations. When Zuo’s lieutenant Liu Songshan (1833–70) died in 
battle, Zuo selected his young nephew Liu Jintang (1844–94), the future 
governor of Xinjiang, to take his place. Dingxiang Wang, it was later 
written, appeared to Liu Jintang in a dream to give him courage as he 
took on his uncle’s duties. Meanwhile, on the nights before the army met 
the enemy in battle, soldiers heard the mysterious sounds of the ghostly 
men and horses whom Dingxiang Wang rallied to their aid the next day.
In 1877, the Xiang Army entered Xinjiang carrying the statue of 
Dingxiang Wang and in less than two years had retaken the entire region. 
As soon as the war was over, however, the army’s leadership recast 
19. Tang Juan, “Fenxi Qing mo Minguo Xinjiang Manasi Dingxiang Wang miao ji qi 
xinyang.”
20. Peng Mingjun et al., comps., Hunan Dingxiang Wang Nanjing xinggong zhilüe, 3–6.


exiled gods 
123 
their erstwhile soldiers, who had been recruited into the army through 
personal connections and marched across all of China, as suspicious 
members of an unstable underclass. Roughly half left Xinjiang and sought 
to return home, while the rest stayed and became farmers, traders, and 
laborers. Few found their fortunes. In these circumstances, packaging 
the bones of the dead to send home for burial became an important 
duty shared by Hunanese collocals and their native-place associations. 
However, that could be an expensive and complicated endeavor.21 Where 
Chinese migrants in distant but gold-rich California could afford to 
dispatch their remains for burial at home across the vast Pacific — so that 
it became a lucrative trade that outgrew the native-place associations — 
their counterparts who had made the arduous overland journey into the 
Northwest did not share that luxury.22
One of the primary roles of Dingxiang Wang was therefore to connect 
Hunanese soldiers and settlers with their homeland. The first known 
temple to him in Xinjiang was founded in Qumul (Hami), which the 
Xiang Army used as a staging ground for the campaign. In 1992, more 
than a century later, a worshipper there described the god thus: “The 
Xiang Braves may have died in Xinjiang, but Dingxiang Wang sent the 
souls of the dead back home.”23 Indeed, Dingxiang Wang’s temple in 
Qumul did not merely ensure the passage of deceased Hunanese who 
could not be buried in their homeland, but came to act as a spiritual 
intermediary for all Han Chinese. In 1939, the writer Mao Dun (1896–
1981) visited Dihua, where he saw a Dingxiang Wang temple buzzing 
with activity. By this time, the temple’s priests (daoshi) were Gansunese, 
rather than Hunanese, and within it they ran a kind of “spiritual post 
office.” Worshippers far from their homes in China proper could send 
letters to their distant deities, if they paid a fee for a special stamp labeled 
“Dingxiang Wang’s Palace” (Dingxiang Wang fu). Thereupon the letters 
would be burnt so that Dingxiang Wang could spirit them to their 
recipients. The temple did especially brisk business around the Lunar 
New Year, when migrants were too far from home for a return visit to be 
feasible.
21. See for example Qingdai Xinjiang dang’an xuanji, vol. 56, 178; Schluessel, Land of 
Strangers, chapter 5.
22. Sinn, Pacific Passages, 267–69.
23. Hami wenwu zhi, 205, 217; Mao Dun, “Xinjiang fengtu za yi” in Mao Dun wenji, vol. 9, 
408–30, 416–17; Xinjiang wenshi ziliao, vol. 14, 114.
士兵的结局？宏大叙事下的小人物？


124  eric schluessel
As Wang Penghui argues, this example reflects the role of deities on 
frontiers in blurring distinctions between Chinese of otherwise diverse 
origins, or what other scholars of Chinese religion might describe as a 
deity’s role in an ongoing tension and negotiation between localizing 
and universalizing identifications.24 Mao Dun even called Dingxiang 
Wang the “city god of the Han ethnic group” (Hanzu zhi chenghuang), 
and as Wang notes, his temple was the only city god temple in Dihua, 
the capital of Xinjiang. The metaphor of the city god as the “god of walls 
and moats” recalls Dingxiang Wang’s ancient function as the protector 
of a territory, or in this case the boundaries around a community. This 
seems to suggest that Dingxiang Wang had somehow become recognized 
both as the city god of Shanhua and, at least from a popular perspective, 
as that of the provincial capital. At the same time, even though the Dihua 
Dingxiang Wang temple served a variety of Chinese communities, it was 
later attached to a Hunanese-Hubeinese native place association (Liang 
Hu huiguan) founded in 1904. It must be emphasized that the reconquest 
and reconstruction of Xinjiang was a distinctly Hunanese project: an 
overwhelming majority of the provincial leadership were former Xiang 
Army officers from a small area around Changsha, and, as many travelers 
observed, the Hunanese Xiang dialect remained more useful than the 
speech of Beijing into the mid-1910s, when the Xiang Army clique 
lost control of the government.25 The region became known as “little 
Hunan” (xiao Hunan), and so it is not surprising that Chineseness as a 
collective identity should be articulated in part through Hunaneseness. 
To draw a comparison with the articulation of European identities in 
colonial contexts, the Dihua temple points to the role of institutions in 
blurring distinctions among settlers who might have had diverse origins 
in the homeland but developed a common identity in their new home. 
Despite the articulation of vertical boundaries between peoples, however, 
horizontal boundaries of class nevertheless persisted, as we will see.26
The construction of Dingxiang Wang’s further “temporary residences” 
followed the path of the army and of the merchant networks that formed 
24. Bryson, Goddess on the Frontier, 7–11; Mao Dun, “Xinjiang fengtu zayi,” 417; Wang, 
“Chongjian fenghua,” 98.
25. Schluessel, Land of Strangers, chapter 2.
26. Stoler, “Rethinking Colonial Categories,” 185.
arguments


exiled gods 
125 
around it.27 Dingxiang Wang temporary residences were built in Turpan’s 
New City sometime before 1893; in Gucheng (Qitai), which was the 
major hub of trade in North Xinjiang; in Manas (Suilai); in Suiding in 
Ili; in Wusu, west of Dihua, in 1907; in Ürümchi (Dihua); and, across the 
Tianshan mountains to the south, in Chaqiliq (Ruoqiang).28
Of these, the Manas temporary residence provides the most complete 
picture of Dingxiang Wang in Xinjiang. Manas was the site of the Xiang 
Army’s final victory in North Xinjiang over the forces of Ya‘q¯
ub Beg 
(1820–77), and, before the Muslim uprisings, it had hosted a significant 
Chinese settlement and trading post. It was also where Xiang Army 
leaders chose to encamp during the planning of the campaign into the 
Tarim Basin to the south. Later, some Hunanese settlers decided to build 
this new residence out of “contrition” for nearly twenty years of missed 
prayers and sacrifices. Local support was strong: the magistrate solicited 
funds and labor in the early spring, and, on the summer solstice, the 
temple was already complete and ready for dedication. A stela erected to 
memorialize the event reads:
Dingxiang Wang is the city god of Shanhua…. After the tragedy of 
the Muslim uprisings, the Great Qing pacified Shaanxi, Gansu, and 
Xinjiang, one by one. The Wang’s incense fires then spread north and 
south of the Tianshan Mountains.
The metaphor of “incense fires” (xianghuo) stands for the popularity and 
geographical reach of a deity’s cult, as worshippers placed ashes from the 
incense burner of the senior temple into that of a newly founded one.29 
Incense implied pilgrimage and continued connection with Dingxiang 
Wang’s primary temple in Shanhua, which worshippers recognized as his 
place of origin.
The timing of the temple’s erection is telling: roughly eighteen years 
after the reconquest, the Xiang Army community was reproducing 
27. Zhou Hong, Quntuan yu quanceng, 312–79, provides a detailed and perceptive 
discussion of the geographic distribution of merchant networks and their interrelationship 
with official power.
28. Suiding xian xiangtuzhi, 203; Suilai xian xiangtuzhi, 80–81; Tulufan zhiliting 
xiangtuzhi, 133; Qitai xian xiangtuzhi, 40; Ruoqiang xian xiangtuzhi, 314; Wang Penghui, 
Qingdai Minchu, 78; Dai, Xiyu beiming lu, 496–97; Xuxiu Wusu xian zhi.
29. Naquin and Yü, “Introduction: Pilgrimage in China,” 11–12.


126  eric schluessel
itself in the borderlands. The army’s leading officers simply became the 
civil officials of the new provincial administration, and they remained 
entrenched in the government until the end of the Qing.30 Hunanese 
officials’ children who were born in the Northwest married each other, 
and their sons often joined the administration, reinforcing the Hunanese 
dominance of institutions. More Hunanese were recruited from the Xiang 
Army’s home counties, as well. Former soldiers, in contrast, usually lived 
as unmarried men or in groups of bachelors, as marriageable Han women 
were rare.31 Some were assigned wives by the Refugees Agency (Nanmin 
ju), while others acquired Muslim wives through brokers. Those unions 
resulted in many children who belonged neither to the Chinese nor 
Muslim communities. These circumstances heightened anxieties about 
descent and belonging.
This temple construction was thus accompanied by a reimagining of 
the place of Hunanese people in Xinjiang and a renaming of Dingxiang 
Wang, who in South Xinjiang was called “Fangshen.” Temples to 
Fangshen were established, also in the mid-1890s, in Kucha, Wensu, 
Kashgar, Yarkand, and Qarghiliq.32 Fangshen, despite being recognized 
as the same deity under a different name, was later worshipped separately 
from Dingxiang Wang. Indeed, some places in the North had a Fangshen 
temple as well as one to Dingxiang Wang: Wusu, Ghulja (Ningyuan), 
and Qumul, where in 1908 Fangshen’s statue was installed alongside 
30. Kataoka, “Shin-matsu shinky¯
osh¯
o kan’in k¯
o”; Schluessel, Land of Strangers, chapter 4.
31. This conclusion is supported by documents from the Turpan archive, for example a 
household register in Qingdai Xinjiang dang’an xuanji, vol. 9, 102–9.
32. Kataoka Kazutada in his brief study of temples in late Qing Xinjiang lists Dingxiang 
Wang and Fangshen as separate deities, but as we will see, an attention to the temples’ 
contexts where they are listed in gazetteers immediately reveals that they involve the same 
god. Shinch¯
o Shinky¯
o, 291. For details, see Hetian zhilizhou xiangtuzhi, 394; Kuerkala Wusu 
zhiliting xiangtuzhi, 170; Ningyuan xian xiangtuzhi, 209; Kuche zhiliting xiangtuzhi, 318; 
Shache fu zhi, 661; Wensu xian xiangtuzhi, 259; Xuxiu Wusu xian zhi, juan shang, 27; Yecheng 
xian xiangtuzhi, 372. Wang Penghui (Qingdai Minchu Xinjiang Zhendi dao) indicates that 
the Wusu temple was established in 1892. Given that Fangshen’s statue was actually installed 
inside a preexisting Huoshen temple, I would suggest that the 1892 date actually refers to the 
establishment of that temple. Similarly, the Ghulja (Ningyuan) Fangshen temple is meant to 
date to 1884, which is very early relative to other records of Fangshen. This may indicate that it 
was actually a different temple.


exiled gods 
127 
that of Dingxiang Wang in the same temple.33 The fact that Fangshen 
and Dingxiang Wang could be worshipped side-by-side indicated 
that Fangshen had rapidly gained an independent identity that was 
nevertheless still tied to the Hunanese presence. Given that the Dihua 
temple served as a “spiritual post office” for all kinds of Han Chinese, it 
is possible that Dingxiang Wang became more commonly accepted, while 
Fangshen stood specifically for the Hunanese community.
While Dingxiang Wang continued to receive adoration in Xinjiang, 
his star in Changsha fell. In 1885, a group of 101 leading Hunanese 
members of the Xiang Army who were then officials in Xinjiang province 
— formally founded a year earlier in 1884 — collectively sponsored the 
reprinting of a didactic work, the Deyi lu of Yu Zhi (1809–74), at a press 
run by another Xiang Army veteran and Xinjiang returnee, Zhou Han 
(1841–1911).34 In it, they singled out Dingxiang Wang for praise, noting 
his special significance to Hunanese everywhere and key role in postwar 
reconstruction. However, it appears that Dingxiang Wang was becoming 
associated more specifically with Zuo Zongtang’s Xiang Army and its 
veterans in Xinjiang, while the army’s earlier leaders no longer favored 
him. Wang Kaiyun, who completed his chronicle of the Xiang Army’s 
exploits in 1881, retained the story of how the Shanhua magistrate placed 
the statue of Dingxiang Wang on the walls of Changsha, but omitted any 
statement about the god’s concrete contributions. Wang Kaiyun’s work 
was soon superseded by Wang Dingan, who was more openly critical: 
“The people of Xiang and Chu believe in spirits and superstition, and of 
old they believed in the Changsha city god.”35 Wang Dingan’s account 
dates to 1889, only one year after Dingxiang Wang had received honors 
from the empire a second time for his role in the Sino-French War, and 
yet it rejects as mere superstition the importance of a deity who was still 
worshipped not only in Changsha, but in a new transregional community 
formed by veterans.
Although a thorough study remains to be written, a document 
produced at the Dingxiang Wang temporary residence founded in 
33. Hami wenwu zhi, 205, 217. I am grateful to Prof. Onuma Takahiro for pointing out the 
Qumul case.
34. Wang Kaiyun, Xiangjun zhi, 1:4b; Yu Zhi, Deyi lu, 2b–4a. On Zhou Han, see Platt, 
Provincial Patriots, 64–66.
35. Wang Dingan, Xiangjun ji, 1:10b–11a.


128  eric schluessel
Nanjing in 1883 attests to the existence of this transregional community.36 
In 1935, the temple’s association leaders compiled a history of their own 
community and the network of temples with which they communicated. 
Apart from Xinjiang and Hunan, the gazetteer lists centers of worship 
in Fujian, Zhejiang, Shaanxi, and Gansu, as well as their own. The 
gazetteer was written with some sense of urgency, as Dingxiang Wang’s 
worship was fading elsewhere. After the Xinhai Revolution, his temple 
in Changsha was an object of violence in “anti-superstition” campaigns. 
Ultimately, the Changsha temple burned in the fire of 1938, and the 
Cultural Revolution destroyed most of what remained. Until 2015, a 
piece of stone that had formed part of the temple remained on display 
in a restaurant that later stood on the site. Today, even the restaurant is 
gone, and while a new city god temple has been erected nearby as part 
of a history-themed shopping street, Dingxiang Wang is not slated to be 
honored within it.37
Soldier’s Sacrifice: The Evolution of the Dingxiang Wang Legend
The erasure of Dingxiang Wang from elite accounts of the Xiang Army 
reflects a competition over history and territory. To return to the idea 
of the chronotope: The changing legend of Dingxiang Wang and its 
expressions of when and how Hunanese people arrived in Xinjiang 
reflected shifts in how Hunanese settlers constructed their relationship 
with the borderland. The horizontal territory defined by the legend 
connected the contemporary Hunanese presence to pre-uprisings history 
through a story of exile. This section will trace the legends of Dingxiang 
Wang from Changsha to Khotan, showing how the same cluster of 
narratives traveled with the deity and were adapted in his worshippers’ 
new circumstances.
Dingxiang Wang’s rise to prominence drew the curiosity of 
contemporary literati. In 1877, one expressed the persistent sense of 
mystery surrounding the deity.38 He speculated that Dingxiang Wang 
36. Goossaert, “The Shifting Balance,” 25; Peng Mingjun et al., comps., Hunan Dingxiang 
Wang Nanjing xinggong zhilüe, 1–2, 4–5; “Xiangren fandui chaihui chenghuang miao,” 
Shenbao, MG 2.1.5 (January 5, 1913); Yi Baisha, Diwang chunqiu, 89.
37. Personal communication and observations, Changsha, June 2017.
38. Chen Zuolin, “Bingzhu li tan,” in Jinling suozhi jiu zhong (xia), 311; Wang Fuzhi, Yongli 
shilu, juan 7, “He Duzhang liezhuan,” 7b–8b.


exiled gods 
129 
originated either as a water god worshipped locally in Hunan, or perhaps 
as the spirit of the local anti-Manchu hero He Tengjiao (1592–1649). He 
Tengjiao was a supreme commander for the Ming when the Qing armies 
crossed into Hunan, and he led his embattled forces in resistance all along 
the Xiang River. According to several accounts, when Changsha was all 
but lost, He Tengjiao entrusted his seal of office to a relative before the 
Qing captured him and placed him on a boat. Somewhere downriver, He 
seized the opportunity to jump deep into the river, where he evaded his 
captors and floated ten li to safety, crawling ashore at a Guandi temple. 
He Tengjiao and his relation were reunited, along with the seal, and the 
fight continued. Later, he was captured but refused food for seven days 
before the Qing executed him. According to Wang Fuzhi (1619–92), 
when the retreating Ming learned of He’s self-sacrifice, they honored him 
posthumously as Zhongxiang Wang, “King of the Middle Xiang,” which 
title obviously resembled Dingxiang Wang. Indeed, in He Tengjiao’s 
hometown of Liping, Guizhou, it was his spirit who was believed to 
be Changsha’s city god, and who frightened the Taiping armies away.39 
Wang Fuzhi was an anti-Manchu intellectual who briefly led a guerilla 
resistance against the Qing invasion, and his writings later profoundly 
influenced the core community of the Xiang Army, who construed Wang 
as part of a distinctly Hunanese scholarly lineage.40 However, there is 
no clear association between He Tengjiao and Dingxiang Wang in other 
known Hunanese sources.
Rather, the stories that accumulated around He seem to reflect two 
of the tropes surrounding Dingxiang Wang: self-sacrifice in the struggle 
against an invading force and diving into the river. Therefore, the deity’s 
story may be far older, in the sense of emerging from a collection of 
traditions. “Dingxiang Wang” literally means “the king who pacifies the 
Xiang River,” the wide waterway that flows through Changsha, and it 
should not surprise us that his known origin legends associate him with 
its fickle waters. Perhaps Dingxiang Wang was worshipped already in the 
Song as the city god of Tanzhou, as mentioned in the 1224 Bintui lu.41 In 
39. Yu and Chen, Liping fu zhi, 8:65.
40. Platt, Provincial Patriots, 16.
41. Zhao Yushi, Bintui lu, 8:14a. There are several known manuscripts and prints of this 
work, written in 1224, and not all of them include the section on city gods. A Song printing 
that does include the relevant phrase is reproduced online in the Airusheng database, with a 
note indicating the print’s re-covering in Yuantong 2 (1334, see the final page of the afterword), 


130  eric schluessel
the meantime, Dingxiang Wang fell into obscurity until the nineteenth 
century.42
Indeed, the Jiaqing-era Changsha County Gazetteer describes 
Dingxiang Wang as a forgotten god, a former city god of Changsha 
known by different names in different places.43 In Shanhua, it relates, he 
was instead called Chengxiang Wang, “the king of clarifying the Xiang,” 
or perhaps of “bathing in the Xiang.” While variation between “Ding” 
and “Cheng” may be attributed to dialectal differences, it also indicates 
an action that the deity took in many of his legends: submerging himself 
in roiling waters in order to calm them. Regardless, as of 1818, Dingxiang 
Wang was not the city god of Shanhua or anywhere else, nor were his 
temples labeled explicitly in local gazetteers.44 Nevertheless, some of 
Dingxiang Wang’s worshippers later referred to him simply as the “noble” 
(wangye), and earlier Qing gazetteers do note the presence of smaller 
temples (dian) near the Xiang River where locals worshipped a “noble.” It 
is possible that this indicated Dingxiang Wang, then playing the role of a 
river god.
Instead, Shanhua’s city god at the time was considered to be the spirit 
of Li Fengsheng, who had come to Shanhua as an acting magistrate in 
apparently demonstrating its antiquity. Several other city gods listed bear the title of “king” 
(wang). A 1646 printing in the Shuofu collectanea is abridged and does not include this 
section, but it appears in the 1752 printing, which is based on the Song version. The most 
complete reproduction of the 1752 printing is Qi Zhiping, ed., Bintui lu, 1983. Some modern 
reproductions have Hunzhou for Tanzhou, which is simply a printing error.
42. None of the intermediate Changsha and Shanhua gazetteers names the city god of 
Shanhua. Their temples did not move from their locations east of the yamen. Fang, Changsha 
fu zhi, 6:55a–58a; Su and Tan, Changsha fu zhi, 7:51a–58a. A Ming-era inscription does not 
name the city god, but indicates that his title was not “king” (wang), but “marquis” (hou). 
Huang Qiazhong, “Chongxiu Shanhua chenghuang miao ji,” in Chen Yunrong, Xiangcheng 
fanggu lu, 144.
43. Jiaqing Changsha xian zhi, also reproduced in Liu and Zhang, Changsha xian zhi, 36:2. 
It should be noted that Dingxiang Wang is distinct from the similarly named Ding Wang. Ding 
Wang was the son of Emperor Jing of Han (r. 188–141 B.C.E.) who was enfeoffed at Changsha. 
His worship continued there through the imperial period, and a neighborhood, Ding Wang 
Tai, is named for him. (Sun and Yang, Changsha fu zhi, zhengsị ji.)
44. Wang Xunxiu and Wang Yunying, comps., Jiaqing Shanhua xian zhi, 11:26b; 20:5b. The 
1613 Shanhua County Gazetteer, compiled by Huang Qiazhong, is apparently lost, and not all 
of it was reproduced in later versions of the gazetteer. If found, it would surely shed light on 
the religious history of the Changsha area.


exiled gods 
131 
1743.45 Li died by dark magic, but according to legend acted from beyond 
the grave to guide his flock back to orthodoxy. His spirit became the 
city god. In 1838, however, a crisis emerged that Li Fengsheng could not 
address: a plague of locusts descended on Changsha and stripped the 
fields bare. Fortunately, the story goes, the magistrate was an upright 
gentleman named Han Dunwu, known alternately by a given name 
Han Yuan, or by a style name “Baowu.” (There is no record of a Han 
Yuan, Baowu, or Dunwu serving as magistrate of Shanhua.) According 
to legend, Han Dunwu was a direct descendant of the Tang scholar 
Han Yu (768–824), and he possessed exceptional abilities to detect and 
control malevolent spirits. Nevertheless, the locust crisis proved an 
insurmountable challenge. In a last and desperate act, Han Dunwu 
dressed in his formal robes, strode out into the fields, and swallowed 
handfuls of locusts, swearing that he would consume them all himself if 
necessary. Magistrate Han died from his efforts, as though drowning in 
locusts instead of water, but he was not gone forever.
Han Dunwu reappeared as a spirit in July 1847, much as He Tengjiao 
had reemerged from the river.46 One day, a water seller was gathering 
water from the Xiang when the spirit of Han Dunwu possessed his body, 
apparently having traveled through the waters. God and man proceeded 
to the magistrate’s office to explain the situation: Han Dunwu, since his 
death, had served as the tutelary god of Yanggu County, Sichuan.47 He 
was then reassigned to Xiangtan County, Hunan — just downriver — as 
its city god. Now he had been transferred back to Shanhua and wished 
to report for duty. The magistrate recognized Han Dunwu as Dingxiang 
Wang and accepted his appointment as Shanhua’s city god.
Dingxiang Wang now possessed a treble identity: as an upright 
magistrate turned city god, a defender of Changsha, and a god who 
pacified dangerous waters. The former two of those aspects were on 
display during the siege of Changsha in 1852, but the third remained 
salient in the retelling of his legend in Xinjiang. In Qumul, Dingxiang 
Wang was identified in an oral source from 1991 as the magistrate of 
45. Peng Mingjun et al., comps., Hunan Dingxiang Wang Nanjing xinggong zhilüe, 1–3; Wu 
Shenglan, Chu nan xiao ji. Li Fengsheng’s identity as an acting magistrate and jinshi is verified 
in the Jiaqing-era, Wang, Shanhua xian zhi, 15:4a. It indicates that Li actually arrived in 1730.
46. Peng Mingjun et al., comps., Hunan Dingxiang Wang Nanjing xinggong zhilüe, 4–5.
47. Yanggu County was in Shandong, not Sichuan.


132  eric schluessel
Xiangxiang County, which neighbors Shanhua and Xiangtan.48 When the 
Xiang River flooded, it is said, this magistrate donned his official robes 
and immersed himself in the river in order to calm the waters. The story 
is plausible, as magistrates were known to act out roles in local rituals of 
self-sacrifice.49 Indeed, magistrates in such rituals took on the roles of 
legendary figures — and so, if and when Han Dunwu or someone like 
him waded into the river, perhaps it was not the origin of the Dingxiang 
Wang story, but an enactment of it. When the flood did not retreat, 
however, he leapt further into the river, and only when he drowned did 
the water calm. According to the story, the Qing court posthumously 
granted him the name “Dingxiang Wang,” with the title of king (wang), 
to celebrate his pacification (ding) of the Xiang. Unfortunately, no records 
appear to verify the story, but it does reinforce the intimate connection 
between Dingxiang Wang the city god, water, and self-sacrifice.
All of those elements survived Dingxiang Wang’s transformation into 
“Fangshen.” Yet Fangshen’s story had one critical difference: Fangshen 
was not a magistrate, but an exiled soldier.50 The Wensu County Gazetteer 
(documenting a county in the northwestern Tarim Basin, north of 
48. Zhongguo minjian gushi jicheng, Xinjiang juan (shang ce), 188–89.
49. Snyder-Reinke, Dry Spells, 153.
50. A contrary hypothesis, that Fangshen’s presence in Xinjiang genuinely predated the 
Muslim uprisings, has been advanced by Chen Guoguang in “Xinjiang ‘Fangshen’ ben shi 
Qingdai Xiang ji aiguo zhi shi”; “Xinjiang ‘Fangshen’ ben shi shubian aiguo zhi shi.” Chen 
argues that the contrasting geographies of Dingxiang Wang and Fangshen cults suggest the 
spread of Fangshen northward from Kashgar, where the deity was supposedly martyred, 
and the intermingling of his cult with that of Dingxiang Wang as it was brought southward. 
According to this hypothesis, the beliefs merged in the late Qing. I concede that Han Chinese 
garrison soldiers in Xinjiang before the Muslim uprisings must have worshipped gods, and 
that, even though Fangshen is nowhere to be found among the temples listed in Chinese 
sources from that period, it is possible that a self-sacrificing garrison soldier was deified. 
Chen’s argument, however, rests entirely on the Wensu and Kucha narratives, which date 
to 1907–1909 and therefore provide no direct evidence for beliefs and practices before 1864. 
That is, to believe that Fangshen existed before 1877 would require us to assume the genuine 
antiquity of these stories about miraculous deeds performed by valiant Hunanese exiles, that 
are only known from after 1877, that differ in content, and that were told by Hunanese soldiers 
far from home. Moreover, the political implications of these stories, which rhetorically bind 
this specific part of the Qing borderland specifically to Hunan, make sense in the post-1877 
context but much less so in the earlier period. It also seems unlikely that Chinese beliefs and 
practices mostly survived the Muslim uprisings, given how much destruction was visited on 
the Chinese community that did live in Xinjiang before them. On the strength of the evidence, 
the hypothesis that Fangshen was Dingxiang Wang, nativized, seems to be the more plausible 
one.


exiled gods 
133 
Kashgar) provides an origin legend for Fangshen that ties him both to 
Hunan and to Xinjiang:51
	
The Fangshen Temple is outside the east gate of the county seat. 
According to the Fangshen Biography, the former Khotan Prefect Liu 
Shinan once found it recorded in the Daoguang-era Posthumous Record 
of the Garrison Soldier:52
	
The god’s surname was Huang, and his style name [zi] was 
Dingxiang. He was from Changsha County, Hunan, and his family 
had lived for generations in Millet Dike Village beside the Liyin 
Temple. He was born in the early evening on Jiaqing 6.5.6 [June 16, 
1801]. In Daoguang 1 [1821], he fought with his neighbors over some 
water. His elder brother, in a fit of rage, accidentally killed someone. 
The god took his brother’s place in acknowledging the crime without 
concealing anything, accepting the punishment. The high official 
appreciated his honesty and affection [for his brother] and sent him as a 
garrison soldier to Gansu.
	
In Daoguang 6 [1826], the god was transferred to [the garrison at] 
Kashgar. At that time, it was the Jah¯
ang¯
ır uprising, and they had diked 
up the city, flooding it with water. The god magnanimously swam 
into the water — he opened the dike, and the water rushed out. In the 
besieged city, soldiers and civilians alike celebrated their new lease 
on life. So he sacrificed himself. In life, he was upright; in death, he 
was made a deity.… His temples have spread across Xinjiang, and he 
is called “Fangshen.” This is probably from the Book of Odes: “They 
will come and offer pure sacrifices to the Spirits of the four quarters 
[fang].”53
51. Cao, Wensu xian xiangtuzhi, 259.
52. “Liu Shinan” could be Liu Jiade (b. 1838, Huoqiu, Anhui), a Hunan Army veteran 
who was prefect of Yarkand at this time. Alternatively, it may have been Liu Zhaosong from 
Xiangxiang, Hunan, then magistrate of Dihua and another Xiang Army veteran and follower 
of Zuo. Liu Zhaosong’s daughter married the son of then-governor Pan Xiaosu (b. 1838) in 
1903, suggesting that he was close to the center of the Xiang Army leadership. Numerous 
archival documents detail their careers, but both are discussed in FHA 03–5403–089, GX 
27.6.20, Rao Yingqi, “Zou wei wei ren Liu Zhaosong shuli Shache zhilizhou zhizhou deng 
yuan que shi.” The marriage is documented in FHA 04–01–12–0624–084, GX 29.2.22, Pan 
Xiaosu, “Zou wei yu Hetian zhilizhou zhizhou Liu Zhaosong shu ernü hunqin guan xiaozhe 
li ying huibi shi.”
53. Translation from James Legge, Chinese Classics, She King, 382. The gazetteer text as 
reproduced reads lai fang li si, with li “rites” standing for the similarly written yin “sacrifice.” I 
am grateful once again to Onuma Takahiro for urging me to pursue this classical reference.


134  eric schluessel
	
It was found that, if one is to make a man into a god, then he 
must be worthy to have an imperial stela recording his deeds, and 
then in the present day he may be offered ceremonial sacrifices. In 
Guangxu wuxu [1898], the officials of Southern Xinjiang memorialized 
requesting him to be sacrificed to... and they attached a copy of 
his Biography to await his receipt of honors.
Thus was Fangshen made both a Hunanese and a loyal servant of the 
empire in Xinjiang. The writer, Pan Zongyue (b. 1858), was a native of 
Ningxiang, Hunan, and member of the Xiang Army community, and 
he had come up through the ranks as a young man fighting in Gansu. 
Pan was surely aware of Dingxiang Wang. He implausibly claims that 
this humble villager had a “style name,” used for signing poetry and 
artistic prose, that was “Dingxiang,” and thus identical to the name of 
the Shanhua city god, as well as a surname, “Huang,” that was a near-
homophone with “Wang.” The simplest conclusion to draw would be that 
Pan Zongyue recorded or created a story that intentionally altered the 
details of the Dingxiang Wang legend to adapt it to new circumstances.
The story about Jah¯
ang¯
ır flooding Kashgar does not seem to appear 
in any accounts of the war in Chinese or in Chaghatay, and we may 
reasonably doubt its authenticity. Rather, it was an adaptation of the 
Dingxiang Wang story also recorded in Qumul: the young soldier, 
rather than the official, sacrificed himself to calm the dangerous waters 
by diving into them and thereby saved the city from foreign invasion. 
Moreover, it provides a satisfying symmetry to the deity’s narrative: he 
was exiled to Xinjiang for a dispute over water in which he saved his 
biological brother, and later died saving his brothers-in-arms by diving 
into water during a conflict. That narrative symmetry is not merely a 
matter of foreshadowing, but an allegory for the experience of the Xiang 
Army itself and its emerging identity. Dingxiang Wang stood for the 
interests of common soldiers, many of whom joined to secure livelihoods 
during a time of hardship, and so the magistrate is reimagined as a farm 
boy. Moreover, because the Xiang Army recruited through familial 
connections, actual brothers in many cases marched together.54 They 
54. Schluessel, Land of Strangers, chapter 2, provides a more detailed account of the army’s 
composition. See also lists of known officers and soldiers in Wang, Xiangjun shi, and Zhao, 
Xiangjun jituan.


exiled gods 
135 
sacrificed themselves on the battlefield, and yet, their reward was to be 
stranded on the frontier.
Yet the name “Fangshen” is connected here to a passage from the Book 
of Odes. The original text referred to human sacrifices performed in 
ancient China in different quarters to give thanks for a bountiful harvest. 
A Qing literatus such as the gazetteer-compiler Pan would probably 
have understood the reference. However, it is also possible that the writer 
provided this gloss as a way to tie the deity to antiquity and thus suggest 
its primordial origins, or else to demonstrate his own erudition. Although 
many gods of one or all of the four directions (fang) are referred to 
throughout the Chinese historical record, nevertheless I am unable to 
locate any deity called simply “Fangshen.” Perhaps a Hunanese literatus 
in Xinjiang first misinterpreted the passage to mean “They will come 
and offer sacrifices to ‘local god,’” taking fang as a shorthand, and then 
reinterpreted the phrase again to indicate a specific deity, the “Fangshen.” 
However, such a contortion seems unlikely. The assertion would appear 
to be an attempt to locate Fangshen not just in the history of Xinjiang or 
Hunan, but of ancient China, tying the interconnection between the two 
places not to a reconquest in recent memory, but to a point in the distant 
past that was itself grounded in the authority of the Classics. “Fangshen” 
is thus presented not as an invention, but as a rediscovery or recovery.
The Khotan Prefecture Gazetteer also records an effort to have 
Fangshen recognized officially by the Qing: “Fangshen’s temples and 
statues are all over Southern Xinjiang. He is esteemed for warding off 
peril on the same day that it appears. It would appear he ought to be 
inducted into the Record of Sacrifices.”55 Yet, there is no record of the 
request, nor of the textual sources mentioned in the Wensu County 
Gazetteer: the Fangshen Biography (Fangshen shilüe) and Posthumous 
Record of the Garrison Soldiers of the Daoguang Era (Daoguang shuzu 
yimo). I have yet to locate either of these works, despite extensive 
searching and consultation with specialists in Beijing, Taipei, Hunan, 
and Xinjiang. They may be fictive, or else hidden in the not-yet-digitized 
archives of the Board of Rites. Unless there is evidence that at least one of 
these two sources exists, or more sources emerge to attest to beliefs and 
practices surrounding the deity, then it would then appear that Fangshen 
was an intentional fabrication.
55. Yi, Hetian zhilizhou xiangtuzhi, 394.


136  eric schluessel
Nevertheless, subtle differences with a second Fangshen legend 
indicate instead the presence of an active tradition, and that divergent 
narratives may have emerged organically in the reconstruction era. This 
one was recorded in the Kucha gazetteer, and apparently in near-identical 
form in a now-lost Kashgar gazetteer.56 It reads:
The Fangshen Shrine is north of the prefectural seat. We find that the 
god was originally from Shanhua, Hunan. His surname was Huang, 
and his name was Guifang. In the Daoguang reign, he was sent to 
Kashgar as an official, where he assisted the general at the Black Water 
Encirclement. When the bandit Jah¯
ang¯
ır flooded the city, in a panic, 
[Huang] alone, magnanimously, and in righteous rage jumped off the 
city walls and into the water, pledging to sacrifice his life. In a flash, 
the water streamed out of the gap, opening the city, and everything was 
all right. The people recognized his virtue and so sacrificed to him, and 
when they do pray, none is without a numinous response. All across 
the South [of Xinjiang], Chinese and Muslims enthusiastically burn 
incense to him.
This account again plays fast and loose with history in its construction of 
an origin legend. The Black Water Encirclement, also called the Battle of 
Tongguzluq, actually took place in 1758 along the Qarasu River during 
the Junghar War, not in the nineteenth-century conflict with Jah¯
ang¯
ır. 
However, the story adapts the same tropes that persisted in the deity’s 
legend from its early days in Changsha: self-sacrifice during a flood and 
invasion, this time by an upright official.
The assertion that even the Muslims of Xinjiang burn incense to 
Fangshen draws on another trope that became popular in the Northwest 
during and after the Muslim uprisings. That is the story of sacrifice and 
transformation, in which a heroic figure journeys into Xinjiang to reunite 
a family torn apart by war.57 In one example, a boy’s father sojourned 
beyond the Pass into Xinjiang before the outbreak of the uprisings. 
When the Xiang Army reconquered the Northwest, the boy learned 
56. Kuche zhilizhou xiangtuzhi, 318; Wang, Xinjiang tuzhi, 111:7b–8a. The gazetteer in 
question may again be a fabrication.
57. The story is recorded in Fan and Tian, Fuping xian zhi gao, juan 9. For a more complete 
discussion of this phenomenon, see Schluessel, Land of Strangers, chapter 5.


exiled gods 
137 
that his father still lived. The self-sacrificing child suffered hardships 
but eventually located his father. In their meeting-place, a tree grew that 
symbolized not only the fulfillment of the parent-child relationship, but 
the planting of a seed of Confucian values in the borderlands. The story 
asserts that Chinese and Muslims alike worship the tree, showing how the 
goodness of filiality is self-evident. Meanwhile, the reclamation of a lost 
parent stands not only for the reclamation of lost territory, naturalized 
through the metaphor of family, but the creation of an even more 
permanent bond through the affirmation of universal values. Fangshen 
would therefore appear to be an agent of this same transformation.
As for Huang Guifang, this name does not appear in accounts from 
Xinjiang before 1864, nor in the official compilation of Jah¯
ang¯
ır War 
dead.58 Nevertheless, there was one well-regarded official with exactly 
this name in the Xinjiang administration in the late 1890s. This army 
major from Yangzhou was praised for having moved to Xinjiang from afar 
and gained respect and notoriety among the people of the new settlement 
of Xinping for planting trees and grasses in the desert. His inclusion thus 
points to another symbol and method of Xinjiang’s territorialization, 
land reclamation and the transformation of the environment.59 Given that 
this adulation for Huang Guifang in 1908 comes from Hunanese officials 
working in Kucha Prefecture, of which Xinping was a part in the 1890s, 
it is likely that they intended to honor their colleague by writing him 
into the Fangshen legend. The trees that he planted were seen not only as 
sources of much-needed lumber, but as symbols of ideological triumph, 
like that which grew where the boy met his father — or those which Zuo 
Zongtang’s armies planted along the road into Xinjiang, and which gained 
a special meaning for those who praised the Xiang Army in poetry.60
Regardless of how the name came about, the transformation of 
Dingxiang Wang into Fangshen coincided with a reimagining of Xiang 
Army soldiers as heroic agents of the restoration of empire.61 Novels 
and dramas cast Zuo Zongtang as the protagonist of an epic struggle 
to reclaim Qing territory, while in the post-Taiping era, others saw the 
58. Zhou, Xinping xian xiangtuzhi, 464. Zhaozhong ci liezhuan xubian lists the names of 
hundreds of martyrs in the war in and around Kashgar. Huang is not among them.
59. See Lavelle, “Cultivating Empire,” 59.
60. See for example Wang Zhensheng, Xi zheng riji, 26a–27b.
61. Millward, Beyond the Pass, 3–4; Schluessel, Land of Strangers, chapter 5; Waley-Cohen, 
Exile in Mid-Qing China, 105–6, 158–62; Zhaozhong ci liezhuan xubian.


138  eric schluessel
army’s march into Xinjiang as the common man’s sacrifice for the greater 
good. This discourse reflected the idea of the Pass, that gateway between 
China and Inner Asia at Jiayuguan through which exiles passed on 
their way to life in the frontier. To go beyond the Pass meant separation 
from home, typically for conviction for a crime. Nevertheless, some 
officials sent into exile in Xinjiang, such as Lin Zexu (1785–1850), were 
now considered heroes to the Chinese people. Chinese and other non-
Muslims who died in the Muslim uprisings were regarded as martyrs and 
celebrated in the increasingly popular “manifest loyalty shrines,” as were 
the exiles who defended Kashgar against Jah¯
ang¯
ır. Xinjiang was becoming 
a topos not of shame and exile, but of heroism.
This heroic reimagining of Xinjiang construed it as the object of a 
civilizing mission, which the Xiang Army took up as an ideological 
program for the creation of Xinjiang as a province.62 Yet the Fangshen 
legend places the agency of that civilizing mission in the hands of an 
ordinary exile. According to the Kucha legend, the death of Huang 
Guifang organically created a new site of memory, the temple to him, 
where members of every community remembered his sacrifice. The 
Hunanese soldier in the borderland, who in life certainly experienced 
violence and deprivation, thereby becomes a natural and positive part 
of the borderland, and one that is accepted even by reconquered Turkic 
Muslim people.
The rapidity of Dingxiang Wang’s transformation into Fangshen — 
from obscure city god to the deity of the Hunanese in Xinjiang in less 
than fifty years — seemingly points to an intentional effort to rewrite 
his story. The notion of the heroic Hunanese exiled soldier is too perfect 
a reflection of the experiences of Xiang Army soldiers and too neat 
a legitimization of their settlement. Yet the differences between the 
Wensu and Kucha legends would indicate the opposite, that a cluster of 
ideas about this deity persisted in the broader Xiang Army community: 
Dingxiang Wang as tamer of waters, defender of the city, and upright 
official. Moreover, photographic evidence demonstrates that the worship 
of Fangshen as a separate deity persisted in some places through at least 
1927.63 The image of Fangshen, known only from a single example in 
Qarghiliq, resembled that of Dingxiang Wang, and he apparently played 
62. Millward, Eurasian Crossroads, 138–46.
63. Helmut de Terra, “China, shrine in temple,” 1927, photograph.
满族人不汉化
汉化是导致满族
人在中国统治失
败的原因
只有汉人是文明
的
arhuments
湖南化
神就是他们自己
提供了最大的合
法性


exiled gods 
139 
a similar role as a curer of disease. The continued relevance of both deities 
suggests that Fangshen was not simply an invention, but something 
that emerged from the Hunanese community and adapted to shifting 
circumstances, even as it remained tied to the same cluster of narratives 
and images.
Prasenjit Duara has characterized this path dependency in the 
imagination of spirits as “radically continuous” and “radically 
discontinuous.”64 That is, the latitude for reimagining a deity is limited 
— instead, a community inscribes new meanings on it, and those that 
might be sublimated under certain circumstances tend to reemerge in 
others. The identity and memory of a spirit is always contested, and the 
flexibility in that contestation helps to ensure its survival. In the case of 
Dingxiang Wang, a major discontinuity in the tradition, the inscription of 
a soldierly identity, coincided with a movement first beyond the Pass, and 
then across the Tianshan Mountains. That discontinuity also reflected 
a cutting-off of communication between the settler community and the 
settlers’ homeland of the kind that necessitated the use of Dingxiang 
Wang’s temple as a spiritual “post office.” Under these conditions, the 
metaphor of the god’s incense fires stood not just for the spread of his cult 
to Xinjiang, but for the separation that its transportation implied. The 
exiled soldier, the new image of Dingxiang Wang or Fangshen, appeared 
in the same moment.
At the same time, the Fangshen legend embodied a sacred-historical 
chronotope in which the death of the exile indicated the defense of 
territorial boundaries, but also a transplantation of the values of the 
community whose experience was reflected in his story. The Hunanese 
population of Xinjiang before the Muslim uprisings had been small 
and little noted, especially compared to merchants and settlers from 
Shanxi. Indeed, the whole configuration of Chinese communities in 
the region was radically different before and after the uprisings, the 
only common factor being the persistent presence of sojourners from 
Shaanxi and Gansu. However, Fangshen’s legend demonstrated that 
Hunanese settlement was not an innovation, but a restoration, and that 
the reconquest was not accomplished by mere force of arms. Rather, the 
Xiang Army and its soldiers had been guided by the spirit of an exiled 
Hunanese commoner and followed his path again into the Northwest, 
64. Duara, “Superscribing Symbols,” 778.


140  eric schluessel
beyond the Pass to Gansu, and then to Kashgar. Their journey was his 
journey, and the conquest of Kashgar and Khotan was not the end of the 
war, but a destiny to be fulfilled.
The Apotheosis of Zuo Zongtang
Yet such a politics of recovery squared awkwardly against the Xiang 
Army leaders’ vision of Xinjiang as territory. Their government 
prioritized establishing the temples required of each administrative unit 
as described in the imperial register of sacrifices, so that the new province 
would also comprise a stable ritual formation. During reconstruction, 
they erased existing popular Chinese deities and instead favored their 
imagined revival of Xinjiang’s ancient Chinese past. Nonetheless, the 
army leadership’s own favored deity soon appeared in the form of Zuo 
Zongtang.
The provincial government planned city god temples for every county 
and prefecture and for the province itself, although budgetary restrictions 
meant that many were never finished. Educated Turkic Muslim observers 
found these “idol-temples” (Chaghatay butkh¯
ana) to be lively centers 
of activity, complete with regular dramatic performances that attracted 
common Muslims to the unholy spectacle.65 Muslims were aware that 
those performances reenacted the deeds of “past emperors,” and those 
at the Dingxiang Wang temples were surely among them. City god 
processions took the deity’s statue on tour through its territory, both 
within and beyond the city walls, stopping at shrine and temples — and 
in Kashgar, the stops included major Islamic shrines. The procession 
functioned just as it did in China proper, as a territorial statement, yet 
one that Muslims did not necessarily find convincing. As one described 
these rituals: “Sometimes they carry the idol through the city streets and 
around to every market, making a round of the city. They have this stupid 
idea that it’s beneficial, and that it will keep them from getting sick, or 
the city from catching fire.”66 Muslims could be very familiar with the 
procedure and evident meanings of worship, and it was clear that the 
65. On drama: Jarring Prov. 207, “Butlar üchün ta‘¯
ın qilinghan öylärning bay¯
ani,” 
“Butlarning bay¯
ani,” and “Chang chiläning bay¯
ani”; British Library, India Office Records, 
L/P&S/10/825 File 2273/1919 Kashgar: monthly diaries 1912–1920, Reg. No. 924, December 
1915; Jarring, “Culture Clash.” On processions: SOAS Archives PP MS 8 #57 E. Denison Ross, 
Kashghar: Dialogues; and Poskami, Kitabi Äbdullah, 147.
66. Jarring Prov. 207, “Butlarning bay¯
ani.”


exiled gods 
141 
provincial government prioritized constructing religious institutions. In 
Turpan, Muslims were obligated to donate to the construction of the city 
god temple, although they were permitted to do so anonymously, and 
witnessed Chinese settlers transform the city’s Eastern Mosque into a 
temple by performing rituals there with the local government’s support.67 
Yet the Xiang Army apparently did not engage with the Prophet 
Mu.
hammad or Islamic saints as threatening deities, but as historical 
figures beyond the realm of numinous competition.
Indeed, the Xiang Army’s imposition of a ritual hierarchy related not 
only to the project of creating Xinjiang as a province but also to their 
self-presentation as the revivers of an imagined era of Chinese supremacy 
over the Western Regions that dated to the Han (206 B.C.E.—220 C.E.) 
and Tang (618–907) dynasties.68 Kashgar’s city god did not belong to 
“Kashgar,” as the place was known in the earlier Qing, but to “Shule,” a 
Tang-era kingdom, the name of which the Xiang Army assigned to the 
new prefecture. The same was true across the province, as antiquarianism 
and golden-age revivalism guided the leadership’s vision of the new 
society, reflecting Xinjiang’s “literary conquest” and “coming-onto-
the-map.” Indeed, this project did not simply inscribe the new territory 
with antique meanings — it served to elevate the position of Xiang Army 
leaders and to eliminate other Han Chinese experiences.
The provincial administration did not recognize any local deities, save 
one: the city god of Barköl (Balikun).69 Barköl was a mountain redoubt, 
a strategically positioned town between Turpan and Qumul, that in 1864 
was home to a Qing garrison and a sizable Han Chinese population. 
The people of Barköl had remarkably managed to survive the Muslim 
uprisings and were alive to greet the Xiang Army on its entry into 
Xinjiang. They attributed this miracle to the numinous action of their 
own city god, who during numerous assaults appeared at night atop the 
walls and drove the Muslim forces away. The deity was joined, although 
not as visibly, by Guandi, whose temple dated to 1772 but was destroyed 
in the uprisings; by the Dragon King (longwang) of nearby Pulei Lake; 
and by a popular deity called General Yang Si. Yang Si’s peculiar history 
is worth mentioning here, as his own legend and history have some 
67. Qingdai Xinjiang dang’an xuanji, vol. 28, 299; vol. 29, 71.
68. Chou, “Frontier Studies,” 229–44.
69. GX 8.3.1 Liu Jintang, “Shenling xianying ken ci bian’e fenghao zhe,” in Liu Xiangqin 
gong zougao, 3:17a–20b.


142  eric schluessel
resonance with those of Dingxiang Wang: He was thought to be a young 
warrior from Song-dynasty Changsha who in death was called upon to 
control floods.70 In the last years of the Ming, Hunanese migrants brought 
Yang Si into the loess plateau of Southern Shaanxi and Gansu, where over 
the course of the first half of the Qing he gained a new grandfatherly 
identity, as his cult diminished in Hunan. This latter Yang Si was the 
one worshipped in Barköl — Hunanese by origin, but Northwestern in 
identity, brought to the town by Shaanxi traders and settlers.
The Barkölese esteemed all of these four deities for providing them 
with over a decade of protection. “If not for the temples of Guandi and 
the gods,” Barköl’s literati asked in 1882, “if not for the protection of the 
spirits, how could human effort have managed this?”71 In response to 
their request, the Xiang Army leadership requested honors for Barköl’s 
city god. The Board of Rites named him “Numinous Aid” (lingji). 
Their story was one of connection with the earlier Qing and miraculous 
survival, and the recognition of the city god reflected the continuity of 
the community across the rupture of the Muslim uprisings.
Guandi, however, saw his temple incorporated into the Xiang Army’s 
own narrative of heroism and recovery. The temple was rebuilt in 1882 
as a home for two stelae, one from the Han and one from the Tang, 
that celebrated early Chinese victories in the Western Regions. The 
Han stela, dating to 137 C.E., celebrated a victory at Dunhuang, and 
it was known from the earlier Qing.72 The 640 Tang stela recorded the 
arrival of Tang general Jiang Xingben (d. 645) during a conflict with 
the king of Gaochang, and it had been rediscovered during the Xiang 
Army’s arrival in 1876.73 In 1901, a new inscription provided a series of 
temporal signposts that placed the temple and Barköl into the Xiang 
Army leadership’s preferred historical trajectory: the Han victory, the 
Tang expansion, the temple’s destruction in 1866, the arrival of the 
Xiang Army, and reconstruction. Barköl was not even called by its 
contemporary name, but instead “Yiwu,” indicating a kingdom that 
existed there during the Tang. Unsurprisingly, literati came to believe 
that the Guandi temple was itself an artifact of the Tang, and so it was 
70. Zhang Xiaohong, “Quyu xinyang de bentuhua yu difang xinyang de zhuanxing.”
71. GX 8.3.1, Liu Jintang, “Shenling xianying ken ci bian’e fenghao zhe,” in Liu Xiangqin 
gong zougao, 3:17a–20b.
72. The stela is called the “Pei Cen jigong bei” (Stela commemorating the victory of Pei 
Cen). Dai, Xiyu beiming lu, 8–9.
73. Pei Jingfu, He hai Kunlun lu, 256; Dai, Xiyu beiming lu, 451–53.


exiled gods 
143 
a particular object of interest in a region where few artifacts that the 
Xiang Army recognized as Chinese actually survived from that idealized 
dynasty.
Soon the Barkölese story of resistance and numinous aid faded from 
the historical record. The 1908 gazetteer explicitly denies the role of its 
deities:
When, fortunately, the Dynasty regained its power, and the great army 
marched to Barköl, they peered in the city and saw that it was weak... 
and its people were poor, there was none who was not speechless at 
how strange this was. They thought, to hold out for ten years, they 
must have had the help of Heaven! They did not know that it was truly 
thanks to human effort.74
Here the agency of the deities is denied, but the efforts of the people 
themselves are also minimized, making the Xiang Army the only 
heroes of Barköl’s liberation. A story of continuity and resistance was 
incompatible with one of loss and heroic reclamation. Staying and 
surviving presented a claim to an authentic belonging in Xinjiang that 
dated to the Qing, while the Xiang Army preferred to present itself as 
retaking lands lost to China since the Tang.
Meanwhile, the Xiang Army leadership offered its own gods, and 
their efforts included the apotheosis of Zuo Zongtang himself. The 
Xiang Army had long drawn on the Taiping-era changes in memorial 
practices to erect “manifest loyalty” shrines to their own fallen heroes, 
and Zuo himself requested shrines to be built for deceased officers. Later, 
Zuo Zongtang and Liu Jintang — Zuo’s erstwhile lieutenant and the 
first governor of provincial Xinjiang (1877–91) — were both enshrined 
as outstanding officials near their homes in Hunan, and small shrines 
to them sprang up all over Xinjiang. In the late 1890s, however, the 
Hunanese regard for Zuo transformed from memorializing a meritorious 
human being into worshipping him as a protecting spirit.
So the story goes: early in the morning on May 3, 1897, a blacksmith 
surnamed Zhu entered the compound of Governor Rao Yingqi.75 He 
went straight to Rao’s office and announced that Zuo Zongtang was 
74. Yan, Gao, and Sun, Zhenxi ting xiangtuzhi, 104.
75. Rao Yingqi, GX 23.8.8, “You chen Zuo Zongtang zhuanci ban bian’e pian,” in 
Gongzhong dang Guangxu chao zouzhe, vol. 11, 147–48.


144  eric schluessel
coming up the Pass to “exterminate the bandits.” Rao knew that Zhu 
had a reputation for excitability and delusion and calmly explained to 
him that Zuo’s campaigns were twenty years past. Zhu, however, was 
insistent on his vision of strong soldiers and stout horses. Rao dismissed 
Zhu, but soon found himself leading soldiers down that very road 
into battle during the He-Huang Uprising in Gansu. Rao found the 
rebels frustrating to fight, as they would disappear into the mountains. 
However, “with divine assistance” (ruo you shenzhu), he wrote, the army 
could apprehend them in a day or so.
Rao wrote that he had once heard Zuo himself say, “If, in his whole 
life, a poor provincial graduate should receive the favor of the dynasty 
and be enfeoffed and respected as a great person, what should that official 
then plan to do? He’s only mortal. He should thus repay the dynasty by 
dying and becoming a hungry ghost, killing bandits!” By “provincial 
graduate,” Zuo seemed to have meant himself, as he had never passed the 
metropolitan exams. For Rao, Zuo’s pledge of immortal loyalty to the 
dynasty invoked the experiences of two Tang military heroes, Wang Jun 
(653–792) and Zhu Ci (742–84), who had once battled Inner Asian forces. 
Those engagements had seen soldiers return from the dead to strike at the 
enemy again. Rao proposed that Zuo, who had died in 1885, be enlisted 
to the Qing cause once again. He invoked the support of scholars and 
commoners and reported that they had already begun work on a new 
shrine to Zuo in Dihua. Rao only asked for imperial approval, which he 
received.
Zuo was enshrined not only in Dihua, but also less formally in 
settlements with a Hunan-Hubei native place association.76 His shrines 
tended to abut Dingxiang Wang temples. In 1927, Sven Hedin visited one 
such shrine, which was located next door to the combined Dingxiang 
Wang and Fangshen temple in Qumul, and described how Zuo’s image 
was flanked by placards on which were inscribed his officers’ names, 
forming a kind of posse comitatus in death. Liu Jintang also had his 
appanage in the afterlife. Wu Aichen describes a similar scene at the 
temple complex of Dihua in the late 1920s, when the Dingxiang Wang 
76. Hedin, History of the Expedition in Asia, 228; Ningxiang xian zhi, gushi 10, xianmin 
34:4a–6b; Qing shi liezhuan, juan 61; Wu Aichen, Xinjiang jiyou, 39; Wu Yinsun, GX 32.4.10 
“Zou wei yigu Yi-Ta dao diaoren Xining dao Yinglin zhengji zhuozhu qing zhun fu si shi,” 
FHA 04–01–12–0649–111; Zhou Hong, “Wan Qing Minguo Xinjiang Han ren zhuti,” 52.


exiled gods 
145 
temple was decorated with placards and full of swirling incense smoke. 
Nearby, Zuo’s shrine held two lifelike statues of him and an adulatory 
poem. Liu’s smaller shrine held only his image, and his poem was simpler.
Narratives and deities in late Qing Xinjiang posed a set of overlapping 
claims about history and territory, the sites for the constitution of which 
sometimes abutted each other. The people of Barköl could claim to have 
survived the Muslim uprisings, forming a bridge between the earlier and 
the later Qing, across a period that was increasingly regarded as one of 
total devastation and loss. That same idea served the self-fashioning of the 
Xiang Army leadership, who recreated Xinjiang’s landscape of worship 
so as to emphasize their own connection to a long-lost age. Their project 
to recreate the region as a province meant establishing a hierarchy of 
temples managed from the provincial center, which were thought to bring 
stability to this territory, and enshrining Zuo Zongtang himself as a spirit 
who, in death, would protect what he had supposedly created. However, 
their own soldiers narrativized their march across China as a journey 
into “exile” undertaken by a forgotten hero. For them, the relevant 
comparison appears to have been between the defense of Changsha 
— in 1852, or perhaps during the Qing conquest — and the defense of 
Kashgar during the Jah¯
ang¯
ır War. Both spoke to the idea of a city god as 
a protector of a place and a preserver of territory. Regardless of whether 
we regard the deities that all of these actors offered as objects of belief, 
metaphors for experiences, or vehicles for historical claims, they were 
topoi for the articulation of belonging.
Conclusion
The cases of Dingxiang Wang, Fangshen, and the other deities visited 
in this article point to the key role that religion played in imagining 
communities in China at the turn of the century. Dingxiang Wang in 
Xinjiang supported the project of empire by giving meaning to conquest 
through narrative, historicization, and personalization, but also revealed 
its incoherence. Territory could be won, borderlands enclosed, but the 
question of to whom those spaces belonged remained open. Xinjiang 
was technically Qing territory, and certainly the sacrifices to the spirits 
of mountains and rivers carried out before the uprisings were revived 
under the Xiang Army. However, the Xiang Army leadership represented 
Xinjiang as a part of a territory that needed to be reclaimed, not simply 
for the Qing, but for an idea of China that transcended the present 


146  eric schluessel
empire. It is telling that the shape of the province was not designed in 
Beijing, but derived instead from plans made in Changsha, and that 
the Qing court later attempted to dislodge the Xiang Army from the 
provincial government.77 This was the time when, it has been argued, the 
activists of that community helped articulate a new collective identity, 
occupying an ambiguous space between Chineseness and Hunaneseness.78 
Xinjiang for them was an object of Hunanese agency, and especially 
of those enshrined leaders who transformed the borderlands, in the 
restoration of imperial territory, but in service of something older than 
the empire. We may understand their project as a top-down process of 
territorialization that aimed at creating a traditionalistic society held 
together through the worship of standardized gods.
Yet within that project dwelled unruly spirits, the worship of which 
recalled other chronotopes — propositions about the relationship between 
time and space — and therefore other collective subjectivities. Dingxiang 
Wang and Fangshen point to the Xiang Army community’s identity as a 
“diaspora”: the Xiang Army soldiers and their descendants in Xinjiang 
considered themselves more victims of empire than its perpetrators, 
and yet worked to valorize that suffering through a narrative of heroic 
overcoming.79 That narrative was suffused with longing for a homeland, 
not over an ocean, but in a remote corner of a vast empire. Moreover, 
an emerging transregional consciousness at the center of the dispersal, 
as expressed in the Nanjing temple gazetteer, pointed to a retroactive 
attempt to understand this scattered people as a community despite 
separation. It was this politics of identity, as much as its material basis in 
geographic dispersal, that made the Xiang Army community in Xinjiang 
diasporic. Moreover, Dingxiang Wang manifested the imagination of 
locality through communication, the experience of displacement but 
intimate connection.80 While the field of history increasingly recognizes 
Chinese migration as diasporic in these terms, studies of Chinese 
diasporas have typically been confined to those that spread across oceans. 
Dingxiang Wang points the way, I would argue, to comparing people’s 
77. Schluessel, Land of Strangers, chapter 2.
78. Platt, Provincial Patriots, 2–3. For a relevant critique that tempers some of Platt’s main 
conclusions, see Esherick, “Review of Provincial Patriots.”
79. McKeown, “Conceptualizing Chinese Diasporas,” 308.
80. Sánchez-Carretero, “Santos y Misterios,” 317.


exiled gods 
147 
movement across land, particularly into the isolation of Xinjiang, to 
the more familiar cases from distant California or Southeast Asia. Each 
creates a different kind of Chinese space that links otherwise disparate 
places.
Dingxiang Wang’s “grand tour” and settlement therefore indicates 
another imagination of Chineseness in the shifting terrain of identity in 
the late Qing. It was unlike that articulated by a contemporaneous Daur 
writer in Ili, who advanced an imperial, pan-Manchu identity.81 Nor was 
it like the anti-imperial nationalisms that emerged among Han Chinese 
elites from the stuff of premodern identity systems. Rather, it was a use of 
the vocabularies and morphologies of local religion to root people in place 
through narrative and worship — a “territorial cult” inscribed across the 
landscape of the Qing. There was a class dimension to this cult, which the 
Xiang Army leadership in China proper wrote out of its own history, and 
which gained its strongest support among the descendants of the lower-
class soldiers whom the leadership regarded with fear.
The invisibility of deities such as Dingxiang Wang, and for that matter 
of poor Han settlers, in Anglophone literature on Xinjiang indicates a 
need to reorient scholarly priorities in the historical study of Inner Asian 
borderlands. The fundamental promise of the New Qing History is to 
recenter marginalized voices and thus nuance the understanding of the 
empire — and, increasingly, of its legacies in the twentieth century.82 
Scholarship on Xinjiang naturally tends to favor Turkic-language sources 
and experiences, much as prioritizing Manchu or Mongol sources is 
meant to illuminate lifeworlds that were inarticulable in the framework 
of Sinocentric history. I would argue that historical anthropology as 
practiced in “China proper” serves a similar purpose, although the 
experiences and imaginations in question belong not to people marked as 
ethnically different, but to people whose class differences were obscured 
by the idea of China as a shared cultural or ethnic identity. Attending 
to the Chinese subaltern is not only germane to the New Qing History 
approach but is essential for nuancing the complexity of imperial 
domination in the borderlands. Doing so, however, may require attention 
to the perspectives of people who left few records of their own, but for 
whom deities were very much alive.
81. Porter, “Manchu Racial Identity.”
82. Waley-Cohen, “The New Qing History.”


148  eric schluessel
GLOSSARY
Balikun		
	
	
巴里坤
Bintui lu	
	
	
賓退錄
chenghuang	
	
	
城隍
Chengxiang Wang	
	
澄湘王
Chujun		
	
	
楚軍
Daoguang shuzu yimo	
	
道光戍卒遺墨
daoshi	 	
	
	
道士
Deyi lu	 	
	
	
得一錄
dian	
	
	
	
殿
Dihua	 	
	
	
迪化
ding	
	
	
	
定
Dingxiang Wang	
	
	
定湘王
Dingxiang Wang fu	
	
定湘王府
Fangshen	
	
	
方神
Fangshen shilüe	 	
	
方神事略
fu	
	
	
	
復
Guandi		
	
	
關帝
Gucheng	
	
	
古城
Hami	
	
	
	
哈密
Han Dunwu	
	
	
韓頓悟
Han Baowu	
	
	
韓保吾
Han Yu		
	
	
韓愈
Han Yuan	
	
	
韓元
Hanzu zhi chenghuang	 	
漢族之城隍
He Tengjiao	
	
	
何騰蛟
hu	
	
	
	
笏
Huang Guifang	 	
	
黃桂芳
Jiang Xingben	
	
	
姜行本
jingshi	 	
	
	
經世
Kuche	 	
	
	
庫車
Liang Hu huiguan	
	
兩湖會館
Li Fengsheng	
	
	
李鳳生
Lin Zexu	
	
	
林則徐
lingji	
	
	
	
靈濟
Liu Jintang	
	
	
劉錦棠
Liu Songshan	
	
	
劉松山


exiled gods 
149 
longwang	
	
	
龍王
Luo Bingzhang	 	
	
駱秉章
Manasi	 	
	
	
瑪納斯
Mao Dun	
	
	
茅盾
nanmin ju	
	
	
難民局
Ningyuan	
	
	
寧遠
Pan Zongyue	
	
	
潘宗岳
Qitai	
	
	
	
奇台
Rao Yingqi	
	
	
饒應祺
Ruoqiang	
	
	
若羌
shanhou ju	
	
	
善後局
Shanhua	
	
	
善化
Shule	
	
	
	
疏勒
Suiding		
	
	
綏定
Suilai	
	
	
	
綏來
Tanzhou	
	
	
潭州
tuanlian	
	
	
	
團練
wang	
	
	
	
王
Wang Fuzhi	
	
	
王夫之
Wang Jun	
	
	
王晙
wangye		
	
	
王爺
Wensu	 	
	
	
溫宿
Wusu	
	
	
	
烏蘇
xianghuo	
	
	
香火
Xiangjun	
	
	
湘軍
Xiangjun jituan	 	
	
湘軍集團
Xiangtan	
	
	
湘潭
Xiangxiang	
	
	
湘鄉
xiao Hunan	
	
	
小湖南
xinggong	
	
	
行宮
Xinping	
	
	
	
新平
Yang Si	 	
	
	
楊四
Yiwu	
	
	
	
伊吾
yongzhen	
	
	
永鎮
youjing	 	
	
	
遊境
Yi Baisha	
	
	
易白沙
Yu Zhi	 	
	
	
余治
Zeng Guofan	
	
	
曾國藩


150  eric schluessel
zhaozhong ci	
	
	
昭忠祠
Zhongxiang Wang	
	
中湘王
Zhou Han	
	
	
周漢
Zhu Ci	 	
	
	
朱泚
zi	
	
	
	
字
Zuo Zongtang	
	
	
左宗棠
WORKS CITED
ARCHIVES CONSULTED
Archives of the School of Oriental and African Studies, London.
First Historical Archive of China, Beijing (FHA).
India Office Records, British Library, London.
Jarring Collection, Lund University Library, Lund, Sweden.
Nanjing Library.
National Palace Museum, Taipei.
OTHER REFERENCES
Bonk, James. “Chinese Military Men and Cultural Practice in the Early 
Nineteenth Century Qing Empire (1800–1840).” PhD dissertation, 
Princeton University, 2014.
Bryson, Megan. Goddess on the Frontier: Religion, Ethnicity, and Gender 
in Southwest China. Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2017.
Cao Linghan. Wensu xian xiangtuzhi (Wensu County local gazetteer). 
Guangxu 34 (1908). In Xinjiang xiangtu zhi gao, 258–65.
Changsha xian zhi gao (Changsha County draft gazetteer). In Hunan 
tushuguan cang xijian fangzhi congkan, vols. 10–13. Beijing: Guojia 
tushuguan chubanshe, 2014 (1948).
Chen Guoguang. “Xinjiang ‘Fangshen’ ben shi Qingdai Xiang ji aiguo zhi 
shi” (“Fangshen” of Xinjiang was originally a Qing patriotic soldier 
from Hunan). Qiusuo 1985, no. 4: 101.
———. “Xinjiang ‘Fangshen’ ben shi shubian aiguo zhi shi: Qingmo 
Xinjiang Fangshen zhiwen bianxi” (“Fangshen” of Xinjiang was 
originally a patriotic soldier who garrisoned the border: An analysis of 
late-Qing gazetteers on Xinjiang’s Fangshen). Xiyu yanjiu 2004, no. 4: 
82–88.


exiled gods 
151 
Chen Yunrong, Xiangcheng fanggu lu (Searching for old Changsha). 
Changsha: Yuelu shushe, 2009.
Chen Zuolin. “Bingzhu li tan” (Talking by candlelight). In Jinling suozhi 
jiu zhong. Nanjing: Nanjing chubanshe, 2008.
Dai Liangzuo, ed. Xiyu beiming lu (Record of inscriptions in the Western 
Regions). Wulumuqi: Xinjiang renmin chubanshe, 2013.
Deng Zuanxian, comp. Xuxiu Wusu xian zhi (Expanded Wusu County 
gazetteer). Minguo 2 (1913). 2 juan. Beijing: Beijing Airusheng 
shuzihua jishu yanjiu zhongxin, 2009.
de Terra, Helmut. “China, shrine in temple.” 1927. Photograph. 3.5 x 5.0 
inches. Helmut de Terra Collection B–205, University of Wisconsin 
— Milwaukee. Online at https://collections.lib.uwm.edu/digital/
collection/agsphoto/id/8144.
Doré, Henri. Researches into Chinese Superstitions, Vol. X: Boards of 
Heavenly Administration. Shanghai: Túsewei Printing Press, 1933.
Esherick, Joseph. “Review of Provincial Patriots: The Hunanese and 
Modern China.” Pacific Affairs 81:3 (Fall 2008): 499–52.
Fan Zengxiang and Tian Zhaoqi, comps. Fuping xian zhi gao (Fuping 
County draft gazetteer). 10 juan. Guangxu 10 (1884). Beijing: Beijing 
Airusheng shuzihua jishu yanjiu zhongxin, 2009.
Fang Yi, comp. Changsha fu zhi (Changsha Prefecture gazetteer). 
Chongzhen 12 (1639). In Hunan tushuguan cang xijian fangzhi 
congkan, vols. 1–3. Beijing: Guojia tushuguan chubanshe, 2014.
Gongzhong dang Guangxu chao zouzhe (Palace documents: Guangxu-era 
memorials). 24 vols. Taipei: Guoli gugong bowuyuan, 1973–75.
Goossaert, Vincent. “Managing Chinese Religious Pluralism in 
Nineteenth-Century City God Temples.” In Thomas Jansen, Thoralf 
Klein, and Christian Meyer, eds., Globalization and the Making of 
Religious Modernity in China: Transnational Religions, Local Agents, 
and the Study of Religion, 1800–Present, 27–51. Leiden: Brill, 2014.
———. “The Shifting Balance of Power in the City God Temples, Late 
Qing to 1937.” Journal of Chinese Religions 43, no. 1 (2015), 5–33.
HadžiMuhamedovi´
c, Safet. Waiting for Elijah: Time and Encounter in a 
Bosnian Landscape. New York: Berghahn Books, 2018.
Hami wenwu zhi (Gazetteer of Qumul antiquities). Wulumuqi: Xinjiang 
renmin chubanshe, 1993.
Hedin, Sven. History of the Expedition in Asia 1927–1935, Part 1: 1927–
1928. Stockholm, 1943.


152  eric schluessel
Jarring, Gunnar. “Culture Clash in Central Asia: Islamic Views on 
Chinese Theatre.” Scripta Minora Regiae Societatis Humaniorum 
Litterarum Lundensis (1990–91: 3).
Johnson, David. “The City-God Cults of T’ang and Sung China.” 
Harvard Journal of Asiatic Studies 45, no. 2 (December 1985): 363–457.
Kataoka Kazutada. Shinch¯
o Shinky¯
o t¯
oji kenky¯
u (Research on the 
government of Xinjiang in the Qing). T¯
oky¯
o: Y¯
uzankaku, 1990.
———. “Shinmatsu shinky¯
osh¯
o kan’in k¯
o” (On officials in late Qing 
Xinjiang Province). ¯
Osaka ky¯
oiku daigaku kiy¯
o 11, no. 31 (February 
1983): 119–38.
Kuche zhiliting xiangtuzhi (Kucha Directly Administered Prefecture local 
gazetteer). Guangxu 34 (1908). In Ma Dazheng, Huang Guofeng, and 
Su Fenglan, eds., Xinjiang xiangtuzhi gao, 317–26.
Kuerkala Wusu zhiliting xiangtuzhi (Karakol-Us Directly Administered 
Prefecture local gazetteer). N.d. In Xinjiang xiangtu zhi gao, 163–78.
Kuhn, Philip A. Rebellion and Its Enemies in Late Imperial China: 
Militarization and Social Structure, 1796–1864. Cambridge: Harvard 
University Press, 1970.
Lavelle, Peter. “Cultivating Empire: Zuo Zongtang’s Agriculture, 
Environment, and Reconstruction in the Late Qing.” In Sherman 
Cochran and Paul Pickowicz, eds., China on the Margins, 43–64. 
Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell East Asia Program, 2010.
Legge, James. The Chinese Classics: Volume 4, Part 2, the She King. 
Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1885.
Li Fangxue. Ningyuan xian xiangtuzhi (Ningyuan County gazetteer). 
Guangxu 34 (1908). In Xinjiang xiangtu zhi gao, 206–10.
Liu Caibang and Zhang Yanke, comps. Changsha xian zhi (Changsha 
county gazetteer). 36 juan. Tongzhi 10 (1871). Beijing: Beijing 
Airusheng shuzihua jishu yanjiu zhongxin, 2009.
Liu Hua. “Cong ‘Dingxiang Wang’ xinyang kan zongjiao de sheshui 
gongneng” (Seeing the social function of religion through belief in 
Dingxiang Wang). Keji xinxi 2008, no. 7, n.p.
Liu Jintang. Liu Xiangqin gong zougao (Memorials of Liu Jintang). 
Taipei: Chengwen Chubanshe, 1968.
Lü Sugao and Zhang Xiongtu, comps. Changsha fu zhi (Changsha 
Prefecture gazetteer). Qianlong 12 (1747). Beijing: Beijing Airusheng 
shuzihua jishu yanjiu zhongxin, 2009.


exiled gods 
153 
Mao Dun. Mao Dun wenji (Collected works of Mao Dun). 9 vols. Beijing: 
Renmin wenxue chubanshe, 1958–61.
McKeown, Adam. “Conceptualizing Chinese Diasporas, 1842 to 1949.” 
The Journal of Asian Studies 58, no. 2 (May 1999), 306–37.
Memmi, Albert. The Colonizer and the Colonized. Boston: Beacon Press, 
1965.
Meyer-Fong, Tobie. What Remains: Coming to Terms with Civil War in 
19th Century China. Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2013.
Millward, James A. Beyond the Pass: Economy, Ethnicity, and Empire in 
Qing Central Asia, 1759–1864. Stanford: Stanford University Press, 
1998.
———. “‘Coming onto the Map’: ‘Western Regions’ Geography and 
Cartographic Nomenclature in the Making of Chinese Empire in 
Xinjiang.” Late Imperial China 20, no. 2 (1999): 61–98.
———. Eurasian Crossroads: A History of Xinjiang. New York: 
Columbia University Press, 2007.
Naquin, Susan, and Chün-fang Yü. “Introduction: Pilgrimage in China.” 
In Pilgrims and Sacred Sites in China, 1–38. Berkeley: University of 
California Press, 1992.
Newby, L. J. “The Chinese Literary Conquest of Xinjiang.” Modern 
China 25, no. 4 (October 1999): 451–74.
Nora, Pierre. “Between History and Memory: Les Lieux de Mémoire.” 
Representations 26 (Spring 1989): 7–24.
Pei Jingfu. He hai Kunlun lu (Record of the river, the seas, and the 
Kunlun Mountains). Shanghai: Wenming shuju, Guangxu 32 (1906).
Peng Mingjun et al., comps. Hunan Dingxiang Wang Nanjing xinggong 
zhilüe (Annals of the temporary residence in Nanjing of Dingxiang 
Wang of Hunan). 1935. Nanjing Library, MS/B99/2.
Platt, Stephen. Autumn in the Heavenly Kingdom: China, the West, and 
the Epic Story of the Taiping Civil War. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 
2012.
———. Provincial Patriots: The Hunanese and Modern China. 
Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2007.
Poskami, Äbdulla. Kitabi Äbdulla (The book of ʿAbdullah.) Ürümchi: 
Shinjang Khälq Näshriyati, 2004.
Qin Huitian. “Chenghuang kao” (On city gods). In He Changling, comp., 
Huangchao jingshi wenbian, juan 55, 14b–15a. Taipei: Shijie shuju, 
1964.


154  eric schluessel
Qingdai Xinjiang dang’an xuanji (Selection of Qing Xinjiang documents). 
91 vols. Guilin: Guangxi shifan daxue chubanshe, 2012.
Qing shi liezhuan (Biographies of martyrs in the Qing History). 80 juan. 
Shanghai: Zhonghua shuju, 1928.
Rong Zhen. Zhongguo gudai minjian xinyang yanjiu — yi Sanhuang he 
chenghuang wei zhongxin (Research on ancient Chinese folk beliefs 
— Focusing on the Three Emperors and city gods). Beijing: Zhongguo 
shangwu chubanshe, 2006.
Sánchez-Carretero, Cristina. “Santos y Misterios as Channels of 
Communication in the Diaspora: Afro-Dominican Religious Practices 
Abroad.” The Journal of American Folklore, 118, no. 146 (Summer 
2005): 308–26.
Sangren, Steven. History and Magical Power in a Chinese Community. 
Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1987.
Schluessel, Eric. “Cong chenghuang dao shuzu: Dingxiang Wang zai 
Xinjiang” (From City God to garrison soldier: Dingxiang Wang in 
Xinjiang). Lishi renleixue xuekan 62, no. 4 (December 2019): 595–621.
———. Land of Strangers: The Civilizing Project in Qing Central Asia. 
New York: Columbia University Press, forthcoming.
Shache fu zhi (Yarkand Prefecture gazetteer). Xuantong 1 (1909). In 
Zhongguo xibei xijian fangzhi xu ji, vol. 10, 621–75. Beijing: Zhonghua 
quanguo tushuguan wenxian suowei fuzhi zhongxin, 1997.
Shenbao.
Sinn, Elizabeth. Pacific Crossing: California Gold, Chinese Migration, 
and the Making of Hong Kong. Hong Kong: Hong Kong University 
Press, 2013.
Snyder-Reinke, Jeffrey. Dry Spells: Rainmaking and Local Governance 
in Late Imperial China. Cambridge: Harvard University Asia Center, 
2009.
Stoler, Ann. “Rethinking Colonial Categories: European Communities 
and the Boundaries of Rule.” Comparative Studies in History and 
Society 31, no. 1 (January 1989): 134–61.
Su Jiasi and Tan Shaowan, comps. Changsha fu zhi (Changsha Prefecture 
gazetteer). Kangxi 24 (1685). Beijing: Beijing Airusheng shuzihua jishu 
yanjiu zhongxin, 2009.
Sun Cun and Yang Lin, comps. Changsha fu zhi (Changsha Prefecture 
gazetteer). 6 juan. Jiajing 12 (1533). Beijing: Beijing Airusheng shuzihua 
jishu yanjiu zhongxin, 2009.


exiled gods 
155 
Tang Guangyi, comp. Ruoqiang xian xiangtuzhi (Chaqiliq County 
gazetteer). Xuantong 2 (1910). In Xinjiang xiangtuzhi gao, 312–16.
Tang Juan, “Dingxiang Wang xinyang de qiyuan ji qi zai Xinjiang diqu 
chuanbo yanjiu” (The origins of belief in Dingxiang Wang and its 
transmission in Xinjiang), MA thesis, Xinjiang University, 2013.
———. “Fenxi Qing mo Minguo Xinjiang Manasi Dingxiang Wang 
miao ji qi xinyang” (Analyzing the Dingxiang Wang Temple in Manas, 
Xinjiang, in the late Qing and early Republic and its beliefs). Shaanxi 
shehui kexue luncong 2011, no. 4: 69–70.
Thum, Rian. Sacred Routes of Uyghur History. Cambridge: Harvard 
University Press, 2014.
Waley-Cohen, Joanna. Exile in Mid-Qing China: Banishment to 
Xinjiang, 1759–1860. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1991.
———. “The New Qing History.” Radical History Review 88 (Winter 
2004): 193–206.
Wang Dingan. Xiangjun ji (Records of the Xiang Army). Changsha: 
Yuelu shushe, 1983.
Wang Dun. Xiangjun shi (History of the Xiang Army). Changsha: Hunan 
daxue chubanshe, 2007.
Wang Fuzhi, Yongli shilu (Veritable Records of the Yongli reign). 26 juan. 
Beijing: Beijing Airusheng shuzihua jishu yanjiu zhongxin, 2009.
Wang Jiping. “Lun Xiangjun jituan” (On the Xiang Army community). 
Xiangtan daxue xuebao (zhexue shehui kexue ban) 1996, no. 6: 59–63.
Wang Kaiyun. Xiangjun zhi (Gazetteer of the Xiang Army). Changsha: 
Yuelu shushe, 1983.
Wang Penghui, “Chongjian fenghua: wan Qing Minguo qianqi Wulumuqi 
de miaoyu yu shehui ronghe” (Rebuilding magnificence: Temples 
and social mixing in late Qing and early Republican Ürümchi). Xiyu 
fazhan yanjiu 2014: 85–101.
———. Qingdai Minchu Xinjiang Zhendi dao de fosi daoguan yanjiu 
(Research on temples in late Qing and early Republican Zhendi circuit, 
Xinjiang). Wulumuqi: Xinjiang renmin chubanshe, 2016.
Wang Qi. San cai tu hui (Pictorial encyclopedia of the Three Powers). 
Huai yin cao tang, 1609.
Wang Shu’nan et al., comps. Xinjiang tuzhi (Xinjiang illustrated 
gazetteer). Taipei: Wenhai chubanshe, 1965.
Wang Yuying, comp. Shanhua xian zhi (Shanhua County gazetteer). 32 
juan. Jiaqing 23 (1818).


156  eric schluessel
Wang Zhensheng. Xi zheng riji (Diary of a journey of recovery to the 
West). Guangxu 26 (1900).
Weller, Robert P., and Meir Shahar. “Introduction.” In Unruly Gods: 
Divinity and Society in China, 1–33. Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i 
Press, 1996.
Wu Aichen. Xinjiang jiyou (Journey to Xinjiang). Lanzhou: Lanzhou guji 
shudian, 1990.
Wu Shenglan. Chu nan xiao ji (A little record of Southern Chu). In Fan 
Zhiming et al., comps., Yueyang fengtuji (ji qita er zhong), 1–13. 
Beijing: Zhonghua shuju, 1991.
Wu Zhaoxi and Zhang Xianlun, comps. Shanhua xian zhi (Shanhua 
County gazetteer). 34 juan. Guangxu 3 (1877).
Xiao Rankui. Suiding xian xiangtuzhi (Suiding County local gazetteer). 
Guangxu 34 (1908). In Xinjiang xiangtuzhi gao, 196–205.
Xie Bin. Xinjiang youji (Journey to Xinjiang). Shanghai: Shanghai 
zhonghua shuju, 1923.
Xinjiang wenshi ziliao (Xinjiang historical materials) 14.
Yan Xuchang, Gao Yaonan, and Sun Guangzu, comps. Zhenxi ting 
xiangtuzhi (Zhenxi Department local gazetteer). Guangxu 34 (1908). 
In Xinjiang xiangtuzhi gao, 97–125.
Yang Cunwei, comp. Suilai xian xiangtuzhi (Suilai County local 
gazetteer). n.d. In Xinjiang xiangtu zhi gao, 72–86.
Yang Fangchi. Qitai xian xiangtuzhi (Qitai County local gazetteer). 
Guangxu 34 (1908). In Xinjiang xiangtuzhi gao, 29–45.
Yecheng xian xiangtuzhi (Qarghiliq County local gazetteer). N.d. In 
Xinjiang xiangtu zhi gao, 369–74.
Yi Baisha. Diwang chunqiu (Spring and autumn of the sovereigns). 
Shanghai: Shanghai shudian, 1991.
Yi Rongding. Hetian zhilizhou xiangtuzhi (Khotan Directly 
Administered Prefecture gazetteer). Xuantong 1 (1909). In Xinjiang 
xiangtuzhi gao, 390–400. Wulumuqi: Xinjiang renmin chubanshe, 
2010.
Yu Wei and Chen Yu, comps. Liping fu zhi (Liping Prefecture gazetteer). 
Guangxu 8 (1882). Beijing: Beijing Airusheng shuzihua jishu yanjiu 
zhongxin, 2009.
Yu Zhi. Deyi lu (A record of single acts of benevolence). Baoshan tang, 
1885.
Zeng Binghuang, comp. Tulufan zhiliting xiangtuzhi (Turpan directly 
administered prefecture local gazetteer). Guangxu 33 (1907). In 
Xinjiang xiangtu zhi gao, 126–36.


exiled gods 
157 
Zhang Xiaohong, “Quyu xinyang de bentuhua yu difang xinyang de 
zhuanxing — jiyu Qingdai Shaan-nan Yang Si jiangjun xinyang de 
kaocha” (The localization of regional beliefs and the transformation of 
local beliefs — an investigation of the belief in General Yang Si in Qing 
southern Shaanxi). Shaanxi Shifan Daxue xuebao (zhexue shehui kexue 
ban) 37, no. 6 (November 2008): 96–103.
Zhao Weixi. Xiangjun jituan yu Xibei Huimin da qiyi zhi shanhou yanjiu: 
yi Gan-Ning-Qing diqu wei zhongxin (The Xiang Army community 
and reconstruction after the Northwestern Muslim Uprisings: 
Focusing on Gansu, Ningxia, and Qinghai). Shanghai: Shanghai guji 
chubanshe, 2013.
Zhao Wenzai and Chen Guangzhao, comps. Changsha xian zhi 
(Changsha county gazetteer). 28 juan. Jiaqing 22 (1817). Beijing: 
Beijing Airusheng shuzihua jishu yanjiu zhongxin, 2009.
Zhao Yushi. Bintui lu (Records written after the guest has left). Beijing: 
Beijing Airusheng shuzihua jishu yanjiu zhongxin, 2009 (1334).
———. Bintui lu (Records written after the guest has left). Edited by Qi 
Zhiping. Shanghai: Shanghai guji chubanshe, 1983.
Zhaozhong ci liezhuan xubian (Further biographies of martyrs at 
manifest loyalty shrines). National Palace Museum, Taipei, gudian 
033674–033793.
Zhongguo minjian gushi jicheng, Xinjiang juan (shang ce) (Collection of 
Chinese folktales, Xinjiang, Part 1). Beijing: Zhonghua shuju, 1993.
Zhou Fangxu. Xinping xian xiangtuzhi (Xinping County local gazetteer). 
Guangxu 33 (1907). In Xinjiang xiangtu zhi gao, 287–93.
Zhou Hong. Quntuan yu quanceng — Yangliuqing shenshang yu shenshen 
de shehui (“Communities” and “strata” — Yangliuqing’s society of 
gentry-merchants and gentry-gods). Shanghai: Shanghai renmin 
chubanshe, 2008.
———. “Wan Qing Minguo Xinjiang Han ren zhuti wenhua — Xinjiang 
Han ren shehui yanjiu zhi san” (The core culture of the Han of 
Xinjiang in the late Qing and early Republic — Research on Xinjiang 
Han society No. 3). Yunnan shifan daxue xuebao (zhexue shehui kexue 
ban) 46, no. 3 (May 2014): 46–58.
Zhou Zhenlin and Lin Zongxiang, comps. Ningxiang xian zhi (Ningxiang 
County gazetteer). 1948. In Huxiang wenku, jia, vols. 342–43. 
Changsha: Hunan renmin chubanshe, 2009.


Reproduced with permission of copyright owner. Further
reproduction prohibited without permission.