Progress Report of 
China’s National Carbon Market
 (2024)
Ministry of Ecology and Environment of 
the People’s Republic of China
July 2024


Progress Report of China’s National Carbon Market (2024)
Forward ………………………………………………………
Abstract ………………………………………………………
I.	
The Chinese government attaches great importance  
           to the development of China's National Carbon  
           Market …………………………………………………
II.	
The institution of the National Carbon Emission  
           Trading System is gradually improving ………………
III.	
Increased market vibrancy of the National Carbon  
           Emission Trading System ………………………………
IV.	
Completion of CEAs allocation and surrender in  
           the second compliance cycle ……………………………
V.	
Improvement in emission data quality …………………
VI.	
Launch of the National Voluntary Greenhouse Gas  
           Emission Reduction Trading Market …………………
VII.	 Robust digital infrastructure for China’s National  

           Carbon Market ………………………………………
VIII. Growing effectiveness of China’s National Carbon  
           Market development ……………………………………
IX.	
Strengthening international cooperation in carbon  
           market development ……………………………………
Outlook …………………………………………………………
Milestones ………………………………………………………
Contents
01
03 
 
09 
11 
17 
20 
 
23 
28 
32 
35 
38
40
43


Progress Report of China’s National Carbon Market (2024)
The carbon market leverages a market-based mechanism to control 
greenhouse gas emissions and promote green and low-carbon transition 
of the economy and society. Accelerating China’s National Carbon 
Market development and fully grasping the decisive role of the market 
in resource allocation is crucial for ensuring that emission mitigation 
responsibilities are assumed, achieving emission control targets, and 
reducing emissions abatement costs in various sectors.
The Chinese government attaches great importance to the development 
of the national carbon market. The report to the 20th National Congress 
of the Communist Party of China (CPC) proposed to improve the carbon 
emissions trading system. President Xi Jinping called for creating a more 
effective, vibrant, and internationally influential carbon market. China’s 
National Carbon Market consists of both a compliance emissions trading 
system and a voluntary emissions reduction trading market. While 
each has its own focus and operates independently, these two markets 
are interconnected through an offsetting mechanism for China Carbon 
Emission Allowances surrendering and together they form the national 
carbon market system. Since 2023, the State Council promulgated and 
implemented the Interim Regulations for the Management of Carbon 
Emission Trading and the second compliance cycle of the national carbon 
emissions trading market has successfully concluded. The National 
Voluntary Greenhouse Gas Emission Reduction Trading Market was also 
officially launched, significantly boosting market vibrancy. The role of 
Forward
01


Progress Report of China’s National Carbon Market (2024)
the carbon market in promoting emission reductions across sectors has 
been elevated, and China’s carbon pricing mechanism, with the national 
carbon market playing the principal role, has basically taken shape.
The construction and development of China’s National Carbon Market has 
attracted significant attention and widespread interest both domestically 
and internationally. The Ministry of Ecology and Environment has 
organized the compilation of this report, which aims to introduce the 
progress and main achievements of China’s National Carbon Market 
and to share development perspectives and relevant policy design 
considerations, hoping to enhance domestic and international recognition 
and support. This report focuses on the construction of the National 
Carbon Emission Trading System, market operations in the second 
compliance cycle, China Carbon Emission Allowances allocation and 
surrender, and data quality management. This report also shares the 
progress since the launch of the National Voluntary Greenhouse Gas 
Emission Reduction Trading Market , as well as the development of the 
national carbon market’s infrastructure, achievements, and international 
cooperation. Additionally, the report provides an outlook on the future 
development of China’s National Carbon Market.
02


Progress Report of China’s National Carbon Market (2024)
The Chinese government attaches great importance to addressing climate 
change and has positioned climate action as a key lever for enhancing 
ecological conservation and pursuing high-quality development. China 
continues to implement an active national strategy in response to climate 
change, adopting a series of policies and measures to strive for carbon 
emissions peaking before 2030 and carbon neutrality before 2060 (hereinafter 
the “dual carbon” goals). Among these measures, the carbon market serves 
as an essential policy tool for China to promote cost-effective carbon 
emissions reduction across sectors and to achieve the “dual carbon” goals. It 
also plays a fundamental role in China’s carbon pricing mechanism.
The influence of China’s National Carbon Market 
continues to expand
China’s National Carbon Emission Trading System covers the 
largest amount of greenhouse gas emissions globally
In accordance with the decisions and plans of the CPC Central 
Committee and the State Council, and drawing experience from 
international carbon markets and practices of domestic pilot markets, the 
National Carbon Emission Trading System (hereinafter the “National 
ETS”) started trading in July 2021. Beginning with the power sector, 
it now includes 2,257 key emitting entities, covering about 5.1 billion 
tonnes of annual carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions—more than 40 percent 
of China’s total CO2 emissions, making it the world’s largest market in 
terms of the amount of greenhouse gas emissions covered.
Abstract
03


Progress Report of China’s National Carbon Market (2024)
Compliance and voluntary markets form China’s National Carbon 
Market, harnessing policy synergy
In January 2024, the National Voluntary Greenhouse Gas Emission 
Reduction Trading Market (hereinafter the “National Voluntary Market”) 
was officially launched, another policy tool for accomplishing the “dual 
carbon” goals, following the launch of the National ETS. The compliance 
market strictly controls carbon emissions of key emitting entities, while the 
National Voluntary Market encourages society-wide engagement. The two 
markets operate independently but are interconnected through an offsetting 
mechanism for China Carbon Emission Allowances (hereinafter “CEAs”) 
 
surrendering. Together, they form China’s National Carbon Market.
China’s National Carbon Market has contributed an innovative 
“Chinese approach” to the global carbon market
China’s National Carbon Market significantly impacts global carbon 
prices and the effectiveness of carbon trading mechanisms around 
the world; its development and operation have drawn substantial 
international attention. The National ETS, with its intensity-control 
objectives, demonstrates the flexibility and applicability of the carbon 
market-based mechanism. The National ETS has contributed an 
innovative “Chinese approach” to the global carbon market mechanism.
Construction of China’s National Carbon Market 
progressed significantly
The Interim Regulations for the Management of Carbon Emission 
Trading has been released and come into force and the fundamental 
regulatory framework has been established
04


Progress Report of China’s National Carbon Market (2024)
In January 2024, the State Council issued the Interim Regulations for 
the Management of Carbon Emission Trading, which is China’s first 
specialized legislation in the field of climate change. It was taken into 
effect on May 1, 2024, forming the National ETS’s fundamental policy 
and regulatory framework along with the ministerial measures, normative 
documents, and technical standards. Ecology and environment authorities 
and other relevant government agencies at each level, key emitting 
entities, registries, trading institutions, and technical service institutions 
have assumed their respective responsibilities to ensure the smooth 
operation across all aspects of the National ETS, including emission data 
accounting, reporting and verification, CEAs allocation and surrendering, 
and trading and market supervision.
Successful conclusion of the second compliance cycle of the National 
ETS and a steady increase in market vibrancy
The supply and demand of CEAs in the second compliance cycle for the 
National ETS was generally balanced, aligning with policy expectations. 
By the end of 2023, the compliance rate for 2021 and 2022 were 99.61 
percent and 99.88 percent, respectively, an improvement compared 
to the first compliance cycle and ranking among the top international 
carbon markets. From January 1, 2022 to December 31, 2023, the trading 
volume of CEAs was 263 million tonnes, with a transaction value of 
17.26 billion yuan. The scale of trade expanded, and CEAs price showed 
a steady rise, with the number of key emitting entities participating in 
trading up by 31.79 percent compared to the first compliance cycle. The 
flexible compliance mechanisms helped 202 key emitting entities facing 
difficulties fulfill their compliance obligation.
05


Progress Report of China’s National Carbon Market (2024)
Emission data quality has been comprehensively improved and digital 
infrastructure provides solid support to the national carbon market
The Chinese government attaches great importance to and continues 
to strengthen data quality management and optimize accounting and 
verification methods, keeping monthly records on key emissions data 
and implementing a three-tier joint review system of emission data at 
national, provincial, and municipal levels. Intelligent early warning 
systems utilizing information technology tools like big data were 
adopted, along with supervision and support in key areas. A closed-
loop management mechanism of “timely detect- transfer to relevant 
departments for handling and supervision - check and rectification” to 
address issues was established, assuring data quality and meeting the 
data needs of the smooth and orderly operation of the National ETS. The 
National Carbon Trading Market Management Platform, registration 
system, trading system, and other infrastructures operated safely and 
stably, achieving interconnection and communication among various 
systems. This led to online management of all processes, data centralized 
throughout entire procedures, and comprehensive decision-making 
on a scientific basis, significantly enhancing data quality management 
capabilities of carbon emissions.
Effectiveness of China’s National Carbon Market 
development gradually increases 
Enterprises’ carbon emission management capabilities have been 
strengthened and the effectiveness of emission reduction of sectors 
was enhanced
06


Progress Report of China’s National Carbon Market (2024)
China’s National Carbon Market has ensured that enterprises fully 
assume their responsibilities to abate carbon emissions, raising society-
wide low-carbon awareness that “emissions come at a cost and reductions 
yield benefits.” Most key emitting entities conducted methods to measure 
values of elemental carbon content. By offering enterprises flexibility 
to curtail emissions, the carbon market’s guiding role in greenhouse gas 
reduction and facilitating energy mix adjustment has become gradually 
evident. In 2023, the emission intensity of national thermal power 
generation (CO2 emissions per unit of electricity by thermal power 
generation) decreased by 2.38 percent compared to 2018, while the 
emission intensity of electricity generation (CO2 emissions per unit of 
electricity generation) decreased by 8.78 percent compared to 2018. 
Fundamental role of carbon pricing mechanism has begun to take 
effect, promoting high-quality green and low-carbon development
On April 24, 2024, the closing price of the National ETS exceeded 100 
yuan per tonne for the first time. The green finance attributes of CEAs are 
gaining recognition from an increasing number of financial institutions, 
with CEAs prices being seen as an anchor for climate investment 
and financing, carbon asset management, and allowance pledging. 
This encouraged green and low-carbon investment led to notable 
improvements in energy efficiency within the thermal power generation 
sector, facilitating energy mix adjustment and promoting high-quality 
green and low-carbon development.
Carbon emission statistics and accounting systems have been 
consolidated and the technical service system and market have 
begun to take shape
07


Progress Report of China’s National Carbon Market (2024)
Efforts have been made to establish a carbon emission statistics and 
accounting institutional system for key sectors that suits China’s national 
circumstances, providing essential data support for formulating and 
releasing the annual CO2 emissions factor for electricity generation, 
the regional power grid baseline emission factor, and establishing and 
improving the carbon footprint management system. A large number 
of professionals and relevant entities have been cultivated through 
strengthening institutional management, clarifying responsibilities 
and liabilities, optimizing technical specifications, and enhancing 
supervision and inspection. This has laid a solid foundation for achieving 
the “dual carbon” goals. In 2023, over 50 consulting firms, more than 
450 inspection and testing institutions, and nearly 100 verification 
agencies provided third-party technical services to key emitting entities 
and government regulatory authorities. Provincial ecological and 
environmental authorities evaluated the services provided by technical 
verification agencies. Among the 16,611 evaluations rating the timeliness 
and quality of work, 99.7 percent were rated as qualified.
Looking ahead, the Chinese government will continue to enhance 
 
China's National Carbon Market and to deepen international exchange 
and cooperation in the carbon market, accelerate the process of 
developing a more effective, vibrant, and internationally influential 
carbon market, and strive to make greater contributions to addressing 
global climate change.
08


Progress Report of China’s National Carbon Market (2024)
The Chinese government attaches great importance to addressing 
climate change, viewing it as a crucial lever for enhancing ecological 
conservation and achieving high-quality development. The government 
continues to implement a national strategy to combat climate change, 
adopting a series of policies and measures to achieve the “dual carbon” 
goals. China's National Carbon Market is an essential institutional 
arrangement that utilizes market mechanisms to control greenhouse gas 
emissions. It is an important policy tool to achieve the “dual carbon” 
goals and plays a fundamental role in carbon pricing.
President Xi Jinping emphasized the establishment of China's National 
Carbon Market as a key measure to address climate change at the Paris 
Conference on Climate Change. The “1+N” policy documents for 
carbon peaking and carbon neutrality, including the Working Guidance 
for Carbon Dioxide Peaking and Carbon Neutrality in Full and Faithful 
Implementation of the New Development Philosophy and the Action 
Plan for Carbon Dioxide Peaking Before 2030, position the National 
ETS as an essential policy tool for achieving the “dual carbon” goals. 
The report to the 20
th CPC National Congress proposed to improve the 
I. The Chinese government attaches great 
importance to the development of 
China's National Carbon Market 
09


Progress Report of China’s National Carbon Market (2024)
carbon emissions trading system.
Since 2023, requirements on China’s National Carbon Market 
development have been further clarified in relevant major conferences 
and policy documents. The National Conference on Ecological and 
Environmental Protection proposed building a more effective, vibrant, 
and internationally influential carbon market. The Opinions of the 
CPC Central Committee and the State Council on Comprehensively 
Advancing the Building of a Beautiful China made overall plans for 
and demanded further progress of China’s National Carbon Market, 
which includes the steady expansion of sector coverage, the enrichment 
of trading product varieties and methods, and the setting up and 
improvement of the National Voluntary Market. China’s 2024 Report 
on the Work of the Government listed expanding sectorial coverage of 
the National ETS as a government task of the year.
The innovative development of China’s National Carbon Market is 
encouraging market entities to innovate green and low-carbon technologies 
with higher efficiency and lower cost, providing inexhaustible impetus for 
the development of new quality productive forces.
10


Progress Report of China’s National Carbon Market (2024)
After three years of development and operation, the institutional 
framework of the National ETS has been basically established, its legal 
basis has been strengthened, and supporting technical standards have 
continued to be refined, laying a solid foundation for the stable and 
orderly operation of the market.
i.Release and implementation of the Interim Regulations for the 
Management of Carbon Emission Trading
On January 25, 2024, the State Council promulgated the Interim 
Regulations for the Management of Carbon Emission Trading (hereinafter 
referred to as “the Regulations”), which came into effect on May 1, 
2024. The Regulations is China’s first specialized legislation in the field 
of addressing climate change, clarifying the primary aspects of carbon 
emissions trading market activities and the legal responsibilities of entities 
involved. The Regulations strengthens legal supervision and management 
and introduced severe penalties for violations (as shown in Figure 1). This 
underscores the legal principle of using the strictest systems and most 
rigorous rules of law to protect the ecological environment, marking it a 
II. The institution of the National Carbon 
Emission Trading System is gradually 
improving
11


Progress Report of China’s National Carbon Market (2024)
significant milestone. The issuing of the Regulations demonstrated China’s 
resolve and confidence in actively addressing climate change and its sense 
of duty as a responsible major country.
12
Figure 1. Framework for the Interim Regulations for the Management of Carbon Emission Trading


Progress Report of China’s National Carbon Market (2024)
Column 1: the Interim Regulations for the Management 
of Carbon Emission Trading
The Regulations, for the first time in the form of administrative regulation, clearly 
defines carbon emissions trading-related activities. It stipulated key management 
tasks for authorities of ecology and environment at national and local levels, 
including identifying key emitting entities, submitting emission data and verifying 
annual reports, CEAs allocating and surrendering, and market trading. The 
Regulations clarifies the roles of key emitting entities, registration institution, 
trading institution, and third-party technical service entities in supporting and 
ensuring market operations. It also specifies penalties for behaviors such as 
failure to surrender CEAs in full and on time and emission data fraud, thereby 
solidifying the legal foundation for the healthy development of the National ETS.
The Regulations adheres to a problem-oriented approach, follows the general 
principles of strengthening full process management, maintaining appropriate 
flexibility, and severely punishing illegal and non-compliant activities, and 
thereby building a fundamental institutional framework for carbon emissions 
trading management. First, the coverage of the Regulations leaves no blind 
spots. The Regulations clearly define the main components of carbon emissions 
trading and all types of participating entities and specifying legal responsibilities 
for illegal and non-compliant activities. Second, key components are targeted 
precisely. Specific requirements and penalties have been developed for key 
management aspects of the National ETS, such as emission data accounting, 
reporting and verification, CEAs surrender, and market trading. Penalties are 
intensified for serious violations to serve as an effective legal deterrent. Third, 
penalty measures are diverse. The Regulations stipulates various administrative 
penalties for illegal and non-compliant activities, including fines, confiscation of 
unlawful gains, orders to suspend production, prohibition from engaging in the 
business, and revocation of certifications.
ii.Completion of the fundamental policy and regulatory framework 
for the National ETS
The Ministry of Ecology and Environment has issued the Measures for 
the Administration of Carbon Emissions Trading (Trial) and released 
three rules for registration, trading, and settlement. The Ministry has 
13


Progress Report of China’s National Carbon Market (2024)
Figure 2. Policies and regulatory framework for the National ETS
also formulated and revised normative documents such as guidelines for 
emission accounting, reporting and verification, and CEAs allocation 
plans. Together with the Regulations, these efforts formed a multi-level 
system encompassing “administrative regulations + ministerial measures + 
normative documents + technical standards” (as shown in Figure 2).
In August 2023, the Supreme People’s Court and the Supreme People’s 
Procuratorate revised and issued the Interpretation on Several Issues 
Concerning the Application of Law in Handling Criminal Cases of 
Environmental Pollution. This interpretation includes the falsification 
of carbon emission data by third-party technical service entities, such 
as emission verification agencies, consulting agencies, and inspection 
agencies, within the scope of criminal jurisdiction. It clarifies sentencing 
standards and serves as a deterrent of the criminal justice system.
14


Progress Report of China’s National Carbon Market (2024)
iii.Improved operational mechanism of the National ETS
The National ETS has formed a comprehensive system architecture, 
including emission data accounting, reporting and verification, CEAs 
allocation and surrendering, market trading, and supervision (as 
shown in Figure 3). Competent government authorities are responsible 
for making CEAs allocation plans and issuing annual CEAs to key 
emitting entities. Key emitting entities are required to measure and 
report their emission data from the previous year on an annual basis, 
which is then verified by competent government authorities. Key 
emitting entities are required to surrender CEAs equivalent to their 
emissions to fulfill their compliance obligation before the deadline. 
The National ETS offers flexibility for key emitting entities to meet 
their emission mitigation responsibilities through CEAs trading. 
To ensure its effective operation, the Ministry of Ecology and 
Environment has developed various information systems, including 
a market management platform, a registration system, and a trading 
system for the National ETS. The National Carbon Trading Market 
Management Platform records emission-related data of key emitting 
entities. The national carbon emissions registration system documents 
information on the holding, changes, surrendering, and cancellation 
of CEAs and provides settlement services. The national carbon 
emissions trading system ensures the centralized and unified trading 
of CEAs within National ETS.
15


Progress Report of China’s National Carbon Market (2024)
Figure 3. Architecture of the National ETS
16


Progress Report of China’s National Carbon Market (2024)
The second compliance cycle (2021-2022) of the National ETS included 
2,257 key emitting entities in the power generation sector (including 
captive power plants in other sectors), covering annual greenhouse gas 
emissions of approximately 5.1 billion tonnes of CO2 equivalent, making 
it the largest emission market in the world.
By the end of 2023, the cumulative trading volume of CEAs in the 
National ETS reached 442 million tonnes, with a cumulative transaction 
value of 24.92 billion yuan (shown in Figure 4). During the second 
compliance cycle, the cumulative trading volume of CEAs was 263 
million tonnes, with a cumulative turnover of 17.26 billion yuan. The 
trading scale has gradually expanded, with trading prices showing steady 
growth and participants becoming more active.
i.Scaling up trading
During the second compliance cycle of the National ETS, the cumulative 
trading volume and value of CEAs increased by 47.01 percent and 
125.26 percent, respectively, compared to the first compliance cycle. The 
transaction volume of listed and bulk agreement trading increased by 
33.93 percent and 49.73 percent, respectively. In July 2023, the Ministry 
of Ecology and Environment released a notice on CEAs surrender 
III. Increased market vibrancy of the 
National Carbon Emission Trading System
17


Progress Report of China’s National Carbon Market (2024)
for 2021 and 2022. Various regions in China organized key emitting 
entities to develop trading plans as early as possible. The trading volume 
continued to rise from August to October in 2023. The average monthly 
trading volume in the first half of 2024 reached 3.67 million tonnes, a 
year-on-year increase of 174.9 percent.
ii.Steady rise in trading prices 
During the second compliance cycle of the National ETS, the composite 
price for market closing fluctuated between 50 and 82 yuan/tonne. By 
the end of 2023, the composite price for market closing was 79.42 yuan/
tonne, an increase of 65.46 percent compared to the opening price on 
the first trading day and 46.48 percent higher than the closing price of 
the first compliance cycle. With the Regulations released and coming 
into full force as well as the continuous advancement of work related 
to the third compliance cycle, the market trading price has shown a 
steady upward trend. The composite price for market closing exceeded 
100 yuan/tonne for the first time on April 24, 2024. It is a concrete 
manifestation of the market’s role in resource distribution for carbon 
emission reduction, which gave further impetus to enterprises to pursue 
green and low-carbon transition.
iii.Increasingly active trading participants 
In the second compliance cycle of the National ETS, transactions occur 
every trading day, with key emitting entities showing enthusiasm for 
engaging in market activities. Compared to the first compliance cycle, 
an additional 338 entities opened trading accounts from 2022 to 2023, 
the number of key emitting entities participating in trading increased 
by 31.79 percent, and the number of key emitting entities with multiple 
18


Progress Report of China’s National Carbon Market (2024)
transactions increased by 32.14 percent. The number of key emission 
entities with trading volume exceeding a million tonnes increased by 
77.59 percent, while the number of key emission entities using both 
listing and bulk agreements trading rose by 36.87 percent. Key emitting 
entities have made trading plans as early as possible based on their own 
situations. The month with peak trading volume shifted from December 
to October, with a notable increase in active trading days
①. After the end 
of the second compliance cycle, the average monthly trading volume 
and the average number of key emitting entities participated in the first 
half of 2024 increased by 49.54 percent and 90.79 percent, respectively, 
compared to the same period in 2022. 
Figure 4. Transactions and prices during the first and second compliance cycles of 
the National ETS
①   Active trading days refer to the number of trading days where the daily trading volume exceeds the 
average level for that year.
19


Progress Report of China’s National Carbon Market (2024)
CEAs allocation and surrender are essential for the healthy, stable, 
and orderly operation of the National ETS and for achieving policy 
objectives. Based on national greenhouse gas emission control targets, 
the National ETS currently adopts an intensity-based benchmarking 
method for CEAs allocation. This approach aligns with the pace and 
efforts to achieve China’s “dual carbon” goals. 
i.Supply and demand of CEAs generally balanced
The National ETS issued 5.096 billion tonnes and 5.104 billion tonnes 
of CEAs  for 2021 and 2022, respectively. The verified emissions (CEAs 
obligated to surrender) were 5.094 billion tonnes and 5.091 billion 
tonnes, resulting in surpluses of 1.47 million tonnes and 12.98 million 
tonnes. This represented 0.03 percent and 0.25 percent of the total CEAs 
allocated, respectively. The balance between the supply and demand of 
CEAs has been maintained for the second compliance cycle, meeting 
policy expectations. Meanwhile, key emitting entities used a total of 3.72 
million tonnes of national certified voluntary emission reduction to offset 
their CEAs surrendering obligation.
IV. Completion of CEAs allocation  
and surrender in the second  
compliance cycle 
20


Progress Report of China’s National Carbon Market (2024)
ii.CEAs allocation plan further optimized
Compared to the first compliance cycle, CEAs allocation methods for 
2021 and 2022 maintained policy continuity and stability in general 
while being optimized based on the circumstances of the power 
generation sector. First, different CEAs allocation benchmark values 
were adopted for 2021 and 2022, with the second year’s benchmark 
values determined based on the previous year’s actual emissions, making 
the benchmark value more aligned with sector realities. Second, a 
balance value was introduced for the first time as an important reference 
for setting electricity-generated and heat-generated benchmarks, 
effectively addressing significant deviations in determining benchmark 
values. Third, electricity-generated and heat-generated benchmarks for 
various types of generators were enhanced to reflect the sector emission. 
It reflects a policy orientation that incentivizes efficient and clean 
generators while constraining inefficient ones.
iii.CEAs surrender management mechanism established
First, a dynamic monitoring mechanism for compliance risks was 
developed. Timely assessment of the compliance risks of key emitting 
entities were carried out and relevant information was regularly notified 
to, enabling automatic early warning of compliance risks. Second, 
targeted assistance programs were initiated. Local ecological and 
environmental authorities comprehensively reviewed enterprises’ 
CEAs surplus and shortfall situations. They visited enterprises with 
compliance difficulties, pushing them to develop compliance plans 
early, and providing targeted assistance. Third, flexible compliance 
mechanisms were created. To alleviate pandemic-related impacts 
21


Progress Report of China’s National Carbon Market (2024)
on some enterprises’ CEAs surrendering, key emitting entities with 
high CEAs deficits were allowed to borrow CEAs, and tailored relief 
mechanisms were introduced for key emitting entities undertaking major 
public welfare tasks. The flexible compliance mechanisms helped 202 
key emitting entities facing difficulties fulfill their compliance obligation.
By the end of 2023, the compliance rates for 2021 and 2022 were 99.61 
percent and 99.88 percent, respectively, showing an improvement 
compared to the first compliance cycle and ranking China among the top 
international carbon markets. A total of 80 key emitting entities failed to 
comply fully and on time, which is 98 fewer than in the first compliance 
cycle. Local ecology and environment departments have handled these 
non-compliant entities in accordance with relevant regulations.
22


Progress Report of China’s National Carbon Market (2024)
The Chinese government attached great importance to and 
continuously strengthened the data quality management of the 
National ETS. It has established a set of emission accounting, 
reporting, and verification systems with Chinese characteristics that 
have proven to be effective. The basic capacity of power generation 
enterprises in carbon emission data statistics and accounting have 
been significantly enhanced. The standardization, accuracy, and 
timeliness of carbon emission reports have markedly improved, 
meeting the data needs for the sound and orderly operation of the 
National ETS.
i.Scientific accounting, reporting, and verification rules 
To address challenges faced by key emitting entities in submitting 
samples for coal quality analysis and conducting on-site verifications 
due to the pandemic, adjustments were made to the methods for 
obtaining data for months with missing coal quality reports. Emission 
data accounting formulas were optimized, reducing the number of 
formulas for measuring power generation sectors from 27 to 12 
and replacing parameters that require complex calculations such as 
V. Improvement in emission
data quality 
23


Progress Report of China’s National Carbon Market (2024)
“amount of electricity supply” and “heat-supply ratio” with directly 
measurable data such as “amount of electricity generation” and 
“amount of heat generation.” Key emitting entities are required to 
develop and strictly implement data quality control plans, clearly 
specifying provisions for key parameters in carbon emission 
accounting, measuring equipment, and handling of missing data, 
standardizing internal management systems for data quality, and 
strengthening key emitting entities’ carbon emission accounting 
capabilities. China also started to explore the application of the 
continuous emission monitoring system (CEMS) for CO2 emissions. 
Since 2021, carbon emission monitoring and assessment pilots 
have been conducted in key sectors such as thermal power, iron and 
steel, and cement. As of March 2024, CEMS equipment has been 
installed at 152 spots in 72 enterprises. Research is being carried 
out on equipment selection, monitoring spot selection, comparison 
and analysis of accounting and monitoring data, and evaluation of 
automatic monitoring results. Specialized verification guidelines for 
the power generation sector have been released to address issues such 
as inconsistent detail and inaccurate key components in verification 
reports. These guidelines developed standardized procedures and 
mandatory verification requirements, proposing “check, inquire, 
observe, and verify” methods for 18 key parameters, thereby ensuring 
consistent verification criteria and boundaries.
24


Progress Report of China’s National Carbon Market (2024)
Column 2: Carbon emission reporting and 
verification in 2023
In 2023, Competent deparments of ecology and environment at provincial 
level organized 92 verification agencies and 2,702 staff members to review 
the 2022 carbon emission reports for the power generation sector. Some 
regions explored innovative supervision methods by introducing certification 
exams for verification personnel, ensuring they are qualified to conduct 
their tasks. Several regions carried out random inspections to supervise the 
review process and evaluate the capabilities of the verification personnel. 
In collaboration with market regulatory authorities, some areas re-tested 
coal samples retained from key emitting entities to ensure the credibility 
of the inspection and report results. Evaluations indicated that verification 
personnel have gained a deeper understanding of technical specifications, 
leading to more standardized review processes and consistent technical 
assessments. The quality of verification work has significantly improved, 
with non-compliance issues identified by verification agencies decreasing 
by approximately 35.7 percent compared to 2022. The rate of first-time 
rectification for non-compliance issues reached about 92 percent, a notable 
improvement from the previous year.
ii.Implementation of a three-tier joint review and monthly 
recorded data 
A three-tier joint review system at the national, provincial, and municipal 
levels has been established for the monthly recorded data of key emitting 
entities. Key emitting entities are required to submit key parameters 
and supporting materials for emission accounting through the National 
Carbon Trading Market Management Platform on a monthly basis. 
Competent departments of ecology and environment at National, 
provincial, and municipal levels conduct regular reviews. Using big data 
25


Progress Report of China’s National Carbon Market (2024)
technology, abnormal data is promptly identified and early warnings 
are issued. This has enabled comprehensive, full-process, and routine 
supervision over the registry of key emitting entities, the compilation 
and implementation of data quality control plans, monthly recorded 
data, emission reporting, and verification. Identified issues are promptly 
transferred to local authorities for verification, ensuring that key emitting 
entities implement necessary corrections. Since March 2023, the on-
time submission rate of monthly recorded data by key emitting entities 
has consistently remained at 100 percent, with the number of problems 
significantly reduced and effectively resolved.
iii.Specialized supervision and support on emission data reporting quality 
Since 2021, the Ministry of Ecology and Environment organized 
three rounds of supervision and assistance campaigns to enhance the 
quality of emission reporting for key emitting entities. Experts and law 
enforcement specialists were dispatched across the country to conduct 
on-site supervision of about 538 key emitting entities distributed 
across 25 provinces and 73 cities for identified issues, clear criteria 
were established, along with standards for case closure and itemized 
lists for supervision and rectification. Additionally, follow-ups on the 
rectifications from the first compliance cycle were continually conducted. 
A total of 54 administrative penalties were imposed across various 
regions for data quality issues, with a total market value of penalties and 
canceled CEAs equivalent to 1.4 billion yuan.
iv.Strengthening management capabilities 
In 2023, competent departments of ecology and environment at 
26


Progress Report of China’s National Carbon Market (2024)
various levels held 134 training sessions regarding the development 
of the National ETS. These sessions attracted approximately 11,600 
participants. The Ministry of Ecology and Environment organized six 
sessions specifically targeting data quality management. Attendees 
included representatives from competent departments of ecology and 
environment at the provincial and municipal levels, key emitting entities, 
and verification institutions. Forty training videos were produced through 
the National Carbon Trading Market Management Platform and online 
training that reached more than 10,000 participants were held. An expert 
panel for China’s national carbon emissions trading market was formed, 
which has provided timely responses to address 688 technical and policy 
questions encountered by participating entities.
27


Progress Report of China’s National Carbon Market (2024)
To mobilize society-wide participation in greenhouse gas emission 
reduction, the National Voluntary Market was officially launched on 
January 22, 2024. The market is led by the government and emphasizing 
the voluntary nature and the role of the market, in line with international 
practice. It strengthens information disclosure and public oversight, 
upholds market integrity, equity, and transparency, and contributes to 
achieving the “dual carbon” goals.
i.Developing the fundamental institutional framework 
In 2023, the Ministry of Ecology and Environment and the State 
Administration for Market Regulation jointly released the Measures 
for the Administration of Voluntary Greenhouse Gas Emission 
Reduction Trading (Trial). This established the overall approach, work 
processes, and rights and responsibilities of market participants in the 
National Voluntary Market (as shown in Figure 5). It requires project 
owners and third-party validation and verification bodies to make dual 
commitments regarding the authenticity and compliance of voluntary 
emission reduction projects and their emission reductions. The State 
Administration for Market Regulation issued the Implementation Rules 
VI. Launch of the National Voluntary 
Greenhouse Gas Emission Reduction 
Trading Market 
28


Progress Report of China’s National Carbon Market (2024)
for Validation of Voluntary Greenhouse Gas Emission Reduction Projects 
and Verification of Emission Reductions and approved the first batch 
of third-party validation and verification bodies. The National Center 
for Climate Change Strategy and International Cooperation (National 
Voluntary Greenhouse Gas Emission Reduction Registration Institution) 
released the Rules for Voluntary Greenhouse Gas Emission Reduction 
Registration (Trial) and the Guidelines for Voluntary Greenhouse Gas 
Emission Reduction Project Design and Implementation. The China 
Beijing Green Exchange (National Voluntary Greenhouse Gas Emission 
Reduction Trading Institution) formulated and issued the Rules for 
Voluntary Greenhouse Gas Emission Reduction Trading and Settlement 
(Trial). These relevant policies, regulations, and technical specifications 
provide comprehensive guidance on all processes and elements for 
participating entities. 
Figure 5. Design and implementation process of the National Voluntary Market
29


Progress Report of China’s National Carbon Market (2024)
ii.Release of the first batch of project methodologies 
In March 2023, the Ministry of Ecology and Environment publicly 
solicited voluntary greenhouse gas emission reduction project 
methodologies, receiving a total of 361 submissions. After scientific 
evaluation and selection, based on principles such as high social 
expectation, clear emission reduction mechanisms, guaranteed data 
quality, combined social and ecological benefits, and ensuring effective 
supervision, the first batch of four methodologies was released. These 
Column 3: General criteria for voluntary greenhouse 
gas emission reduction projects and emission reductions
Voluntary greenhouse gas emission reduction projects and emission 
reductions must meet general criteria, including authenticity, additionality, 
uniqueness, and conservativeness. Authenticity means certified voluntary 
emission reductions must be genuine, accurate, and reliable. Additionality 
refers to voluntary emission reduction projects that should help overcome 
barriers related to internal rate of return, financing, and critical technologies. 
The project’s greenhouse gas emissions should be lower than the baseline 
emissions, or its greenhouse gas removals should be higher than the baseline 
removals. Uniqueness means the project must not participate in other 
greenhouse gas emission reduction trading mechanisms; there should be no 
instances of project duplication or double-counting of emission reductions. 
Conservativeness refers to the practice of using conservative methods 
for estimation and value assessment when precise judgments for relevant 
parameters or technical pathways are difficult during the accounting or 
verification process of voluntary greenhouse gas emission reduction projects. 
This ensures that project emission reductions are not overestimated.
30


Progress Report of China’s National Carbon Market (2024)
methodologies include forestation carbon sequestration, grid-connected 
solar thermal power generation, grid-connected offshore wind power 
generation, and mangrove afforestation, supporting the development of 
forestry carbon sequestration and renewable energy projects.
iii.Innovative projects and management methods on emission 
reduction data quality
To guarantee authentic, long-lasting, and additional emission reduction 
effects and strengthen data quality management, the Ministry of Ecology 
and Environment considered potential risks for voluntary emission 
reduction projects in various fields. Key technical components for project 
validation and emission reduction verification were added to the project 
methodologies, strengthening targeted data quality management for 
project owners and validation and verification bodies. On this basis, the 
feasibility of online management of measurement data is being explored. 
By utilizing information technology tools, real-time data verification can 
be achieved, ensuring the quality of projects and emission reductions 
from the data source.
31


Progress Report of China’s National Carbon Market (2024)
The National Carbon Trading Market Management Platform, registration 
system, trading system, and other infrastructure operate safely and stably, 
achieving interconnection among various systems, which contributed 
to the integrated management of all business processes, centralized data 
collection throughout the entire process, and a comprehensive scientific 
decision-making process. 
i.Establishment of National Carbon Trading Market Management 
Platform 
The National Carbon Trading Market Management Platform is an 
integrated management system that serves the full process of carbon 
emission data management, quality supervision, and verification 
management. In February 2023, the platform was officially launched 
to adopt information technology tools such as big data to enable 
automatic detection and verification of abnormal emissions data and 
related parameters and provide early warning for suspicious data, 
which digitized and optimized key aspects of carbon emission data 
management. Users include regulatory authorities, key emitting entities, 
technical service institutions, and other stakeholders. It has enriched 
VII. Robust digital infrastructure for 
China’s National Carbon Market 
32


Progress Report of China’s National Carbon Market (2024)
the technical methods of data quality management and significantly 
improved efficiency. A National Carbon Trading Market Information 
Network website and a social media account have been launched to 
release authoritative information on China's National Carbon Market. To 
date, the social media account has over 7,000 followers, and the website 
and social media account have received 70,000 visits.
ii.Optimization of the national carbon emission registration system 
and trading system 
The national carbon emission registration system and trading system are 
undergoing constant optimization and upgrading, with strengthened daily 
operation and maintenance management. Daily collaboration mechanisms 
have been established within competent departments of ecological and 
environmental at the provincial level to secure smooth CEAs allocation, 
trading, surrendering, and offsetting. During the second compliance 
cycle, the national carbon emission registration system supported the 
issuance and surrendering of over 10 billion tonnes of CEAs. System 
functions such as compliance completion certificates and compliance risk 
early warnings were developed and launched, achieving unified serial 
number management of CEAs. The National ETS successfully labeled 
CEAs for 2021 and 2022 and price information for the national carbon 
emission trading market, sending a unified price signal. The two systems 
have provided over 200,000 services to 2,257 key emitting entities and 
other market participants.
iii.Launch of the national voluntary greenhouse gas emission 
reduction registration system and trading system 
33


Progress Report of China’s National Carbon Market (2024)
The national voluntary greenhouse gas emission reduction registration 
system and trading system are crucial infrastructures for the National 
Voluntary Market. Currently, the development of these systems have 
been launched for business operation, with 4,582 accounts. The 
registration system provides registration and cancellation services for 
voluntary emission reduction projects and emission reductions, while 
the trading system offers centralized and unified trading and settlement 
services for certified voluntary emission reductions to market entities. 
Meanwhile, the two systems align with widely accepted international 
standards, to achieve unique serial numbers for certified voluntary 
emission reductions.
34


Progress Report of China’s National Carbon Market (2024)
i.Enterprises’ carbon emission management capabilities have been 
effectively strengthened 
China’s national carbon market has ensured that enterprises fully assume 
their responsibilities to abate carbon emissions, raising society-wide low-
carbon awareness that “emissions come at a cost and reductions yield 
benefits.” Key emitting entities in the power generation sector have 
established internal control systems for carbon emission management, 
with over 80 percent assigning dedicated personnel for carbon assets 
management and incorporating it into daily operation activities. The 
majority of key emitting entities have assessed their emission reduction 
potential and costs, actively adopting emission mitigation measures such 
as low-carbon technology retrofits and production process optimization 
and implementing emissions reduction as internal assessments. Most 
key emitting entities use measuring methods to get values of elemental 
carbon content.
ii.Enhanced effectiveness of sector emission reduction 
Compared to setting mandatory restrictions on production and emission, 
the carbon emission trading mechanism distributes resources for carbon 
VIII. Growing effectiveness of China’s 
National Carbon Market development 
35


Progress Report of China’s National Carbon Market (2024)
emission reduction through market means, providing enterprises 
flexibility on emission mitigation and driving sector emission reduction. 
Under the premise of ensuring the rapid development of the power 
 
sector and energy security, in 2023, the emission intensity of national 
thermal power generation (CO2 emissions per unit of electricity by 
thermal power generation) decreased by 2.38 percent compared to 2018, 
while the emission intensity of electricity generation (CO2 emissions 
per unit of electricity generation) decreased by 8.78 percent compared 
to 2018. The carbon market’s guiding role in promoting greenhouse gas 
reduction, facilitating energy mix adjustment, as well as encouraging the 
efficient and restraining the inefficient has become more evident. 
iii.Fundamental role of carbon pricing mechanism has begun to 
take effect
On April 24, 2024, the closing price of the National ETS exceeded 100 
yuan per tonne for the first time. The green finance attributes of CEAs are 
gradually gaining recognition from the market, with market prices being 
seen as an anchor for climate investment and financing, carbon assets 
management, and CEAs pledging. This encouraged green and low-carbon 
investment and led to notable improvements in energy efficiency within 
the thermal power generation sector, facilitating energy mix adjustment, 
and promoting high-quality green and low-carbon development.
iv.Consolidated carbon emission statistics and accounting 
Pursuant to China’s national circumstance, a comprehensive, scientific, 
effective, and internationally aligned carbon emission data statistics, 
accounting and management system has been established, through 
36


Progress Report of China’s National Carbon Market (2024)
building a long-term supervision mechanism and cracking down on 
fraudulent practices strictly. Monthly data and updates at the installations 
and enterprise level have covered over 40 percent of China’s national 
CO2 emissions. The standardization, accuracy, and timeliness of carbon 
emission statistics and accounting have been improved. The measured 
data of key parameters such as fossil fuels provide basic data support for 
the scientific formulation and release of  the annual CO2 emission factors 
for electricity generation, regional power grid baseline emission factors, 
and establishing and improving carbon footprint management systems. 
A large number of professionals and relevant entities in carbon reduction 
and carbon management have been cultivated, laying a solid foundation 
for achieving the “dual carbon” goals. 
v.The technical service system and market have begun to take shape 
A large number of qualified technical institutions have been cultivated 
by strengthening institutional management, clarifying responsibilities 
and liabilities, optimizing technical specifications, and enhancing 
supervision and inspection. In 2023, over 50 consulting firms provided 
annual emission report formalization for key emitting entities, more 
than 450 inspection and testing institutions conducted routine reviews 
on fuel usage by key emitting entities, and nearly 100 verification 
agencies engaged in the technical verification of annual emission reports 
submitted by key emitting entities. Competent departments of ecology 
and environment at the provincial level evaluated the services provided 
by verification agencies, with 99.7 percent of the 16,611 evaluations 
rating the timeliness and quality of work as qualified.
37


Progress Report of China’s National Carbon Market (2024)
The Chinese government upholds the United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) principles of equity, 
common but differentiated responsibilities, and respective capabilities 
and promotes the full, balanced, and effective implementation of 
the Paris Agreement. China actively participates in international 
negotiations on the global carbon market mechanism under Article 6 
of the Paris Agreement, fully respects each country’s sovereignty and 
different national circumstances, and makes positive contributions to 
promoting the establishment of a scientific, fair, and reasonable global 
carbon market mechanism.
The Chinese government has attached great importance to international 
cooperation in the national carbon market. Regarding the construction 
of the carbon market systems, multi-faceted exchanges, dialogues, 
and cooperation have been conducted with the EU, Germany, Norway, 
BRICS countries, and Belt and Road Initiative (BRI) partner countries. 
Successive China-EU ministerial dialogues on carbon emissions trading 
policies have been held, and the China Carbon Market Conference 2023 
was held in Shanghai to share experience and promote mutual learning. 
IX. Strengthening international 
cooperation in carbon market 
development 
38


Progress Report of China’s National Carbon Market (2024)
Various carbon market capacity-building activities have been organized 
to strengthen the foundation for carbon market implementation. China 
has actively conducted research on key topics in the carbon market and 
collaborated with international organizations. For example, China has 
cooperated with the World Bank on the study of monitoring, reporting, 
verification, and CEAs allocation to continuously optimize system 
design. International exchanges in the voluntary emission reduction 
trading market have been enhanced to explore feasible paths for the 
National Voluntary Market to participate in the Carbon Offsetting and 
Reduction Scheme for International Aviation (CORSIA).
International attention to China’s National Carbon Market has increased 
continuously. With more and more global emission reduction efforts, 
carbon markets are increasingly recognized as an essential policy tool 
for emissions mitigation. China’s National Carbon Market covers the 
largest amount of greenhouse gas emissions, with a significant impact 
on the carbon price and effectiveness of carbon trading mechanisms 
around the world. Its establishment and operation have attracted 
great attention from the international community. With an intensity-
based objective, the National ETS enforces greenhouse gas emission 
reduction responsibilities onto enterprises and provides incentives to 
curtail emissions. It demonstrates the flexibility and applicability of 
the carbon market-based mechanism. China’s National Carbon Market 
has contributed an innovative “Chinese approach” to the global carbon 
market mechanism.
39


Progress Report of China’s National Carbon Market (2024)
China’s economic and social development has entered a high-quality 
stage characterized by accelerated green and low-carbon development. 
As the world’s largest developing country, China has a series of 
arduous tasks ahead, including economic growth, improving people’s 
livelihood, environmental governance, and energy security. It will 
continue to advance industrialization and urbanization, with its reliance 
on heavy industries and a coal-dominated energy mix. In addition, 
the time frame for reaching peak emission is tight. It will require 
extraordinary hard work to achieve the “dual carbon” goals.
The carbon market is an effective long-term driver to induce low-
carbon production and lifestyle changes across society, providing 
an efficient approach to balancing economic growth and emission 
mitigation. In the future, China’s national carbon market role as an 
essential policy tool to achieve the “dual carbon” goals and its principal 
role in the carbon pricing mechanism will be strengthened. 
Building a carbon market is a complex systematic project. China’s 
National Carbon Market is still at the initial stage and its institutional 
systems need to be further reinforced. It still needs to be improved 
in many aspects, including the coverage of sectors, trading methods, 
trading entities and product varieties, market vibrancy, market 
Outlook 
40


Progress Report of China’s National Carbon Market (2024)
functions, and data quality management capabilities.
Next, China will continue to improve relevant policy-supporting 
systems for the National ETS. While extensively considering factors 
such as sector carbon emissions, data quality, the synergy between 
pollution reduction and carbon emission reduction, and high-quality 
sector development, China will work to increase coverage of key 
sectors through the National ETS in stages. China will gradually 
implement a combination of free and paid CEAs allocation methods, 
gradually increasing the proportion of paid allocation to make 
carbon prices more accurately reflect the emission reduction costs of 
enterprises. China will continuously enrich trading product varieties, 
trading entities, and trading methods, further enhance market vibrancy, 
and improve the price discovery function. At the same time, China 
will actively develop the National Voluntary Market with high-quality 
carbon credits, constructing a scientific, fair, open, transparent, widely-
participated system that aligns with international standards. Priority 
support will be given to the development of projects in ecosystem 
carbon sequestration, renewable energy, methane emission control, 
energy conservation, and efficiency improvement. The application 
of low-carbon, zero-carbon, and negative-carbon technologies will 
be promoted. Efforts will be made to explore the application of 
information technology tools to strengthen data quality management, 
and promote the widespread application of certified voluntary emission 
reduction.
China will further deepen international exchange and cooperation, 
actively participate in bilateral and multilateral processes of global 
41


Progress Report of China’s National Carbon Market (2024)
climate governance, and advance new progress in negotiations on 
global carbon market mechanisms. China will enhance cooperation 
with relevant countries, regions, and international organizations, engage 
in policy dialogues with all parties on carbon market development, 
and strengthen research support and capacity-building cooperation. 
China will accelerate process to build a more effective, more vibrant, 
and more internationally influential carbon market, and strive to make 
greater contributions to addressing global climate change.
42


Progress Report of China’s National Carbon Market (2024)
On February 4, the Ministry of Ecology and Environment (MEE) 
released the Notice on Strengthening Management of Enterprise 
Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reporting in the Power Generation Industry 
for 2023-2025.
On February 4, the National Carbon Trading Market Management 
Platform was launched.
On March 13, the MEE released the Implementation Plans on National 
Carbon Emissions Trading Allowance Setting and Allocation in the 
Power Generation Industry for 2021 and 2022.
By March 31, key emitting entities in the power generation sector 
submitted the previous year’s greenhouse gas emissions report.
From June 12 to June 21, the MEE conducted the second round of 
actions to supervise and support the quality improvement of carbon 
emissions reports.
On June 30, the competent departments of ecology and environment 
under the provincial-level governments completed the verification tasks 
Milestones
2023
▶
43


Progress Report of China’s National Carbon Market (2024)
for the 2020 greenhouse gas emissions reports from key emitting entities 
in the power generation sector.
On July 14, the MEE released the Notice on Allowance Surrender of the 
National Carbon Emissions Trading Market for 2021 and 2022.
On August 11, the National Carbon Emission Registry completed the 
allocation of the CEAs.
On August 28, the national carbon emissions trading system categorized 
Carbon Emission Allowance 21  and Carbon Emission Allowance 22 
and released information on price trends for the national carbon emission 
trading market.
On October 14, the MEE released the Notice on Key Industrial 
Enterprises Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reporting and Verification in 2023-
2025, which covers sectors such as petrochemicals, chemicals, building 
materials, iron and steel, non-ferrous metals, paper, and civil aviation.
On October 19, the MEE and the State Administration for Market 
Regulation (SAMR) jointly issued the Measures for the Administration 
of Voluntary Greenhouse Gas Emission Reduction Trading (Trail).
On October 24, the MEE issued four methodologies of voluntary 
greenhouse gas emission reduction projects, including forestation carbon 
sequestration, grid-connected solar thermal power generation, grid-
connected offshore wind power generation, and mangrove afforestation.
On November 8, the China Carbon Market Conference 2023 was held in 
Shanghai.
On November 16, the National Center for Climate Change Strategy 
44


Progress Report of China’s National Carbon Market (2024)
and International Cooperation (National Voluntary Greenhouse Gas 
Emission Reduction Registration Institution) issued the Guidelines for 
Design and Implementation of Voluntary Greenhouse Gas Emissions 
Reduction Projects and the Registration Rules for Voluntary Greenhouse 
Gas Emissions Reduction (Trial). Additionally, the China Beijing Green 
Exchange (National Voluntary Greenhouse Gas Emission Reduction 
Trading Institution) issued the Trading and Settlement Rules for 
Voluntary Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction (Trial). 
On December 25, the SAMR released the Measures for the Administration 
of Voluntary Greenhouse Gas Emission Reduction Trading (Trail), which 
regulates the basis, workflow, and general requirements for project 
approval and emission reduction verification.
On December 31, the national carbon emissions trading market successfully 
concluded its second compliance cycle.
On January 22,  the National Voluntary Market was launched.
On January 25, the Interim Regulations for the Management of Carbon 
Emission Trading was released.
On February 26, the State Council Information Office held a routine 
policy briefing on the Interim Regulations for the Management of Carbon 
Emission Trading.
2024
▶
45


Progress Report of China’s National Carbon Market (2024)
By March 31, key emitting entities in the power generation sector 
submitted the greenhouse gas emissions reports of 2023.
On April 24, the composite price of trading in the National ETS 
exceeded 100 yuan per tonne for the first time.
On May 1, the Interim Regulations for the Management of Carbon 
Emission Trading came into effect.
From May 7 to May 16, the MEE conducted the third round of actions to 
supervise and support the quality improvement of carbon emissions reports.
On June 11, the SAMR released the first batch of institutions authorized 
for the approval and verification of voluntary greenhouse gas emission 
reduction projects.
On June 30, the competent departments of ecology and environment 
under the provincial-level governments completed the verification tasks 
for 2023 greenhouse gas emissions reports from key emitting entities in 
the power generation sector.
On July 21, the China Carbon Market Conference 2024 is held in Wuhan.
46