CONTENTS 
Preface 
1 Introduction 
1.1 
Aerodynamics 
1.2 
Properties of Air and Water 
1.3 
Flow Similarity 
1.4 
Incompressible Flow 
1.5 
Time Dependence of the Solutions 
1.6 
Aeroacoustics 
References and Notes 
2 Wind Tunnels 
Impottant Parameters for Similarity 
Research and Development Programs 
Types of Wind Tunnels 
Aeronautical Wind Tunnels 
Smoke Tunnels 
Automobile Wind Tunnels 
Aeroacoustic Wind Tunnels 
Water Tunnels 
General-Purpose Wind Tunnels 
Environmental Wind Tunnels 
References and Notes 
3 Wind Tunnel Design 
Overall Aerodynamic Objective 
Basic Decisions 
Power Considerations 
Section Loss Coefficients 
Energy Ratios of Some Typical Circuits 
Fan-Straightener Section 
Return (or Second) Diffuser 
Cooling 
Breather: Vibrations 
Test-Section Flow Quality 


vi 
CONTENTS 
3.11 Approach to Flow Improvement 
3.12 Drive System 
3.13 Wind Tunnel Construction 
3.14 Test-Section Inserts 
3.15 Safety 
References and Notes- 
4 Pressure, Flow, and Shear Stress Measurements 
4.1 
Pressure 
4.2 
Temperature 
4.3 
Flow Insbumentation 
4.4 
Boundary Layers and Surface Shear Stress 
4.5 
Flow Field and Surface Analyses 
References and Notes 
5 Flow Wsualiiation 
5.1 
Path-, Streak-, Stream-, and 'Ilmelines 
5.2 
Direct Visualization 
5.3 
Surface Flow Visualization 
5.4 
Flow Field Visualization 
5.5 
Data-Driven Visualization 
References and Notes 
6 Calibration of the Test Section 
6.1 
Test-Section Flow Calibration 
6.2 
Wind Tunnel Boundary Layers 
6.3 
Acoustics 
6.4 
Wind Tunnel Data Systems 
References and Notes 
7 Forces and Moments from Balance Measurements 
7.1 
Forces, Moments, and Reference Frames 
7.2 
Balances 
7.3 
Balance Requirements and Specifications 
7.4 
External Balances 
7.5 
Fundamentals of Model Installations 
7.6 
Internal Balances 
References and Notes 
8 Use of Wind Tunnel Data: Scale Effects 
8.1 
Boundary Layer 
8.2 
Trip Strip 


CONTENTS 
vii 
8.3 
Drag 
8.4 
Lift Curve 
8.5 
Flap Characteristics 
8.6 
Pitching Moment 
8.7 
Longitudinal Stability and Control 
8.8 
Directional Stability and Control 
8.9 
Lateral Stability and Control 
8.10 Correlation of Wind Tunnel to Flight Data 
References and Notes 
9 Boundary Corrections I: Basics and Two-Dimensional Cases 
9.1 
Descriptions of Wind Tbnnel Flow 
9.2 
Mathematical Models 
9.3 
Related Developments 
9.4 
Bodies Spanning the Tunnel 
References and Notes 
10 Boundary Corrections 11: Three-Dimensional Flow 
Buoyancy 
Solid Blockage 
Wake Blockage 
Streamline Curvature 
General Downwash Corrections 
Lift Distribution Interference 
Downwash Corrections 
Flow behind the Wing 
Summary: Closed Test Section 
Summary: Open Jet 
References and Notes 
11 Boundary Corrections III: Additional Applications 
11.1 
Reflection Plane Models 
11.2 
Swept Wings: Nonuniform Lift 
11.3 
Control Surface Hinge Moments 
11.4 
Ground Proximity Effects for Aircraft 
11.5 
Downwash Corrections: Powered Models 
11.6 
Boundary Correction: Propellers 
11.7 
Boundary Effects: V/STOL Experiments 
References and Notes 
12 Additional Considerations for Aerodynamic Experiments 
12.1 
Wind Tunnel Experiments 
12.2 
Uncertainty of Measurements 


viii 
CONTENTS 
12.3 
Aspects of Design of Experiments 
12.4 
Model Design and Construction 
12.5 
Planning the Experiment 
12.6 
Arranging for Use of Facilities 
References and Notes 
13 Aircraft and Aircraft Components 
13.1 
General Test Procedure 
13.2 
Components 
13.3 
Complete Configurations 
13.4 
Power Effects of Propeller Aircraft 
13.5 
Power Effects of Jet Aircraft 
13.6 
V/STOL Vehicles 
13.7 
Reentry Landing Craft 
References and Notes 
14 Ground Vehicles 
14.1 
Production Automobiles 
14.2 
Racing Vehicles 
14.3 
Trucks, Motorcycles, and Other Vehicles 
14.4 
Systems for Ground Vehicle Experiments 
References and Notes 
15 Marine Vehicles 
15.1 
Surface Vessels: Above the Water 
15.2 
Surface Vessels: Below the Water 
15.3 
Underwater Vehicles 
15.4 
Sailing Vessels 
References and Notes 
16 Wind Engineering 
16.1 
Modeling the Atmospheric Surface Wind 
16.2 
Local Pressures and Panel Loads 
16.3 
Loads on Complete Structures 
16.4 
Structures Exhibiting Elastic Motion 
References and Notes 
17 Small Wind lhnnels 
17.1 
Tests Least Affected by Reynolds Number 
17.2 
The Small Wind Tunnel for Instruction 
17.3 
Low-Reynolds-Number Testing 
References and Notes 


CONTENTS 
ix 
18 Dynamic Tests 
18.1 
Spin Characteristics and Spin Recovery 
18.2 
Dynamic Aeroelastic Experiments 
18.3 
Store Release or Jettison Experiments 
18.4 
Parabrake Evaluations 
18.5 
Cavity Resonance 
References and Notes 
Appendix 1 Subsonic Aerodynamic Testing Association (SATA) 
Appendix 2 Numerical Constants and Unit Conversions 
Index 




PREFACE 
The practice of low-speed experimental aerodynamics has continued to evolve and 
continues to be a cornerstone in the development for a wide range of vehicles 
and other devices that must perform their functions in the face of forces imposed 
by strong flows of air or water. In the 1970s and continuing into the early 1980s a 
sizable group of experts predicted that the need for aerodynamic experiments, 
particularly in the subsonic regime, would rapidly disappear as computational fluid 
dynamics would in a rather short time become sufficiently capable so that all 
needed information would be available from computational simulations at a cost- 
effectiveness superior to that of experiments. It is true that computational capability 
has continued to improve at a substantial pace, but it has not come close to reaching 
a level sufficient to replace the need for experimental data in development projects. 
There are now no credible predictions that computational simulation will replace 
the need for all data from physical experiments in any significant development 
projects. Turbulence continues to confound us in many respects. 
Increasing capability of computing equipment has contributed greatly to changes 
in the practice of experimental aerodynamics by increasing dramatically the rate at 
which measurements can be obtained, by making additional measurement methods 
such as pressure-sensitive paint feasible, and by making it possible to share the 
results of experiments in practically real time with people at widely separated 
geographic locations. There is also a need to integrate directly the outcomes of 
experiments with the outcomes of computational simulations as each progresses. 
This is a capability that continues to be a work in progress at many laboratories. 
Nevertheless, as stated in the preface to the previous edition, the basic methods 
and theory have remained unchanged over several decades. The scope of the book 
remains the same: to help students taking a course in wind tunnel experimentation 
and to furnish a reference source to wind tunnel engineers and others who use wind 
tunnels to solve problems of fluid flow or vehicle development. Considerable new 
material has been added in this edition. Some material has been added to the 
treatment of fundamental issues, including a more extensive theoretical introduction 
to help relate experimental work to computational simulations and a chapter on the 
design of experiments and data quality. The most obvious additions are separate 
chapters on ground vehicle experiments, marine vehicle experiments, and wind 
engineering, with the material on aircraft divided into two chapters. Because of the 
wide scope, we continue to include material on tunnel design, 
calibration, and simple 
as well as more sophisticated instrumentation. All the material in the book is directed 
to low-speed experiments. The subject of high-speed wind tunnel testing is covered 
xi 


xii 
PREFACE 
in High-speed W
i
n
d
 l h n e l  Testing by A. Pope and K.L. Goin (John Wiley & Sons, 
New York, 1965). 
We note the absence of a table of wind tunnel facilities that has appeared in 
previous editions. The substantial additions of material have resulted in a rather 
large book. The Subsonic Aerodynamic Testing Association (SATA) now has a site 
on the World Wide Web that includes facility descriptions and operational capabili- 
ties. The URL is http:/hww.nial:twsu.edu/sata/sata.h& A list of members of the 
SATA is provided in Appendix 1. We believe this represents a readily available 
resource and that it is likely to be maintained with up-to-date information. 
The untimely death of Bill Rae in 1992 cut short his work on this edition. Jewel 
Barlow and Alan Pope wish to acknowledge his early contributions to planning for 
the revisions leading to the current form. Jewel Barlow is pleased that Alan Pope 
saw fit to substantially entrust this endeavor to him and hopes that the result is 
worthy of that trust. Several students at the University of Maryland have made 
substantial contributions. First among those is Daniel "Rick" Harris, who drafted 
the chapter on marine vehicles, with Rui Guterres, who drafted the chapter on 
ground vehicles, and Molly Simmons, who did yeoman duty in many ways in close 
array. Robert Ranzenbach, Ahmad Kassaee, and Mark Dresser as leaders of the 
technical staff along with June Kirkley as the right-hand person in the office and 
her able assistant, Zenith Nicholas, have done much to keep the Glenn L. Martin 
Wind Tunnel laboratory on an even keel while allowing Jewel Barlow to focus on 
preparation of the manuscript. Jewel Barlow also wishes to express his gratitude to 
the many representatives of member facilities of the SATA with whom he has had 
the privilege and pleasure of sharing meetings, information, and experiences that 
have enriched his knowledge of wind tunnel experiments and more. 
Very special thanks from Jewel Barlow are expressed to Diane Barlow, his wife, 
who has given unwavering support as well as good advice. 


1 Introduction 
This book concerns low-speed wind tunnels. The common usage of this classification 
includes wind tunnels with maximum speed capability up to about 300 mph (440 
ftlsec, Mach = 
0.4, 134 mls, 261 knots). The concepts to be treated are applicable 
to higher speed tunnels and to water tunnels as well. However, before launching 
into the main topics, it is worthwhile to set the stage for wind tunnels in general 
by asking the question: What has motivated the invention, development, and continu- 
ing uses of wind tunnels? 
Our planet, Earth, is completely enveloped by oceans of air and water. Humans 
and almost all the other creatures spend their lives immersed in one or the other of 
these fluids. Naturally produced motions from gentle breezes and currents to storms 
and floods have profound impact on human existence. Winds and currents have 
been harnessed for moving about by boat and sail since before the earliest existing 
recorded history. And it seem~certain 
that humans throughout their existence have 
marvelled at the agility of birds and fishes in their expositions of swimming and 
flying skills. Today, less than 100 years after the first successful airplane, there 
exists a vast array of aircraft tailored for many specific uses with corresponding 
variety in their shapes. The shapes of airplanes are determined by considerations 
of aerodynamics with varying degrees of attention to performance, agility, stealth, 
procurement cost, operational cost, time to delivery, and any other aspect that a 
customer may require for intended missions. There are millions of automobiles in 
routine use whose shapes attest to the influence of external aerodynamics on the 
decisions of the designers. The main focus for production automobiles has been 
on aerodynamic drag, although lift has received considerable attention as well. 
Aerodynamic down load is most often the main objective for racing automobiles. 
Automobile companies are also keenly interested in knowing how to choose details 
of external shapes to reduce exterior and interior noise. Racing yacht keels are the 
- 
- .  
subject of intense investigations in efforts to achieve advantages of a few seconds 
per mile. Architects routinely require aerodynamic evaluations of any prominent 
building almost anywhere. Nearly every building component is being subjected to 
aerodynamic evaluation if it is to be accepted for use in hurricane-prone areas such 
as Florida. The shapes of submarines and the details of their propulsion systems 
are 
evaluated as designers attempt 
to maximize speed, minimize 
energy requirements, 
and minimize noise generation. Aerodynamic influences are substantial in the design 
of large bridges. 
Yet the veil covering the secrets of the forces involved in the dynamic interactions 
of fluids and solid objects has only begun to be lifted and only in relatively recent 
times and continues to refuse all efforts to tear it cleanly away. The investigative 


2 
INTRODUCTION 
methods leading to 
predictions have been a combination of experiment 
and theory, with computational methods becoming a new tool of increasing conse- 
quence since the 1960s. The great advances in theory and computational capability 
notwithstanding, experimental explorations remain the mainstay for obtaining data 
for designers' refined and final decisions across a broad range of applications. A 
primary tool of experimental aerodynamics is the wind tunnel. The proper and 
productive use of experimental 
investigations in general and wind tunnels in particu- 
lar requires applications of aerodynamic theory and computational methods in the 
planning of facilities, the planning of experiments, 
and the interpretation of resulting 
data. Those aspects of aerodynamics will be drawn upon heavily in the course of 
this book. 
To answer the question posed above: The invention, use, and ongoing evolution 
of the wind tunnel has been, and is now, motivated first by a wide interest in practical 
problems in aerodynamics and second by the fact that thkoretical and comp&onal 
methods have not been. are not now. and will not in the foreseeable 
future be ca~able 
A 
of providing the full range of results needed to guide detailed design decisions for 
many practical problems. 
The most successful attack on virtually any aerodynamic design problem will 
be based on application of a combination of results from experimental, theoretical, 
and computational methods appropriately combined and leavened by experience. 
1.1 AERODYNAMICS 
Readers of this book will find many parts where it will be helpful to have a prior 
knowledge of aerodynamics1 to the level represented in texts such as Anderson2 or 
Shames3 or to have such a reference readily available. Included in those and other 
texts are discussions of flow similarity in which definitions of s
i
m
i
l
a
r
 
flows 
are 
given. This is a very important concept that leads to significant advantages in 
experimental work and in theoretical and computational work as well. The most 
common approach to the concept of similarity is through dimensional analysis 
using some variation of the Buckingham Pi the~rem.~ 
Knowledge, of a detailed 
mathematical 
model of the processes involved 
is not required to apply the Pi theorem. 
A reduction in the number of independent parameters to be manipulated in an 
investigation is obtained based on the requirement of dimensional homogeneity for 
any equation expressing a valid relationship among physical variables. Introductory 
treatments of dimensional analysis are given by Anderson2 and by Sharne~.~ 
A very 
useful discussion based on dimensional analysis is given by Karam~heti.~ 
More 
extensive treatments of background and applications of similitude methods in engi- 
neering are given by S e d ~ v , ~  
David and Nolle,' 
and Baker, Westine, and Dodge? 
Some of the most important results are those associated with "distorted" models, 
that is, models in which complete similarity cannot be achieved but that nevertheless 
are very useful. Such models are the norm rather than the exception, as becomes 
apparent when almost any specific wind tunnel program is being planned. 
Although the application of dimensional analysis has been of great importance 
in studies in aerodynamics, that approach will not be elaborated at this point. 


1.1 AERODYNAMICS 
3 
Motivated by the need to bring theoretical, 
computational, 
and experimental 
methods 
into closer proximity, dimensionless similarity parameters will be obtained directly 
from the equations for which solutions are sought in theoretical and computa- 
tional studies. 
Principal Equations of Aerodynamics 
The fundamental principles from which the equations used to model "low-speed" 
aerodynamic flows are derived are only three in number. These are (1) mass is 
conserved, (2) force and motion are 
related by Newton's Second Law, and (3) energy 
exchanges are governed by the First Law of Thermodynamics. In addition to these 
three principles, certain fluid properties 
and their variations 
with pressure 
and temper- 
ature must be described mathematicallv 
with sufficient accuracy for each application. 
. 
a 
The equations expressing the three principles 
provide relationships 
among various 
quantities (such as density, velocity, pressure, rate of strain, internal energy, and 
viscosity) as they vary in space and time. The dependence for a particular quantity, 
say velocity, is indicated as V(r, t) where r is a three-component position vector 
and t is time. The details of the function expressing the space and time dependence 
are strongly affected by the choice of reference frame while the physical phenomena 
cannot be affected by the choice of reference 
frame. It is desirable to choose reference 
frames that lead to relatively simple forms for the functional descriptions of the 
various quantities. 
l k o  
kinematic results of importance relate time derivatives from different per- 
spectives. One relation is between "Lagrangian" and "Eulerian" 
descriptions of the 
motion of particles. The other relation is between the time derivatives of quantities 
when measurements are made from two reference frames that are moving relative 
to one another. 
The Lagrangian and Eulerian perspectives of motion of a field of particles are 
described in almost every book on aerodynamics. The Lagrangian perspective is 
based on the idea of "tagging" 
every particle and subsequently describing the motion 
of each particle as a function of time with a space coordinate indicating the identity 
of the particle. The usual choice would be that the space coordinate indicates the 
position of the particle at time equal to zero. The Eulerian perspective is based on 
the idea of focusing on particular points in space and describing the motion of 
particles passing through each point in space as a function of time. The time 
derivatives are related by Equation (1.1), where the internal energy e has been used 
as an example. The derivative from the Lagrangian perspective is referred to as a 
"total derivative" or "material derivative" and is indicated by the capital D as 
the derivative symbol. The relation holds for all other such quantities including 
components of velocity: 
The relationships that arise when two reference frames are moving relative to one 
another are important when "noninertial" 
reference frames become more convenient 


for a problem than theealternatives. The equations for these situations are given 
by  shame^.^ 
Conservation of Mass 
The continuity equation follows from the principle of conservation of mass. It can 
be written as a partial differential equation as follows: 
In this equation and throughout the book p is the density of the fluid, t is the time, 
and V is the vector fluid velocity. The standard notations for divergence operator 
and dot product are used. 
Newton's Second Law, F = mu 
The application of Newton's second law to an elemental mass can be expressed 
quite generally as 
where FB 
is the body force per unit mass and Fs 
the surface force per unit volume. 
The time derivative is the "total" derivative in the sense used in Equation (1.1)' 
with respect to an inertial reference frame and V is the velocity of the material 
element with respect to the same inertial frame. The left-hand side can be written as 
This last form is convenient for deriving the well-known Bernoulli equation when 
the appropriate conditions are applied. 
The body force is frequently neglected in aerodynamic developments but rarely 
in hydrodynamic applications. In either case it is most commonly of gravitational 
origin and in that case is simply FB 
= g, where g is the gravitational acceleration. 
Body forces will also arise in cases of noninertial reference frames. 
The surface force for a material element is expressed in terms of the state o
f
 
stress at the location of the element. For a particular material the state of stress is 


1.1 AERODYNAMICS 
5 
related to the state of strain, including the possibility of memory effects. For any 
particular material, solid or fluid, the relationship between stress and strain must 
be obtained from experimental evaluation. The two most common forms of the 
relation are those for elastic bodies and for Newtonianfluids. For elastic bodies the 
relationship between stress and strain is given by Hooke's law, which can be stated 
in an oversimple form as "stress is proportional to strain." For Newtonian fluids 
the relationship between stress and strain is given by Stokes' law offiction, which 
is a generalization to three dimensions of the assumption made by Newton for the 
simpler case of two-dimensional parallel flow. Stokes' law of friction states that 
the "stress is proportional to the time rate of strain." Using Stokes' law to develop 
the surface force in Equation (1 
.3)3 
produces the equations of motion for a Newtonian 
fluid. These equations are known as the NavierStokes equations. Detailed deriva- 
tions of these equations are given by Schlichting9 and Loitsyanskii." The surface 
force per unit volume that follows from Stokes' law of friction can be written as 
New variables appearing in Equation (1.6) are pressure p, coefficient of viscosity 
y, and rate of strain tensor 9
.
 
The assumption that the bulk modulus is -; 
times 
the coefficient of viscosity is incorporated in Equation (1.6). The elements of s 
associated with a Cartesian reference frame are given by the equations 
The NavierStokes equation for the case of a viscous compressible fluid with body 
force of gravitational origin can be written as 


6 
INTRODUCTION 
The NavierStokes equation is considered to be an accurate representation of New- 
ton's Second Law applied to water and air over wide ranges of temperature and 
pressure. 
First Law of Thermodynamics: The Energy Equation 
The energy equation is a mathematical representation 
of the principle of conservation 
of energy. A form is given here that is appropriate for flow of a fluid in which there 
may be heat transfer by conduction, transformation between mechanical energy and 
thermal energy by both reversible 
and irreversible processes, and energy contribution 
or absorption by body force of gravitational origin but no radiative transfer. The 
reader is referred to Anderson2 and LoitsyanskiiIo 
for detailed derivations of the 
energy equation. The energy equation may be written as 
An additional variable, the temperature T, is present in the energy equation. Two 
additional 
parameters also are 
present. These 
are 
the specific 
heat at constant volume, 
C,, and the thermal conductivity k. These parameters are 
considered to be constants 
throughout any flow considered in this book. 
Equation of State and Other Considerations 
Equations (1.2), (1.13), and (1.14) provide five equations relating the variables p, 
V, p, T, and p. 
Since there are seven scalar variables, two additional relations are 
required to obtain a solvable set. 
We consider typical cases of air and water because it is common to use low- 
speed wind tunnels to investigate hydrodynamic as well as aerodynamic problems. 
In the case of water, the density varies very little with pressure so long as the 
pressure is greater than the vapor pressure, which in turn is a function of temperature. 
An assumption of constant density is invariably applied for flows of water. Viscosity 
is primarily a function of temperature in the cases of both air and water. In flows 
of water, if the initial and boundary conditions are isothermal, then negligible 
temperature variations will arise from the flow phenomena. In such circumstances 
both density and viscosity can be considered constant. Equations (1.2) and (1.13) 
then provide an equal number of equations and unknowns. 
In the case of air, the processes are more complex even for "low-speed" flow as 
we use the term here. It is assumed that air in these regimes is a calorically perfect 
gas, which means that the specific heats are constant. As stated above, it is also 
assumed that the thermal conductivity is constant, in which case it can be factored 
to the leading position in the last term of Equation (1.14). The perfect gas equation 


1.2 PROPERTIES OF AIR AND WAmR 
7 
of state gives a good description of air over the range of conditions of interest here. 
Equation (1.15) is the sixth of seven needed relations among the seven variables: 
The seventh relation is a specification of variation of viscosity with temperature. 
Equation (1.16), which is an expression of Sutherland's law, gives such a relationship 
for air: 
where T, is temperature in degrees Rankine. For T, = 518.6"R, the viscosity is 
= 
3.74 X lo-' lb - 
s/ft2. 
The dependence 
of viscosity 
on temperature is frequently 
approximated by a power law, as discussed by Schlichting? For example Equation 
(1.17) is given in the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA) Report 
1135" for air: 
For each problem to be investigated there will be an appropriate set of initial 
and boundary conditions that along with the set of equations (1.2), 
(1.13), (1.14), 
(1. IS), and (1.16) approximately describe the subsequent spatial and temporal evolu- 
tion of the seven variables. 
1
.
2
 PROPERTIES OF AIR AND WATER 
The properties of the fluids involved in experiments and in operations of devices 
are critical. It is common to idealize their properties, but it is important to keep in 
mind the degree of approximation involved in the idealization. Jones" 
has given a 
substantial summary of the models of properties of air, water, and some addi- 
tional substances. 
Properties of Air 
Air is a mixture of nitrogen, oxygen, water vapor, and several other gases present 
in small quantities. The equation of state is written as Equation (1.18), where R is 
the universal gas constant and M is the apparent molecular weight of the mixture. 


8 
INTRODUCTION 
The apparent molecuIar weight for air is significantly affected by the presence of 
water vapor: 
Jones" gives an extensive development and arrives at Equation (1.19) for density 
of air as a function of temperature (
O
K
)
,
 
pressure (Pa), relative humidity, and effective 
saturation vapor pressure of water (Pa): 
The saturation vapor pressure is related to temperature by 
Equations (1.19) and (1.20) give density of 1.1992 kg/m3 for p = 101325 Pa, T = 
293.15"K, and relative humidity of 50%. Over plausible ranges of variation of 
relative humidity of say 30-75% the density varies by -0.5%. This is small but is 
definitely not negligible compared to the level of measurement accuracy sought in 
many wind tunnel experiments. 
An equation for viscosity of air has previously been given as Equation (1.17). 
Table 1.1 summarizes some properties of a
i
r
 at the "standard" condition. 
Properties of Water 
The density of water is nearly constant over common ranges of pressure and tempera- 
ture. The small variation with temperature at atmospheric pressure is modeled by 
Jones with Equation (1.21). This gives density in kilograms per cubic meter for 
temperature in degrees Celsius. The temperature should be in the range of 5-40: 
TABLE 1.1. Air at "Standard" Condition 
Temperature, T 
59°F = 518.67"R = 15°C = 288.16"K 
Density, p 
0.002378 slug/ft3 
1.225 kg/m3 
Pressure, p 
2116 lb/ft2 
101,325 Pa (N/m2) 
Viscosity, (J. 
3.74 X 
lb-sec/ft2 
1.791 X 
kg/m-s 
Kinematic viscosity, v 
1.55 X lo-' ft2/sec 
1.44 x 
m2/s 
Reciprocal of v 
6452 sec/ft2 
69,440 dm2 
Gas constant, R 
1714.9 ft-lblslug-"R 
287 N-mkg-OK 


1.3 now 
SIMILARITY 
9 
TABLE 1.2. Fresh Water 
Temperature 
39.2"F = 498.872 = 4°C = 277.16'K 
15°C = 288.16"K 
Density 
1.940 slugs/ft3 
1000 kg/m3 
999.13 kg/m3 
Viscosity 
3.229 X 
lb-sec/ft2 
1.52 X lo-) N-s/mZ 1.105 X 
N-dm2 
Kinematic 
1.664 X 10-' ft2/sec 
1.52 X 
mZ/s 
1.106 X 
m2/s 
viscosity 
Reciprocal of v 
60,100 sec/ft2 
657,900 dmz 
904,300 s/m2 
The variation of viscosity of water with temperature for the range of 0-20°C is 
given by Equation (1.22),12 
where the viscosity is in centipoise (g/cm-s): 
log p
.
 = 
1301 
- 
3.30233 (1.22) 
998.333 + 8.1855 (T - 
20) + 0.00585(T - 
20)' 
This equation can be used for moderately higher water temperatures with little 
error. The density of water decreases about 1% for a temperature change from 4 to 
45°C. The variation in kinematic viscosity of water with temperature is primarily 
due to change in the viscosity. In the case of air, kinematic viscosity changes with 
temperature are significantly affected by changes in both density and viscosity. 
Table 1.2 gives some properties of water at two temperatures. A row showing 
the reciprocal of the kinematic viscosity is included as this is a value directly 
proportional to the Reynolds number for a given size of model or prototype and a 
given speed. By comparison of the data in the two tables it can be seen that the 
Reynolds number in water for a given size article and a given speed will be 
approximately 13 times the Reynolds number in air if both fluids are 
at a temperature 
of 15°C. This ratio will climb to about 15 if both fluids are at 20°C. 
Sea water will be somewhat more dense and have slightly different viscosity. 
1.3 n o w  
SIMILARITY 
To explore similarity for flows governed by the set of equations (1.2), (1.13). (1.14), 
(1.15), and (1.16), consider a problem of determining flow properties about a 
complete airplane, automobile, ship, or other body. In principle, it is necessary to 
find the appropriate solution to the system of partial differential equations with the 
associated boundary and initial conditions. The complete geometry of the body 
including any time-dependent motion is required to specify the boundary conditions 
at the body. For the present discussion, the body is considered to be rigid, in which 
case motion may be specified by the linear and angular velocities. Note that this 
would have to be treated more generally to include aeroelastic phenomena. 
Attention is now turned to arriving at a corresponding set of nondimensional 
equations. The geomeby can be nondimensionalized as a ratio to some reference 
length, which is usually chosen as the chord of the wing in the case of aircraft. Any 


10 
INTRODUCTION 
other length can be used, such as the overall airplane length for airplanes, the 
wheelbase in the case of automobiles, or the beam or overall length in the case of 
marine vehicles. The fluid speeds will be nondimensionalized by using the ratio to 
the speed at a selected point far away from the body. This is not a fundamental 
requirement, but it is the standard practice. In some experimental arrangements and 
in many computational problems-the question of whether there is an available point 
considered to be "far" from the body becomes an important issue. The density will 
also be nondimensionalized in terns of the ratio to the value at the selected point 
far from the body. Pressure will be nondimensionalized by introducing the standard 
pressure coefficient. The pressure coefficient is the ratio of the change in pressure 
due to the presence of the body (as compared to the pressure at the selected point 
far from the body) to the dynamic pressure at the selected point far from the body. 
Temperature will be nondimensionalized by its ratio to the value at the selected 
point far from the body. The time will be nondimensionalized as a ratio to the time 
for a fluid particle to travel the reference length at the speed of flow far from the 
body. To summarize, we will consider the variables in Equations (1.2), (1.13), (1.14), 
(1.15), and (1.16) to be given by r = 1?, t = (NV,)f, V = v~V, 
p = p& 
T = T,I', p = =@, 
and p - 
p, = fp,v2+, 
where all the symbols with carets are 
dimensionless variables and c, is the dimensionless form for pressure with the 
reference value shifted according to standard practice. Equation (1.2) becomes 
This is the same form as the dimensional equation. Equation (1.13) becomes 
Two dimensionless coefficients appear in Equation (1.24). The fust is 
which is the Froude number. Including the square root in the definition is not 
essential, but it is done here to be consistent with common usage. The symbol e
,
 
is a unit vector in the direction of the gravitational field. Normally the coordinates 
would be chosen so that only one element would be nonzero. The Froude number 
is important for flows in which there is a free surface, such as will exist for surface 
ships. A Froude number will also arise as an important similarity parameter if there 
are unsteady boundary conditions. The acceleration of the boundaries will play a 
role similar to the gravitational acceleration. The Froude number is a significant 
parameter in some cases of dynamic systems such as towed bodies. A complete 


1.3 PLOW SIMILARlTY 
11 
similarity study of such systems requires inclusion of the equations of motion of 
the towed systems themselves as well as the fluid dynamic equations. 
The Froude number will not appear if the fluid body forces are neglected. This 
is a common assumption introduced in aerodynamics texts. The Froude number will 
not be considered further in this introductory material. 
The 
second 
coefficient appearing 
inEquation 
(1.24)isthe most 
important parameter 
for most experiments 
conducted 
in low-speed wind tunnels. It is the Reynolds number, 
The Reynolds number is the primary similarity parameter of interest in planning 
experiments for Mach numbers less than -0.3 when the geometry is fixed. 
The process of developing the nondimensional form of the energy equation leads 
to the introduction of some additional and some alternative parameters of the fluid. 
These are the specific heat at constant pressure, C,; the ratio of specific heats, 
y = C&; 
the speed of sound in the fluid, a = -
T
;
 
and the Prandtl number, 
P, = pCbk. To shorten the resulting equation, we also introduce the substitution 
T 
= 
y(y - 
1). The nondimensional energy equation can be written as 
There are many terms inEquation (1.27), and finding 
solutions to it by mathemati- 
cal or computational analysis is not the purpose here. The important result to be 
obtained here from this equation is that there are two dimensionless coefficients 
that did not appear in the nondimensional Navier-Stokes equation. These are the 
Mach number M
.
 = V
,
/
a
,
 
and the Prandtl number P
,
,
.
 
The Mach number is a flow 
parameter while the Prandtl number is a property of the fluid that is temperature 
dependent. The last term of Equation (1.27) is the term associated with transport 
of energy by heat conduction. For low-speed flows that do not have heated or cooled 
boundaries, 
there 
is seldom a significant 
contribution 
from this term. We will consider 
that this term is negligible for most circumstances with which we will be dealing 
in this book. This also implies that the Prandtl number will not be a consideration 
since it only appears in the heat conduction term. The net result is that the dimen- 
sionless energy equation provides the Mach number as an additional similarity 
parameter for our present class of problems. 
Equations (1.23), (1.24), and (1.27) along with dimensionless forms of the equa- 
tion of state and the variation of viscosity with temperature form a set of equations 
for the dimensionless flow variables. The associated boundary conditions for any 
particular case must also be obtained in nondimensional form. 
For the moment consider only cases for which the boundary conditions are not 
functions of i
.
 This does not mean that the flow is steady throughout the domain 


12 
INTRODUCTION 
so this is not equivalent to an assumption of steady flow, which is a far more 
stringent assumption. Almost a
l
l
 flows of importance to vehicle aerodynamics are 
turbulent and therefore unsteady. Most wind tunnel studies involve steady "mean" 
flow. We can choose to use "wind axes," in which case the boundary conditions 
far upstream of our body would typically be 2, = 1, I?- = 0 & = 0, c,, = 0 
0. = 1, f
,
 = 1, and fL 
= 1 for-all I. For a family of bodies of a particular shape 
the boundary conditions at the body surface, which can be represented as j(f, 
9,2, 
a, P) = 0, are t
&
 = Cs = $
,
 = 0, plus given values for either Ts 
or (VD, 
for all 2. 
The angles can be given in terms of the components of 9, 
on a set of body-fixed 
axes. Let tib, 
Cb, 
Gb 
be the components of ?- on body-fixed axes. Then tan a - 
+dB,, and sin p = 
i@,. 
If we could obtain solutions of the set of equations with 
the associated boundary conditions, we would have a set of functions: 
which give the details of the nondimensional fluid velocity, pressure, density, viscos- 
ity, and temperature throughout the domain. 
The values of the pressure coefficient and the shear stresses at the body surface 
would typically be of particular interest in the present context since the integrals of 
those quantities over the surface of the body provide the total force coefficients. To 
obtain these from the above set of functions, it is necessary to form the combinations 
representing 
expressions for the normal and tangential stress components 
on the body 
surface and integrate 
these over the entire body surface. This process provides dimen- 
sionless coefficients 
for force and moment components that can be represented by 
for "lift," "drag," and "side-force" coefficients and 


1.4 INCOMPRESSIBLE now 
13 
for "rolling moment," "pitching moment," and "yawing moment" 
coefficients. The 
force coefficients are related to the dimensional forces by the factor ip,vi12, 
and 
the moment coefficients are related to the dimensional moments by the factor 
$p,~23. 
When the time dependence is averaged out or the actual circumstance of 
having steady boundary conditions yields steady results, these coefficients are func- 
tions only of the dimensionless similarity parameters Reynolds number and Mach 
number along with the attitude angles. 
These are powerful results applying equally to experimental, analytical, and 
computational studies of fluid flows. Instead of separately varying the density, 
viscosity, flow speed, body size, and temperature, it is only necessary to vary 
the combinations represented by the similarity parameters. Each solution of the 
nondimensional system for a value of the Reynolds number provides a result that 
applies for every combination of the four involved quantities that give that particular 
Reynolds number. Of further significance is that the result shows that different fluids 
as well as different sizes of bodies in streams of differing speeds and differing 
coefficients of viscosity can be used when it is convenient to do so as long as the 
similarity parameters are matched. 
For bodies completely immersed in a single fluid (as is always the case in wind 
tunnels) and that are rigid and held in a fixed position, the results will not be 
dependent on the Froude number, as has been stated previously. One interpretation 
of "low speed" as applied to wind tunnels is the speed below which the Mach 
number dependence is small enough to be neglected. In such cases, which are our 
primary concern, the results will be dependent on only one similarity parameter, 
the Reynolds number. 
We find that for a body of fixed shape held rigidly in a "low-speed" 
stream, the 
time averages of the force and moment coefficients are functions of a single parame- 
ter, the Reynolds number, and two angles that are required to specify the body 
attitude relative to the free stream. This result holds for flows of water when 
cavitation is not present and for flows of air at speeds up to a Mach number of -0.3. 
1.4 INCOMPRESSIBLE now 
In considering "low-speed" flows it is common to adopt the assumption that the 
density is constant, that is, 6 = 1. With the assumption of constant density, Equation 
(1.23) reduces to the equation 
and Equation (1.24) with some minor manipulation becomes 


14 
INTRODUCTION 
In cases in which dehsity is nearly constant, there are many situations in which the 
temperature variation is negligible. Such problems are entirely mechanical without 
any thennodynamic phenomena. Equations (1.41) and (1.42) are then a complete 
set for the three velocity components and the pressure coefficient. The force and 
moment coefficients in such cases will, of course, not be dependent on Mach number. 
Classical Bernoulli Equation 
For an idealized case of steady flow with viscosity equal to zero and a uniform 
velocity field far from any object that may be in the flow, we will have the time 
derivatives equal to zero, the Reynolds number will be infinity, and the curl of the 
velocity field must be everywhere equal to zero. Equation (1.42) then becomes 
Recalling the definitions 9, = 1 
and c, = 0
,
 
we have the result that 
iR + cp 
= 1 or equivalently p + 
! p ~ Z  
= 
pm 
+ i p E  P,* 
(1.43) 
which is the classical Bernoulli equation that is very important in low-speed wind 
tunnel work as it is the basis for most speed-setting systems. 
Inviscid and Irrotational Flow 
For inviscid, irrotational flow, a velocity potential 4 exists so that we can write 
= $4, and the continuity equation (1.41) becomes 
This is the classical Laplace equation that arises in many applications in classical 
physics. The study of its solutions is sometimes called potential theory due to its 
application in determining the gravitational field potential associated with distribu- 
tions of mass. 
With the same assumptions as above for arriving at the Bemoulli equation except 
that time dependence is still allowed, Equation (1.42) becomes 
Equation (1.46) is referred to as the unsteady Bemoulli equation. 


1.6 AEROACOUSTICS 
15 
1.5 TIME DEPENDENCE OF THE 
SOLUTIONS 
Real flows in wind tunnels and elsewhere are always unsteady. For sufficiently 
small values of the Reynolds number, flows can be established that are very nearly 
steady based on observations. In a small set of circumstances, there are known 
solutions to the NavierStokes equations. None of these are of direct value to vehicle 
designers, although they serve as an aid to aerodynamicists in trying to understand 
basic issues in fluid flow. 
A vast majority of aerodynamic problems associated with vehicle design and 
wind engineering efforts involve flows that can be considered to have an incoming 
free stream that can be characterized by a time-independent mean flow with a 
superimposed additive fluctuating contribution most often characterized in terms of 
a "turbulence level." For some applications, the description of the unsteadiness in 
the incoming flow may be much more detailed, but still will be based on statistical 
descriptors rather than detailed space-time functions. The interaction with the body 
of interest creates a spatial modification of the mean flow and in general creates 
fluctuating motions in the flow in addition to those present in the incoming stream. 
Landahl and Mollo-Christenseni4 
give a good treatment of methods and summaries 
of aspects of turbulence. Issues associated with modeling effects of turbulence, 
both experimentally and computationally, are the most difficult issues with which 
aerodynamicists must grapple. 
There are important classes of problems frequently studied in wind tunnels for 
which the assumption that the boundary conditions on the fluid are independent of 
time is not valid. Examples are studies that involve propellers or rotors, towed 
devices suspended on thin cables, significant elastic deflections such as occur for 
flutter models, fabric structures such as parachutes or sails, forced or "free" motion 
of complete models, and manipulation of the incoming flow. Incoming flow may 
be manipulated to produce essentially deterministic large-scale variations in the 
flow or, as in the case of wind engineering studies, the incoming stream may be 
passed over roughness elements or otherwise processed to produce high levels of 
large-scale turbulence. In addition, the presence of significant acoustic signals can 
in some situations produce significant macroscopic effects. Aeroacoustic effects in 
low-speed flows have been receiving increasing attention in the 1990s. 
1.6 AEROACOUSTICS 
The system of equations previously given for compressible flow with appropriate 
boundary conditions and with considerable reduction through appropriate assump- 
tions can be reduced to the equations commonly applied to model acoustic phenom- 
ena. The most influential paper on this topic is that of Lighthill," who derived 
an equation containing the same assumptions as those required in deriving the 
Navier-Stokes equations for compressible 
flow. It has become known as Lighthill's 
equation. We show it here and discuss some general properties 
because these proper- ( 


ties provide some insight into aeroacoustics phenomena whether the investigations 
are to be carried out numerically or experimentally. Lighthill's equation is given as 
where p' = p - 
p, and u
,
,
 is the speed of sound in the free stream. The right-hand 
side contains Tfi, 
the celebrated Lighthill 
stress tensor. Direct solution of aeroacoustic 
problems using this formulation has not been achieved for technically important 
problems. But it is the basis for much understanding of aeroacoustics, especially 
generation and propagation of sound from jet engines. A subsequent development 
by Ffowcs-Williams and HawkingsI6 
is most important to currently ongoing efforts 
to develop methods of direct solution to aeroacoustic problems and to understanding 
of mechanisms of generation. They derived what has become known as the Ffowcs- 
Williams-Hawkings equation, and a formal solution is given here as Equations 
(1.48)-(1.51): 
where the right-hand side is made up of 
Tij 
(Quadropole) Q = - 
- 
- M c o s + I  
(1.5 
1) 
There are a large number of variables. On the right-hand sides the variables are 
as follows: (r, 
t) gives the time and space location of the "observer." The spatial 
variables of integration are the coordinates of the sources as indicated by r, and 
evaluated at the "retarded time" re. 
This is the time at each source element for which 
the emitted signal will reach the observer at time t. The source-observer vector is 
given by R
 = r - 
r,, R 
= I
R
I
,
 
+
I
 is the angle between r and r,, ni 
is the unit normal 
to the body surface enclosed by S
,
 
are the fluid velocity components, M is the 
Mach number, and Tij 
is Lighthill's stress tensor. 
Very important descriptive interpretations have been given for the three terms, 
and they are found to scale very differently with flow speed. The "monopole" 
term 
is identified with a vibrating solid surface or an oscillating mass source. Examples 
are loudspeaker cones, vibrating sheet metal or glass, or the pulsating gas emitted 
from an automobile exhaust pipe. These are the most efficient generators of sound. 
The associated intensities increase as the fourth power of the fluid velocity. 


1.6 AEROACOUSTICS 
17 
The "dipole" term is identified with an oscillating pressure on a solid surface 
that then acts as a sound radiator. This will occur on a surface under a turbulent 
boundary layer or on the surface of a fixed circular cylinder that is undergoing the 
periodic shedding of the Karman vortex street phenomena. The efficiency of the 
dipole source type is intermediate between that of a monopole and a quadropole. 
The intensity increases as the sixth power of the velocity. 
The "quadropole" term is a volume source associated with fluctuating gradients. 
It is more difficult to visualize but is associated with highly sheared turbulent flow 
volumes like the shear layers bounding rocket and jet engine exhausts. The intensity 
increases as the eighth power of the velocity. This can be the dominant type of 
source for jet and rocket engines. 
For low-speed wind tunnel studies, there will be monopole-type sources if there 
are vibrating surfaces. Variations in noise generation due to shape changes are 
generally associated with the dipole type of source. 
We will give some additional brief sections on aeroacoustics at other points in 
the book as it is being met at low-speed wind tunnels. Blake" has written one of 
the most useful technical treatments. 
REFERENCES AND NOTES 
1. The term aerodynamics as used here and throughout this book is intended in a broad 
sense as being synonymous with fluid dynamics. 
2. Anderson, J. D., Jr., Fundamentals of Aerody~mics, 
2nd ed., McGraw-Hill, New 
York, 199 
1. 
3. Shames, I. H., Fluid Mechanics, 2nd ed., McGraw-Hill, New York, 1994. 
4. Buckingham, E., "On Physically Similar Systems, Illustration of the Use of Dimensional 
Equations," Phys. Rev., 4, 345-376, 1914. See also: "Model Experiments and tbe Forms 
of Empirical Equations," Trans. ASME, 37,263-288, 1915. 
5. Karamcheti, K., Principles of Ideal Fluid Aerodynamics, 
John Wiley & 
Sons, New York, 
1966, Chapter 1. 
6. Sedov, L. I., Similarity and Dimensional Methodr in Mechanics, 10th ed., CRC Press, 
Boca Raton, FL, 1993. 
7. David, F. W., and Nolle, H., Experimental Modeling in Engineering, Buttenvorths, Lon- 
don, 1982. 
8. Baker, W. E., Westine, P
.
 
S., and Dodge, F. T., Similarity Methods in Engineering 
Dynamics: Theory and Practice of Scale Modeling, rev. ed., Elsevier, New York, 1991. 
9. Schlichting, H. S., Boundary Layer Theory, McGraw-Hill, New York 1960. 
10. Loitsyanskii, L. G., Mechanics of Liquids and Gases, Pergamon, New York, 1966. 
11. Staff of Ames Research Center, "Equations, Tables, and Charts for Compressible Flow." 
NACA Report 1135, 1953. 
12. Jones, F. E., Techniques and Topics in Flow Measurements, CRC Press, Boca Raton, 
n, 
1995. 
13. Handbook of Chemistry and Physics, 61st ed., CRC Press, Boca Raton, F
L
,
 
1980-81, 
p. F-5 
1. 


18 
INTRODUCTION 
14. Landahl, M. T., arnl 
Mollo-Christensen, E., Turbulence and Random Processes in Fluid 
Mechanics, 2nd ed., 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1992. 
15. Lighthill, M. J., "On Sound Generated Aerodynamically: I General T
h
e
o
r
y
,"
 
Proc. Roy. 
Soc., 211, 564-587, 1952. 
16. Ffowcs-Williams. J. E., and Hawkings, D. L., "Sound Generation by Turbulence and 
Surfaces in Arbitrary Motion." P
h
i
l
.
 Trans. Roy. Society, 264 (1151), 301-346, 1969. 
17. Blake, W. K., Mechanics o
f
 Flow-Induced Sound and Vibration, Academic, New 
York, 1986. 


Wind Tunnels 
Experimental information useful for solving aerodynamic and hydrodynamic prob- 
lems may be obtained in a number of ways: from flight experiments; drop tests; 
rocket sleds; water tunnels; whirling arms; shock tubes; water tables; rocket flights; 
flying scale models; road tests; ballistic ranges; subsonic, near sonic, transonic, 
supersonic, and hypersonic wind tunnels; and other methods leading to an almost 
endless list. Each device has its own sphere of superiority, and no one device can 
be called "best." 
This book considers only the design and use of low-speed wind tunnels. Because 
they make it possible to use models that can be prepared early in design cycles, 
because they include the full complexity of real fluid flow, and because they can 
provide large amounts of reliable data, wind tunnels are often the most rapid, 
economical, and accurate means for conducting aerodynamic research and obtain- 
ing aerodynamic data to support design decisions. Their use saves both money and 
lives. 
The nations and industries of the world support aerodynamic research and devel- 
opment, of which conducting wind tunnel experiments is a major item, according 
to their needs, abilities, and desires. In many countries there is a separate national 
research organization that augments the activities 
of the armed services. A substantial 
amount of work is contracted from national agencies to universities and industry. 
There is a considerable and growing volume of aerodynamic research and develop- 
ment done by corporations for civil purposes in the development 
of aircraft, automo- 
biles, marine vehicles, and architectural structures. A cross section of entities from 
all of these areas is represented by the membership of the Subsonic Aerodynamic 
Testing Association (SATA). The membership of the SATA in 1998 is given in 
Appendix 1. 
2.1 IMPORTANT PARAMETERS FOR SIMILARITY 
Since conducting experiments using scale models is the primary activity of most 
major wind tunnels, we pause now and consider aspects of experiments using scale 
models, the results of which may effectively be used to predict full-scale behavior. 
In Chapter 1 we have given the equations for fluid motion i
n
 nondimensional 
form. These equations provide a foundation for designing scale experiments and 
interpreting the resulting data. For present purposes, the results of principal interest 
are the dimensionless coefficients that appear in the nondimensional form of the 
fluid dynamics equations as derived in Chapter 1. The three coefficients are the 


20 
WIND TUNNELS 
Reynolds number, the Mach number, and the Froude number. The coefficients as 
developed in Chapter 1 were obtained by introducing nondimensional variables into 
the conservation equations. We will now consider a more heuristic approach. 
When a body moves through a fluid, forces arise that are due to the viscosity of 
the fluid, its inertia, its elasticity, and gravity. These forces are represented directly 
by the various terms in the Navier-Stokes equation. The inertia force, corresponding 
to the left-hand side of the Navier-Stokes equation, is proportional to the mass of 
air affected and the acceleration given that mass. Thus, while it is true that a very 
large amount of air is affected by a moving body (and each particle of air a 
different amount), we may say that the inertia force is the result of giving a constant 
acceleration to some "effective" volume of air. Let this effective volume of air he 
kl', where I is a characteristic 
length of the body and k is a constant for the particular 
body shape. Then we may write 
pPV 
Inertia force - 
- 
t 
where p is the air density (slugs/ft3), V is the velocity of the body (ftlsec), and t is 
time (sec). 
Substituting IIV for t, we get 
pl3 ppv 
Inertia force - 
- 
- 
1/v 
(2.1) 
The viscous force, according to its definition, may be written as 
Viscous force - 
pVl 
(2.2) 
where p 
is the coefficient of viscosity (sluglft-sec). 
The gravity force is proportional to the volume of the body, which in turn is 
proportional to the cube of the reference length. The gravity force may be written 
Gravity force - 
p13g 
(2.3) 
where g 
is the acceleration of gravity. Keep in mind that the gravity force term in 
the Navier-Stokes equation is the force on the fluid. It is not the gravity force on 
the body. As mentioned in Chapter I, it is necessary to introduce the equations of 
motion of the body along with the equations of motion of the fluid to carry out a 
formal nondimensionalization for the case of a fully coupled system of the motion 
of the body moving under the influence of the 
fluid and gravitational forces. However, 
in the present heuristic consideration, we may consider the gravity force on the 
body to have the same form as the gravity force on the fluid but with a different 
constant of proportionality. 


2.1 IMPORTANT PARAMETERS FOR SIMILARITY 
21 
The elastic force may be considered to be simply 
Elastic force - 
p12 
(2.4) 
The speed of sound a in a fluid is related to pressure and density according to 
so that we may write 
Elastic force - 
pa2Z2 
Dividing the inertia force by each of the others gives three force ratios that, as 
can be seen in Equations (2.5)-(2.7), 
are the same forms as the dimensionless 
coefficients that appear in Chapter 1: 
inertia force 
p 
Reynolds number = . 
= -Vl 
viscous force 
p 
inertia force - 
V 
Mach number = 
- 
- 
elasticity force 
a 
Froude number = 
gravity force 
The last equation, it will be noted, uses the square root of the ratio rather than 
the ratio itself. For wind tunnel experiments, the Froude number is an important 
similarity parameter only for dynamic tests in which model motion as well as the 
aerodynamic forces are involved. Although such experiments are very important, 
they constitute a minority of the experimental program in most wind tunnels. Such 
experiments will be treated in more detail later in the book. 
For experiments in which the model is held stationary during data gathering, the 
Reynolds number and Mach number are the significant similarity parameters. If a 
model experiment has the same Reynolds and Mach numbers as the full-scale 
application, then the model and the full-scale flows will be dynamically similar. 
The nondimensional functions for fluid velocity components, pressure coefficient, 
density, viscosity, and temperature will then be the same for the model and the full- 
scale flows. In turn the force and moment coefficients will be the same for the 
model and full-scale flows. 
Under these conditions, the forces developed by the model can be directly related 
to the forces on the full-scale article by multiplying the force coefficients obtained 
in the experiment using the model by the factor $p.~i12 
with the values of parameters 
in the factor corresponding to full scale. The moments developed by'the model can 


-
-
 
22 
WIND TUNNELS 
be directly related tothe moments on the full-scale 
article by multiplying 
the moment 
coefficients obtained in the experiment using the model by the factor $
,
I
&
'
 
with 
the values in the factor corresponding to full scale. 
In practice it is seldom possible to match both Reynolds number and Mach 
number to full scale in a model experiment. In fact, it is frequently the case that 
neither Reynolds number nor Mach number can be matched. Choices must then be 
made on the basis of which parameter is known to be most important for the type 
of flow situation under consideration. 
The matching of Mach number usually applies only to flight vehicles in the 
high-speed flight region as Mach number effects predominate and the matching of 
Reynolds number effects is not as critical. In the low-speed flight region Reynolds 
number effects predominate and matching of Mach number is not as critical. How- 
ever, for any experiment a careful evaluation of the effect of Reynolds and Mach 
numbers should be made to ensure that the results can be applied to the full-scale 
problem. Many wind tunnel experiments are seriously sensitive to Reynolds number 
effects, and no experiment should be attempted without knowledge of material like 
that found in Chapter 8 and a discussion with the experienced operators of the 
tunnel to be used. 
Despite the fact that it is difficult, if not impossible, to match both Reynolds and 
Mach numbers in most wind tunnel experiments, the wind tunnel still is one of the 
most useful tools an aerodynamics engineer has available to him or her. Skillful 
use of the wind tunnel can make strong contributions to the aerodynamics engineer's 
goal of quickly and efficiently optimizing his or her design. The more complex the 
flow phenomena involved, the more important will be the role of the wind tunnel. 
An interesting and useful fact that follows from the scaling relations is that the 
force on a body of a particular shape for which the flow characteristics are a function 
only of Reynolds number is the same regardless of the combination of size and 
speed that is used to produce the particular Reynolds number if the fluid, its tempera- 
ture, and the free-stream pressure are unchanged. This can be seen by writing the 
expression for a particular force component. Choosing drag, we have 
This indicates that the drag on a particular shape with length of 10 ft at 20 rnph is 
the same as the drag on the same shape with a length of 1 ft at 200 mph if the fluid 
temperature and pressure are unchanged. Or the force on a b-scale truck model at 
200 mph is the same as the force on the full-scale vehicle at 25 mph. 


2.2 RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS 
23 
2.2 RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT 
PROGRAMS 
Aerodynamic research and development programs should be based on available 
existing information from all pertinent sources. This would certainly start with a 
sound basis in the current state of aerodynamic theory. Appropriate results, if such 
exist, from previous experiments and from previous computational studies are typi- 
cally of great value. The aerodynamics engineer must then choose approaches to 
develop the specific information required to meet the objectives of the immediate 
program. Three broad categories are commonly recognized: analytical, computa- 
tional, and experimental. 
The analytical approach plays a vital role in the background 
studies and in gaining an appreciation for possibilities, but it never suffices for a 
vehicle 
development program. All development programs from the time of the Wright 
Brothers to the 1960s were based on a combination of analytical and experimental 
approaches. During the 1960s the evolution of the digital computer reached a point 
where solutions to approximate forms of the fluid dynamic equations could be 
obtained for vehiclelike geometries. The development of methods and computing 
machinery have advanced rapidly and have led to many predictions that "computers 
will replace wind tunnels."' Hans Mark was the author of one of the more widely 
quoted such predictions. It has turned out, however, that the continuing dizzy pace 
of development of computers notwithstanding, the complexity of real flows has 
only partially been tamed by the computational approach. Practical computations 
for complete vehicles for the foreseeable future will require "turbulence models" 
that up to now at least must be tailored for specific types of flow. Hammond' 
presented a review of progress in application of computers to engineering develop- 
ment in both structural mechanics and fluid dynamics. In the case of fluid dynamics 
he gave three aspects of development as pacing items for increasing the effectiveness 
of applications of the computer: central processing speed, size of memory available, 
and turbulence models. The fist two continue to advance at a rapid rate. In the 
case of turbulence models, Hamrnond asserted that while many have been developed 
it is not clear that there has been progress in terms of achieving generality or 
significantly improved performance in the period from 1964 to 1994. Ockendon 
and OckendonZ assert that "modeling turbulence is the major unsolved problem of 
fluid dynamics." This is the Achilles heel of current efforts to extend applications 
of computational aerodynamics. 
The approaches to numerically solving the Navier-Stokes equations that are 
currently used and currently being investigated are discussed by Spe~iale.~ 
The 
direct numerical solution @NS) with no turbulence modeling is limited now and 
for the foreseeable future to simple geometries and low- to moderate-turbulence 
Reynolds numbers. According to Speziale, the direct numerical simulations of com- 
plex turbulent 
flows that are 
of technological 
importance 
could require the generation 
of databases with upward of loZo 
numbers. This is unlikely to be possible in the 
near future, and even should it become feasible, it is not clear how this would result 
in a technologically useful result. The next line of attack that has been expected to 
minimize requirements for modeling turbulence is large eddy simulation (LES). 
Speziale discusses the failure of LES to live up to its earlier promise and is proposing 


24 
WIND TUNNELS 
methods to blend the best of LES with Reynolds Averaged Navier-Stokes (RANS) 
methods in an effort to provide more technologically useful methods within capabili- 
ties of current and near-future computational machinery. Computational methods 
are now an important tool to be applied in aerodynamic development programs, but 
it should be recognized that they are best used in conjunction with analytical and 
experimental methods. 
- 
In addition, there is a lurking fundamental mathematical question concerning the 
Navier-Stokes equations. According to Doering and Gibbon! it remains uncertain 
whether the Navier-Stokes equations, even for incompressible cases, are actually 
a self-consistent system (pp. xi-xii): 
It has never been shown that the Navier-Stokes equations, 
in three spatial dimensions, 
possess smooth solutions starting from arbitrary initial conditions, even very smooth, 
physically reasonable initial conditions. It is possible that the equations produce solu- 
tions which exhibit finite-time singularities. I
f
 this occurs, then subsequent evolution 
may be nonunique, violating the fundamental tenets of Newtonian determinism for 
this model. Furthermore, finite-time sineularities in the solutions sienal that the eaua- 
- 
tions are 
generating structures on arbitrarily small scales, contradicting the separation- 
of-scales assumption used to derive the hydrodynamic equations from microscopic 
models. It turns out that the nonlinear te&s that can't be-controlled mathematicily 
are precisely those describing what is presumed to be the basic physical mechanism 
for the generation of turbulence, namely vortex stretching. So what may appear to 
applied scientists to be mathematical formalities, i.e., questions of existence and unique- 
ness and regularity, 
are 
actually intimately tiedup with the efficacy of the Navier-Stokes 
equations as a model for fluid turbulence. Whether or not the equations actually do 
display these pathologies remains an open problem: It's never been proved one way 
or the other. 
This is an issue of far greater importance to analytical and computational efforts 
than to experimental work of the nature undertaken to support vehicle design. 
Advances in computing power have contributed greatly to the capabilities and 
cost effectiveness of wind tunnels and other experimental facilities. Even small 
wind tunnels today will commonly have a dedicated computer to manage data 
gathering and presentation and possibly provide control of the experiment. This is 
true of all large wind tunnels. The time required to present the corrected data in 
graphical and/or tabulated form is typically of the order of milliseconds after the 
measurement is taken. It is now common to have the analytical and/or analytical 
predictions that have been used to design the experimental program available for 
direct graphical comparison as the experimental points are obtained. This enables 
the aerodynamics engineer both to check the predicted results and, based on the 
results of one tunnel run, to make an informed choice among the optional parameters 
that can be chosen for the next run. The most important parts of the matrix or 
conditions to be included in an experiment will be those parts that are most at 
variance with the analytical or computational predictions. 
The availability of increased computing power has contributed in other ways to 
the effectiveness 
of wind tunnel programs. 
The process 
of model design and construc- 


2.3 TYPES OF 
WIND TUNNELS 
25 
tion has been affected by the wide use of computer-based design, which provides 
numerical geometry specifications that are transmitted from designer to model maker 
electronically instead of by paper drawing. This can shorten the time required to 
prepare for an experiment provided the wind tunnel facility is intimately involved 
with the model design so that tunnel mounting features are included in the initial 
model realization. 
There are new measurement methods that have been enabled by the availability 
of powerful dedicated computers and the potency of old methods has been amplified 
greatly. Many of these will be discussed later in this book. 
Emerging communication technology such as the World Wide Web when linked 
to the highly computerized wind tunnel of today and tomorrow offers a possibility 
of the wind tunnel as a virtual laboratory for people for whom physical presence 
is not convenient or cost effective. This is a role that is likely to become more 
important as project teams are increasingly diversified and information must be 
delivered with the absolute minimum time delay to a cross section of the development 
team who may be geographically dispersed. 
2.3 TYPES OF WIND TUNNELS 
There are two basic types of wind tunnels and two basic test-section configurations. 
However, there are almost endless variations on the specific features of various 
tunnels. Virtually every wind tunnel with a test section larger than 2 s ft2 is one of 
a kind. The two basic types are open circuit and closed circuit. The two basic test- 
section configurations are open test section and closed test section, although these 
must now be considered as the two ends of a spectrum since slotted wall test sections 
are now in use for low-speed as well as transonic wind tunnels. 
The air flowing through an open circuit tunnel follows an essentially straight 
path from the entrance through a contraction to the test section, followed by a 
diffuser, a fan section, and an exhaust of the air. The tunnel may have a test section 
with no solid boundaries (open jet or Eiffel type) or solid boundaries (closed jet or 
National Physical Laboratory (NPL) type). Figure 2.1 shows a plan view of an open 
circuit tunnel with a closed jet. 
The air flowing in a closed return wind tunnel, Prandtl, or Gottingen type, 
recirculates continuously with little or no exchange of air with the exterior. An 
example of a closed circuit tunnel is shown in Figure 2.2. 
The great majority of the closed circuit tunnels have a single return, although 
tunnels with both double and annular returns have been built. Again, the closed 
circuit tunnel may have either a closed or open test section, and a number have 
been built that can be run with either an open or closed test section, as needed 
for a particular experimental program. As with any engineering design, there are 
advantages and disadvantages with both the open- and closed-circuit-type tunnels 
and with both open and closed jets. In general, the type of tunnel decided upon 
depends on funds available and purpose. 


FIGURE 2
.
1
 Plan view of an open circuit wind tunnel (Diamler-Benz Aerospace Airbus, 
Bremen, Germany). 
Turning 
Vanes 
I 
I 
Fan 
(6 
Bladed) 
1 
Generator 
~ o o m '  
I 
Switch Gear 
Rwm 
FIGURE 2 2  A closed circuit wind tunnel, Defense Establishment Research Agency 
@ERA), 13 X 9-ft tunnel in Bedford, England. 


Open Return Wind Tunnels 
The following are advantages and disadvantages of an open return tunnel: 
Advantages 
1. Construction cost is typically much less. 
2. If one intends to run internal combustion engines or do extensive flow visual- 
ization via smoke, there is no purging problem provided both inlet and exhaust 
are open to the atmosphere. 
Disadvantages 
1. If located in a room, depending on the size of the tunnel to the room size, it 
may require extensive screening at the inlet to get high-quality flow. The same 
may be true if the inlet and/or exhaust is open to the atmosphere, when wind 
and cold weather can affect operation. 
2. For a given size and speed the tunnel will require more energy to run. This 
is usually a factor only if used for developmental experiments where the 
tunnel has a high utilization rate. 
3. In general, open circuit tunnels tend to be noisy. For larger tunnels (test 
sections of 70 ft2 and more) noise may cause environmental problems, limit 
hours of operations, andlor require extensive noise treatment of the tunnel 
and surrounding room. 
Because of the low initial cost, an open circuit tunnel is often ideal for schools 
and universities where a tunnel is required for classroom work and research and 
high utilization are not required. Open circuit designs are also frequently used by 
science fair participants who build their own wind tunnels. 
Closed Return W i d  
Tunnels 
The following are advantages and disadvantages of a closed return tunnel: 
Advantages 
1. Through the use of comer turning vanes and screens, the quality of the flow 
can be well controlled and most important will be independent of other 
activities in the building and weather conditions. 
2. Less energy is required for a given test-section size and velocity. This can be 
important for a tunnel used for developmental 
experiments with high utilization 
(two or three shifts, five to six days a week). 
3. There is less environmental noise when operating. 
Disadvantages 
1. The initial cost is higher due to return ducts and comer vanes. 
2. If used extensively for smoke flow visualization experiments or running of 
internal combustion engines, there must be a way to purge tunnel. 


28 
WIND TUNNELS 
3. If tunnel has high utilization, it may have to have an air exchanger or some 
other method of cooling. 
Open or Closed Test Section? 
An open test section in conjunction with an open circuit tunnel will require an 
enclosure around the test section to prevent air being drawn into the tunnel from 
the test section rather than the inlet. 
For closed return tunnels of large size with an external balance, the open test 
section tends to have one solid boundary, since the balance must be shielded from 
the wind. This is an anomaly for aircraft experiments other than takeoff and landing, 
but it is a natural condition for exveriments on automobiles or surface-borne ma- 
rine vehicles. 
Many open test-section, closed circuit tunnels have experienced severe flow 
fluctuation problems that require extensive postconstruction diagnostics and correc- 
tive actions. One of the tunnels currentlv acknowled~ed 
to be one of the most useful 
- 
tunnels in existence nevertheless has had substantial difficulties with unsteady flow 
and noise when running in the open test-section configuration. 
The most common geometry is a closed test section, but a wide range of tunnel 
geometries have provided good experimental conditions once the tunnel idiosyncra- 
sies have become known to the operators and users. Slotted wall test sections are 
becoming more common as are test sections that can be converted among two or 
more configurations. 
It is also noted that in larger size tunnels a rectangular test section is preferable 
because it is easier to change a model when working off a flat surface. Further, if 
automobile or other ground vehicle experiments are to be conducted, a flat floor is 
a requirement. 
Test-Section Size 
In general it may be expected that the test section should have as large a cross- 
sectional area as possible. Ideally, a tunnel would be large enough to handle a full- 
scale vehicle. In fact, several tunnels were built in the 1920s through the 1940s to 
achieve this goal for aircraft. A number of tunnels are available in which full-scale 
automobiles are routinely used as test articles. However, since the World War 11 
era, and presumably in the future, the size of aircraft have become such that wind 
tunnels to accommodate full-scale vehicles are not practical. If one uses the rule of 
thumb that the model span should be less than 0.8 of tunnel width, then Howard 
Hughes' Hercules, or as more popularly known, the "Spruce Goose," which was 
designed and built in the 1940s with a 320-ft wing span, would require a test section 
400 ft wide. The cost of building and operating a tunnel of this size is staggering 
to contemplate. The cost of building a model, transporting it, and erecting it in the 
tunnel, as well as making changes during an experimental program, would also be 
an interesting, albeit expensive task. Thus, it is apparent that for the larger of modem 
aircraft, the concept of a tunnel to accommodate full-size aircraft is out of the 


2.4 
AERONAUTICAL WIND TUNNELS 
29 
question based on costs. Recalling the earlier discussions of flow similarity, it is 
more important to seek to obtain Reynolds numbers for the model experiments that 
are as near as possible to the full-scale values than to be concerned with size alone. 
Consideration of this goal is given in the following. In practice most development 
experiments are done in tunnels with widths from 10 to 20 ft. 
2.4 AERONAUTICAL WIND TUNNELS 
A large fraction of wind tunnels have been designed and used for aeronautical 
purposes. For high-speed tunnels capable of sonic speeds or more, this is still the 
case. There are an increasing number of wind tunnels in use exclusively for other 
than aeronautical applications. We provide synopses of a number of specialized 
classes of facilities. 
High-Reynolds-Number lhnnels 
It is often not practicable to obtain full-scale Reynolds numbers by use of a full- 
scale vehicle in an experimental facility; however, there are methods of increasing 
the Reynolds number with smaller tunnels and models. 
One of the oldest methods is to build a tunnel that can be pressurized. In fact, 
some of the earliest definitive work on Reynolds number effects was done in 
pressurized tunnels. The NACA variable-density tunnel (VDT)' that began operation 
in 1929 and the similar compressed-air tunnel at NPL in England were pressure 
tunnels (VDT up to 20 atm) and were used to simulate high Reynolds numbers. 
These tunnels used an annular return duct, because this design required the mini- 
mum amount of steel. The VDT, despite a high level of turbulence, yielded a good 
deal of insight into the effect of Reynolds numbers up to about 10 million on the 
characteristics of 78  airfoil^.^ The reason for pressurization can be seen by examina- 
tion of the equation of state for a perfect gas and the equation for Reynolds number 
[Equation (2.5)]. If one increases the pressure by a factor of 20, the density, and 
hence the Reynolds number, for a given size and speed is increased by a factor 
of 20. 
Some basic issues related to cost of construction and cost of operation of pressur- 
ized tunnels must be considered. The shell cost for a given size will be greater but 
the proper comparison is the shell cost for equal Reynolds number. Necessary 
compressor equipment will add to the cost for pressurized tunnels, and for larger 
facilities, the provision of access to the model test area without decompressing the 
entire tunnel will add to construction complexity and cost. Operation of pressurized 
facilities involves additional time to change the pressure condition and to access 
the model, which reduces productivity of the facility and thereby increases the cost 
to users. Despite these problems, there have been many tunnels built that can be 
pressurized to obtain higher Reynolds numbers. 
A second approach is to change the working fluid. For a given power input the 
use of Freon 12 can increase the Mach number by a factor of 2.5 and the Reynolds 


30 
WIND TUNNELS 
number by a factor Qf 3.6. Again, many of the problems of a pressure tunnel will 
exist, such as initial cost, cost of pumps, cost of the gas, and a method of making 
the test section habitable for model changes. The Transonic Dynamics Tunnel at 
the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) Langley is an example 
of a tunnel that used Freon 12 as the working fluid beginning in 1960. Recent 
recognition of detrimental effectson the environment from the use of Freon has led 
to plans to use a different heavy gas, referred to as R-134a.7 
A third approach is that of a cryogenic tunnel. NASA has built such a facility 
at its Langley Research Center called the National Transonic Facility (NW).' Al- 
though this tunnel is intended for transonic experiments, the same concept applies 
for a low-speed tunnel. The NTF tunnel combines the ability to operate at cryogenic 
temperatures with the ability to change pressure up to 9 atm. The working fluid is 
nitrogen, and by injecting liquid nitrogen upstream of the fan, the gas is cooled. 
By this technique it is possible to operate over a range of dynamic pressures and 
Reynolds numbers at a constant temperature to the tunnel's stagnation pressure 
limit, similar to any pressure tunnel. Or, the tunnel can be run at constant dynamic 
pressure, and by chahging temperature, the Reynolds number can be changed. The 
range of unit Reynolds number and Mach number is impressive, varying from 
1 X 1
0
6
 to over 100 X lo6 
per foot. This sort of facility is very expensive both to 
build and to operate, but it does show what can be achieved in a wind tunnel. Low 
productivity of the NTF due to the long times required to cycle and stabilize the 
temperature has prevented it from being useful as a development facility. The 
European Transonic Facility at Cologne, Germany, is another high-Reynolds-number 
tunnel based on operation at cryogenic temperatures. 
V/STOL Wind lbnnels 
These tunnels require a much larger test section for a given size model owing to 
large downwash angles generated by powered lift systems in the transition flight 
region. Flight velocities in the transition region are low; thus tunnels with large test 
sections used for this purpose do not need high velocities, the maximum being in 
the 6&100-mph range, compared to the 200-300-mph range for a conventional 
low-speed wind tunnel. Since power varies with the cube of velocity, this reduces 
the installed power requirement. There will be, however, a demand to run the tunnel 
at higher speeds with conventional models; thus the tunnel will typically be powered 
for the higher speeds. This was the solution in both the Boeing Helicopter Co. 
tunnel9 (test-section area 400 ft2) and the NASA Langley verticdshort takeoff and 
landing (V/STOL) tunnel (test-section area 300 ft2). 
Another solution to the problem of building V/STOL tunnels is that taken for 
the Lockheed Martin Aeronautical Systems Co. tunnel. A drawing of the circuit is 
shown in Figure 2.3. The Lockheed low-speed wind tunnel has tandem test sections 
with two contractions. The first, and larger, test section is for V/STOL or powered 
lift models and has a cross-sectional area of 780 ft2 with speeds from 23 to 115 
mph. The second test section has a cross section of 378 ft2 and speeds from 58 to 
253 mph. This design avoids the high installed power required to drive the larger 


2.4 AERONAUTICAL WIND TUNNELS 
31 
FIGURE 
2.3 Tandem section design, Lockheed Martin Aeronautical Systems tunnel in 
Marietta, Georgia. 
test section at high speeds. The length of the tunnel is increased by this solution, 
increasing the shell cost. 
Another approach to a larger test section at low speeds for V/STOL and a smaller 
test section at higher speeds is to provide multiple interchangeable test sections. This 
is attractive, but the time required to install and remove the large inserts must be taken 
into 
account 
in the operational 
availability 
of the tunnel facility. The United Technolo- 
gies Research Center has a large wind tunnel with interchangeable test sections. 
The most economical approach to providing V/STOL tunnels has been to modify 
an existing wind tunnel. One of the least expensive methods of obtaining V/STOL 
capability is to use some portion of an existing tunnel return circuit for a V/STOL 
test section. This could be the settling area ahead of the contraction cone or, possibly, 
the end of the diffuser. These test sections may suffer from poorer flow quality than 
a tunnel built for the purpose, but this can be made acceptable by use of screens 
and honeycombs. The speed available will also be determined by the original tunnel 
dimensions. However, by using internal balances and a sting support, one can obtain 
V/STOL capabilities at an acceptable cost. 
Another approach to modifying an existing tunnel for V/STOL experiments is 
to add another leg or legs to the tunnel. The McDonnell-Douglas low-speed tunnel 
actually has three legs. With this arrangement, they can operate with an 8 X 1 2 4  
closed test section up to 200 mph or as a closed return tunnel with an open throat 
15 X 2 0 4  
V/STOL test section up to 80 mph. The V/STOL 15 X 2 0 4  
open throat 
test section can also be operated as an open return tunnel up to 60 mph. 
A second approach to adding another leg is the NASA Ames modification to 
the 40 X 80-ft closed throat tunnel, also known as the National Full Scale Facility. 


32 
WIND TUNNELS 
The new leg forms basically an open circuit tunnel with a closed throat test section 
with dimensions of 80 X 120 ft. In this modification the tunnel was also repowered 
and new fans were built to increase the speed in both test  section^.'^ 
Another approach to an inexpensive V/STOL tunnel was the modification of an 
engine test cell by British Aerospace Aircraft. Again, this is an open circuit tunnel 
with a closed 18 X 18-ft test sectlon. In the design and construction of the tunnel, 
many problems associated with large open circuit tunnels, such as the effect of gusts 
on the test-section flow and the effect of weather, were addressed. 
These few examples show that there are many ingenious and practical solutions 
to adapting an existing facility for new experiments. The facilities of the SATA 
include other V/STOL capable tunnels. 
Free-Flight Tunnels 
In the 1930s several "free-flight" tunnels were built. These tunnels were of the open 
return type and were arranged so that dimensionally and dynamically scaled models 
could be flown under the influence of gravity. The tunnels could be tilted to set the 
angle of the air stream to match the glide path of the model. The dynamic behavior 
of the model could be studied in these tunnels, and often control surfaces could be 
deflected by command through a trailing wire. At present, none of these tunnels 
are in operation as a free-flight tunnel. NASA Langley has performed a considerable 
number of free-flight experiments in the 30 X 6 0 4  
tunnel" with powered models. 
This facility has been used to study V/STOL transition, stalls, and loss of control 
of aircraft  model^.'^ The simulations in these tunnels are at very low Reynolds 
numbers, so care must be exercised in extrapolating the results to much higher 
Reynolds number conditions. 
Spin lhnnels or Vertical Wind k n e l s  
The tendency of some aircraft to enter a spin after a stall and the subsequent need 
to determine actions to achieve recovery from the spin have been perennial problems 
of the aircraft designer. The recovery from a spin is studied in a spin tunnel.13 
This 
is, in most cases, a vertical wind tunnel with the air drawn upward by a propeller 
near the top of the tunnel. An example is shown in Figure 2.4. Some spin tunnels 
use an annular return with turning vanes while others are open circuit with the air 
drawn in at the bottom and emitted at the top. A dynamically similar model is 
inserted into the tunnel by an operator in a spinning attitude. The tunnel air speed 
is adjusted to hold the model at a constant height and the model's motions recorded 
by movies and/or video for later analysis.14 
Spin tunnels are also equipped with six- 
component rotary balances so that direct force measurements can be made for the 
aircraft over a range of rotation rates at various attitudes. In this way spin modes 
can be predicted from the measurements without the restrictive requirement of 
dynamic 
scaling of the model,15 
and predictions 
for transient motions can be obtained 
by using the data in six-degree-of-freedom 
simulation programs. A number of spin 


2.4 AERONAUTICAL WIND TUNNELS 
33 
FIGURE 2.4 
A vertical tunnel, Bihrle Applied Research Tunnel, Germany 
tunnels have been built in several countries. Rotary balances have also been installed 
in horizontal wind tunnels to carry out similar experimental programs.I6 
Stability h n e l s  
In 1941 a stability tunnel was built at NASA Langley. This tunnel had two inter- 
changeable test sections about 6 ft in size.17 
One test section had a set of rotating 
vanes that created a swirl in the airstream. The second test section was curved to 
simulate turning flight. This tunnel was moved to the Virginia Polytechnic Institute 
and State University in 1958 where it continues to serve as both a general- and a 
special-purpose wind tunnel. Similar results are obtained by using oscillating model 
techniques or free-flight experiments in conventional tunnels. 
Propeller lhnnels 
Propeller tunnels are similar to conventional tunnels with the exception that they 
usually have an open test section and a round cross section (see Chapter 3). One 


34 
WIND TUNNELS 
of the earliest propdler tunnels was built at Stanford University in 1917 with a 5.5- 
ft-diameter test section. The propeller tunnel at NASA Langley with a 20-ft test 
section went into operation in 1922. Besides propeller experiments, this tunnel gave 
insight into the advantageous location of engine nacelles relative to the wing and the 
design of cowls (NASA cowl) for radial 
engines to reduce drag and increase 
~ooling.'~ 
. 
Propulsion 'hnnels 
Experimental evaluation of aircraft engines, either reciprocating or jet, requires 
simulation of both flight velocity and the variation of atmospheric pressure and 
temperature. Since the engine must be operated in the tunnel, the exhaust gases 
must be removed from a closed circuit tunnel or an open circuit tunnel must be 
used. The altitude requirement necessitates pumps to provide the low density, and 
the lower temperature at altitudes requires a refrigeration system. Among the largest 
and most powerful experimental facilities in existence is the propulsion test facility 
at the U.S. Air Force's Arnold Engineering Development Center in Tullahouma, 
Tennessee. 
Icing Tnnnels 
The NASA 6 X 9-ft Icing Research Tunnel at Lewis Research Center near Cleveland, 
Ohio, is a conventional low-speed closed return tunnel with the addition of a 
refrigeration system to reduce the air temperature to -40°F and atomizers upstream 
of the test section to produce water droplets that freeze. The shell of this tunnel is 
heavily insulated to help keep the tunnel cold. A novel aspect of this facility is that 
the fan must be run at idle speed during model changes to prevent it from freezing. 
The formation of ice on aircraft continues to be a serious safety problem for aircraft 
and helicopters that operate at low to medium altitudes. 
Low-Turbulence Tunnels 
These tunnels usually have a wide-angle diffuser just ahead of the settling chamber 
in order to increase the size of the settling chamber without a corresponding increase 
in the overall circuit dimensions. The large settling chamber has honeycombs and 
a larger than usual number of screens to damp out turbulence, and its size allows 
for a larger contraction ratio to further reduce turbulence. Some low-turbulence 
tunnels of the closed return type have used 180" curved corners rather than the 
usual two 90' turns. This type of comer has been used in the NASA Langley low- 
turbulence pressure tunnel (LTPT), a two-dimensional tunnel, and the Ames 1 2 4  
high-speed pressure tunnel. The Langley LTPT uses a wide-angle diffuser ahead of 
the settling chamber, a 17.6 : 
1 contraction ratio, and 11 screens. 
Two-Dimensional Tnnnels 
Two-dimensional tunnels are used primarily for evaluation of airfoil sections. They 
have been built both as open circuit and closed return types. These tunnels have 


2.6 AUTOMOBILE WIND TUNNELS 
35 
tall narrow test sections with height-to-width ratios of 2 or greater. The tunnels are 
usually of the low-turbulence type and may be pressurized to increase the Reynolds 
numbers. An example is the previously mentioned LTPT at Langley Research Center. 
2.5 
SMOKE TUNNELS 
Smoke tunnels are used primarily for flow visualization. Usually these tunnels are 
of the nonreturn type, as photographs and video recording are the primary methods 
of data recording. Both two- and three-dimensional smoke tunnels have been built. 
For smoke sources current practice seems to favor vaporized light oils, kerosene, 
or propylene glycol although many other substances have been used. Smoke tunnels 
used for research rather than demonstration purposes tend to have very large contrac- 
tion ratios (up to 24 : 1) and a large number of antiturbulence screens at the inlet 
to obtain smooth laminar flow.19 
In general, the speed of smoke tunnels tend to be 
low-
around 30-60 ftlsec. Smoke has been injected both just before the model and 
at the tunnel inlet. For research tunnels, injecting ahead of the inlet and antiturbulence 
screens reduces the turbulence from the smoke-injector rake. 
Smoke is used for flow visualization in many general-purpose tunnels, though 
rarely are the results as spectacular as can be obtained in a facility carefully tailored 
for the purpose. 
2.6 
AUTOMOBILE WIND TUNNELS 
Experiments to obtain aerodynamic parameters that affect automobile performance, 
handling, engine cooling, brake cooling, and wind noise are made with either scale 
models or at full scale in larger tunnels. Unlike the case of aircraft, it is quite feasible 
and is common practice to build tunnels that accommodate the use of full-scale 
automobiles. It is also advantageous to use moderate scale such as 0.25-0.4 models 
and conduct experiments at full-scale Reynolds numbers. 
External Flows 
There are two distinct classes of wind tunnels involved in aerodynamic experiments 
on automobiles. The one that is the main focus of this book is concerned first and 
foremost with the external aerodynamic flow and'with internal flow to the extent 
it has a significant interaction with the external flow characteristics. All of the major 
automobile manufacturers worldwide either own or have regular access to wind 
tunnels for such experiments of both model- and full-scale automobiles. In North 
America there are several wind tunnels used extensively 
for automobile 
aerodynamic 
experiments. The Lockheed low-speed wind tunnel in Marietta, Georgia, is used 
extensively for automobile work by several manufacturers and by a number of 
automobile racing teams, as is the National Research Council tunnel in Ottawa, 
Ontario. The General Motors Research Laboratory operates both model- and full- 


36 
WIND TUNNELS 
scale tunnels. The Chrysler Corp. has recently completed a pilot tunnel that is 
serving as a working tunnel for experiments using scale models and as a pilot for 
a planned full-scale tunnel. The Glenn L. Martin wind tunnel (GLMWT) at the 
University of Maryland has worked extensively on automobile aerodynamics as 
well as heavy truck aerodynamics beginning in 1953. In Europe, the companies 
including Ford of Germany, Pmsche, Opel, BMW, Volvo, Mercedes, Audi, Fiat, 
Pinninfarina, Volkswagen, and the Motor Industry Research Association (MIRA) 
of Great Britain all own and use wind tunnels extensively in aerodynamic develop- 
ment of automobiles. The primary manufacturers 
in Japan, including Nissan, Honda, 
Mazda, and Toyota, all have impressive aerodynamic experimental facilities. Figure 
2.5 shows the Nissan full-scale wind tunnel. 
Nozzles 
0 
1 
g 
1 
c
o
 
Aerodynamic Balance /Turntable 
FIGURE 2.5 
Full-scale facility at Nissan Motor Corp. 


2.6 AUTOMOBILE WIND TUNNELS 
37 
Climatic Wind 'hnnels 
The other class of wind tunnels are facilities that provide the capability to evaluate 
the drive systems, air conditioners, door, and window seals under simulated hot- 
and cold-weather environments and under arbitrarily chosen operating cycles. These 
facilities have capability to heat and cool the airstream, to simulate strong sun 
radiation conditions, to provide simulated rain, and to have the automobiles running 
on dynamometers around the clock for extended periods of time. An example of 
such a wind tunnel is shown in Figure 2.6. The auto industry frequently refers to 
these tunnels as "climatic" 
or "en~ironmental"~~ 
wind tunnels. There are 
many more 
climatic wind tunnels in use by the automotive industry than of the class for external 
aerodynamic studies. Every manufacturer has several climatic wind tunnels, and 
there are some independent operators who sell such services. However, they have 
seldom been used for external aerodynamic development for several reasons. They 
are 
typically very heavily scheduled for their environmental purposes. The size that 
h- 
- 
8. Steam Lances 
Lamps 
Section 
1 
1. Control R
o
o
m
 
12. Movable Corner 
6. Courtyard Cooling Tower 
Turning Vane 
7. Heat Exchanger Coils 
13. Vehicle Entrance 
FIGURE 2.6 
An automotive "environmental" wind tunnel, Ford Motor Co., Dearbol 
Michigan. 


38 
WIND TUNNELS 
is quite adequate for the environmental work is not large enough to do external 
aerodynamic work on full-scale vehicles. And the flow quality is generally less than 
is thought proper for external aerodynamic studies. 
Most automobiles are considered to be aerodynamically bluff bodies, which 
reflects the fact that there are almost always significant regions of separated flow 
on an automobile. This leads tointeractions between the flow about the model and 
the wind tunnel walls or free jet boundary that are somewhat more complex than 
is the case for bodies with fully attached flow. One result is that understanding these 
types of flow in wind tunnels continues to engage research personnel. 
A major point concerning wind tunnel experiments on automobiles is the question 
of ground simulation. To provide a strict simulation, the wind tunnel floor must move 
with the speed of the 
air. A 
considerable 
amount of work has been carried 
out to 
address 
thequestion 
of when this 
is 
necessary 
and when 
this 
condition 
can be relaxed. 
Generally 
speaking, it is the current practice to use a fixed floor with some treatment to produce 
a thin boundary layer for production car experiments and a moving floor for formula 
I or Championship Auto Racing Team (CART) race car experiments. The principal 
difference is the clearance between the bottom of the car and the ground. This and 
other issues will be addressed in more detail later in the book. 
Wind tunnels for automotive experiments are increasingly required to have 
low-flow noise levels so that wind noise associated with flow around the vehicle 
can be measured with sufficient accuracy to allow assessment of proposed design 
variations. 
2.7 AEROACOUSTIC WIND 
TUNNELS 
Studies of flow-generated noise from submarines, ships, and other types of marine 
vehicles and appendages and their wake distributions have long been a problem in 
the military world, just as noise suppression for aircraft and land vehicles has been 
in the civilian area. Realizing the advantages of holding the model and the measuring 
instrumentation still and letting the fluid move, as well as the enormous cost of 
running full-scale experiments, and that noise suppression is more easily handled 
with air than with water, the David Taylor Research Center designed and built a 
unique wind tunnel known as the Anechoic Flow Facility. While basically a single- 
return wind tunnel with a closed test section upstream of an open one, its other 
features both as a wind tunnel and low-noise facility have made an enormous 
contribution to the world of wind tunnels for others to copy. 
A sketch of the tunnel is shown in Figure 2.7. Special features include: 
1. The use of a wide-angle diffuser to permit a contraction ratio of 10 
: 
1 with- 
out a long diffuser and return path with corresponding high constructions 
costs. 
2. The use of two 100' turns and two 80° turns instead of the more customary 
four 90" turns. This permitted the length needed for the fan noise suppressors, 
again with a shortened passage. 


2.7 AEROACOUSTIC WIND 
TUNNELS 
39 
FIGURE 
2.7 Layout of the Anechoic Flow Facility. 
3. Extremely heavy concrete constructions plus the use of noise suppression 
materials on walls, ceilings, and turning vanes. 
4. An anechoic chamber surrounding the open test section to yield by far the 
lowest noise levels achieved in a wind tunnel. 
5. Section isolation is practiced throughout, as well as isolation of the entire 
tunnel from the ground through several feet of crushed rock. 
Figure 2.8 shows a model in the anechoic facility of Figure 2.7. The wedges 
used for reflection cancellation are evident in the background. 
Many general-purpose wind tunnels have been modified to include noise absorp- 
tion materials and other features to provide quieter environments 
-in which some 
. 
aeroacoustic 
work can be carried out. Increased understanding of aeroacoustic 
princi- 
ples, better material availability, and improved instrumentation that allows useful 
measurements in the presence of higher background noise have come together with 
increasing demands of users for quieter vehicles to stimulate an increasing level of 
activity in aeroacoustic studies in both special- 
and general-purpose 
wind tunnels. An 
example of a general-purpose 
facility that has received extensive 
acoustic treatment is 
the National Full Scale Facility. 


FIGURE 2.8 Airplane configuration for airframe noise study in the Anechoic Flow Facility. 
(Courtesy Naval Surface Warfare Center.) 
2.8 WATER TUNNELS 
Water tunnels are, of course, not wind tunnels. However, water tunnels are used in 
essentially the same way and under the same physical principles as low-speed wind 
tunnels. Water tunnels support direct investigation of cavitation phenomena that 
cannot be done in a wind tunnel. Water tunnels tend to be physically smaller than 
wind tunnels for achieving the same Reynolds numbers. However, this apparent 
advantage is more than offset by the greater difficulty in having water as the working 
fluid instead of air. There are few "large" water tunnels. There is a 48-in. tunnel at 
the Navy's Applied Physics Laboratory at State College, Pennsylvania. This tunnel 
is used for underwater vehicle development, including considerable work on torpedo 
design. Small water tunnels have been widely used for flow visualization studies. 
It has been possible to achieve low dispersion of die streaks, which combined 
with very low flow speeds has allowed more detailed observation and associated 
photographic and video recording than has been achieved in wind tunnels. 


2.9 GENERAL-PURPOSE WIND TUNNELS 
41 
2.9 
GENERAL-PURPOSE WIND TUNNELS 
Many wind tunnels that have in practice become general-purpose facilities were 
originally designed based on requirements of experiments on aircraft of types com- 
mon in the World War I1 era. The most common of these is the 7 X 10-ft class 
wind tunnel that have those approximate dimensions of their test sections. All of 
the NASA research centers that date from the days of the NACA have or had one 
or more of these: The U.S. Air Force has one, the U.S. Navy has two, five universities 
in the United States have tunnels of this class, and numerous other agencies and 
companies throughout the world have or had tunnels of this class. Many of these 
tunnels have been closed and some have been destroyed as work that had its 
origin in these tunnels moved more specialized facilities spawned by increasing 
understanding of particular problems. The GLMWT at the University of Maryland, 
which entered service in 1949, is one of these. Its layout is shown in Figure 2.9. 
These facilities continue to be very good for a wide range of vehicle-related 
experiments and continue to be the best available for a range of special-purpose 
experiments that have not spawned their own specially designed aerodynamic facili- 
ties. For many purposes they are simply the most cost effective at carrying out 
exploratory investigations when no fully satisfactory capability is available. 
A selection of subjects of aerodynamic experiments not previously mentioned is 
added here to further emphasize the broad range of applications that arise for low- 
speed wind tunnels. 
People 
Attention has been paid to people-drag of the type encountered by bike racers and 
skiers. The bicycles should ideally be arranged so that the biker can pedal and with 
166'0' 
3 
FIGURE 2.9 
Layout of the Glenn L. Martin wind tunnel at the University of Maryland. 


42 
WIND TUNNELS 
a belt so that the front wheel rotates along with the back one. Experiments have 
shown a change of drag with the number of wheel spokes and other details. Wind 
tunnel entries have proven beneficial for showing bike riders their lowest drag 
posture. For skiers, the "model" is mounted in the tunnel and during a run at 
approximately 55 mph (which is close to full-scale "flight") assumes a series of 
positions endeavoring to learn Which minimizes his or her drag or possibly the lift- 
to-drag ratio in the case of ski jumpers. The fascinating part of these experiments, 
and they are not without hilarity despite the seriousness of the end results, is that 
the model corrects his or her own drag by watching a drag indicator. Position 
changes are shown on frontal and side TV 
projectors, and coaching suggestions 
sent in as needed. A programmed computation in real time can also be presented 
so the skier or biker can be shown how much each change helps in terms of race 
time or distance results. Substantial improvements in clothing have resulted from 
such programs. In some cases clothing has been evaluated to seek increases in drag 
when it is to be worn by an athlete seeking to increase load during training. Airborne 
troops have been trained in vertical wind tunnels so that they are familiar with the 
condition they will experience when jumping from aircraft. Figure 2.10 shows a 
skier suspended in a wind tunnel. 
Birds and Insects 
Over the years a number of wind tunnel experiments have been made of natural 
fliers, alive, frozen, and simulated. Initially experimenters were seeking mysterious 
and incredibly efficient devices that nature's creatures were supposed to have. No 
such things have been found; nor are they needed to explain natural flight. The high 
landing angles of some buds have been duplicated with highly latticed wings, and 
bud power has been estimated to be in line with demonstrated performance. Bird 
fat turns out to have a similar energy content to jet fuel. Differences that remain 
are of small magnitude and are within the uncertainty of experiments to date. 
Live insects have been somewhat more cooperative than live birds and have 
flown more extensively in tunnels for close observation. In some cases, tunnels 
similar in concept to the "stability" tunnels described above have been used. 
Wind Power Devices 
Currently, and for the foreseeable future, there is a lot of interest in developing 
devices that will supply direct energy for pumping water for irrigation, to prevent 
pond freezing, or for the generation of electricity. Experiments are usually run at 
low tunnel speeds, but the tunnel engineer should satisfy himself or herself of the 
model integrity (and that it has a brake) and that damage to the tunnel is not likely 
to occur. Experiments will probably encompass runs under various power loadings 
and at different Reynolds numbers. It would be preferable to evaluate windmills in 
the wind gradient that they will eventually see, but this is rarely done. The tunnel 
engineer should encourage the windmill promoter to have siting experiments 
made in an environmental wind tunnel to get the best results in the field.21.22 
PTior 


2.9 GENERAL-PURPOSE WLND TUNNELS 
43 
FIGURE 2.10 Skier in wind tunnel. (Courtesy Verdian-Calspan Operations.) 
to siting studies, one may guess that the winds on a mountain top will run 80-100% 
higher than along a local plane. A long-term record cannot be established for the 
mountain location, but a ratio can be, and from this 50-100-year probabilities can 
be estimated. 
At the moment, aside from several exotic but unproven designs, the types of 
windmills of most interest are the conventional or horizontal axis windmill, the 
Danieus, and the Savonius, which is a bucket type. For estimating the maximum 
power coefficient one should use, respectively, 0.4,0.4, and 0.3. The lower maximum 
power coefficient for the Savonius type is offset in practice by its lower manufactur- 
ing cost. Measurement of side force is not normally made but should be, as all 
types develop small to substantial lateral "lift" force, as does an airplane propeller. 


44 
WIND TUNNELS 
Experiments on windmills in a wind tunnel require careful attention to wake- 
blocking corrections. 
Large installations seem to suffer from making a disturbing buzzing sound, 
interrupting T
V
 
reception, and having instabilities, which lead to a short mechanical 
lifetime. Windmills should never be put on a rooftop, even to get a high local 
velocity. Natural winds have many times the total power needed for the entire 
electrical needs of humans, but the energy is very diffuse and therefore requires 
considerable ingenuity to harness economically. Windmills have, however, been a 
source of power that has been used successfully in certain locales for hundreds of 
years. It turns out that a maximum of 59.4% of the power as given by the rate of 
kinetic flowing through an area the size of the windmill disc is theoretically available. 
Solar Collectors 
Interest in solar energy has spawned a need for wind loads and moments on the 
various solar collectors, usually of parabolic cross section and of various aspect 
ratios and arranged in various arrays all the way from being in sheltered ground 
installations to being on rooftop locations subjected to all sorts of local wind 
concentrations. Since winds come from all directions, loads and moments must be 
measured for a full range of yaw. In particular, there is interest in drag (also called 
lateral load) and pitching moment and with the loads along the long axis. Yawing 
moments and roll moments are measured but are usually of lesser import. Besides 
needing loads for strength and preservation of the proper focal distance, the pitching 
moment is needed to size the drive motor that keeps the collector aimed at the sun 
and turns it over at night or in hail to reduce damage to the reflecting surface and 
reduce the collection of dust. Loads are reduced substantially by being shielded by 
a nearly solid fence around the array or other collectors, and this should be explored. 
The experimental program usually consists of force, moment, and pressure data.z3 
Obviously forces and moments are needed from the standpoint of foundation and 
structural design. Pressure data are needed for limiting local deflections of the 
reflector itself. The collector pitch angle is varied from - 
180" to +18O0 and yaw 
from 0" to 90'. Array spacing and distance above ground are additional variables. 
Runs at several air speeds usually establish that there is little variation with Reynolds 
number. The tunnel speed range is chosen based on historical wind records at the 
proposed site. An example of an installation to evaluate the effect of wind screens 
is shown in Figure 2.11. 
Radar Antennas and Satellite Television Receivers 
The same type of experiments described above for solar collectors may be made 
for radar antennas or other dish-type receivers. A major difference is that one would 
not expect to find them in arrays, and more than likely radars will be placed on 
mountain tops where signals may be received from 360". As local winds may be 
quite high, it is not unusual to find them protected by radar-transparent domes. 


2.9 GENERAL-PURPOSE WIND TUNNELS 
45 
FIGURE 2.11 Effects of wind barriers on solar collectors being simulated in a wind tunnel. 
Radar antennas are common on ships that may expect to encounter high-wind 
conditions and at those very times may be dependent on the radar for safety. 
For wind tunnel experiments on exposed antennas the model should be mounted 
in the tunnel on top of the same structure it will see in the field-trailer, antenna 
stand, small house, and so on. Measurements of drag, side force, and torque should 
be made every 10" or so from - 
10" to +190°. If there is any question at all about 
structural integrity, pressure measurements should be taken near comers, particularly 
on the dome, if one is to be used. 
It is quite common to evaluate the actual hardware in the wind tunnel to obtain 
the actual structural integrity and the capability of the drive motors to operate the 
antenna in the specified wind conditions. Figure 2.12 shows a radar antenna undergo- 
ing direct evaluation of performance capability in a simulated wind condition. Figure 
2.13 shows an example of data on the forces and torque for a different shaped antenna. 
Sails and Above-Water Parts of Ships 
The performance of sails have been evaluated in wind tunnels in limited numbers 
over the years. M a r ~ h a j ~ ~ . ~  
gives a good treatment of the subject. In general, sail 
experiments embrace measurements of side force, drag, yaw, and roll on a model 
mounted on the tunnel floor in an atmospheric tunnel where the boundary layer is 
properly simulated. 
Sail material should be varied during an experiment to see what effect, if any, 
arises. Material roughness and porosity will probably be out of scale, and several 
variations of each should be tried for comparison. 
Ship experiments have been somewhat more extensive. These usually embrace 
a floor or ground plane model cut off at the waterline, with measurements made of 
side force and drag only, although yaw and roll would be of interest. Again, a wind 
gradient should be provided as above. 


46 
WIND TUNNELS 
FIGURE 2.12 Air traffic control radar in wind tunnel simulation of service conditions. 
(Courtesy Glenn L. Martin Wind Tunnel.) 
Both sail and ship model experiments should have their data corrected for wake 
and solid blockage. The models should be kept small enough so that at a yaw angle 
of 90" 
bow and stem remain no less than half a ship length from the tunnel walls. 
Extreme care to duplicate model detail, such as ships' railigs, ventilators, and mast 
detail, are not warranted in studies to reduce aerodynamic drag. 
Experiments on speed boats are primarily to find a body shape that has mini- 
mum nose-up characteristics. Here the model is set at a range of pitch angles about 
the stem, and the angle at which the aerodynamic moment overcomes the moment 
due to gravity and thrust about the stem is determined. The current wide, flat- 
bottomed speedboats can survive only a few degrees of nose up before they be- 
come unstable. 
A relatively recent problem that arises with tankers carrying liquid natural 
gas is ascertaining that the vents needed as the gas boils off do not constitute a fire 
hazard. 
Bridges 
The effect of natural winds is important to the proper design of long or even 
intermediate bridge spans. There has been at least one case in which aerodynamic 
excitation at quite low wind speed led to fatigue cracking of high aspect ratio I 
beams in a bridge superstructure. n o  
wind instabilities must be studied: (1) vortex 
shedding, which causes limited vertical movement or torsional oscillations at gener- 
ally low wind speeds; or (2) flutter instability, which can result in both vertical 
movement and torsional oscillation. Four types of experiments have been tried: 


2.9 GENERALPURPOSE WIND TUNNELS 
47 
Angle of attack, a, 
deg 
FIGURE 
2.13 Data from elliptic dish-type radar antenna. Drag component includes sup- 
port drag. 
1. full models in smooth air, 
2. section models in smooth air, 
3. section models mounted on taut wires in smooth air, and 
4. full elastic models in turbulent air. 
Section models would of course be desirable for ease of construction, especially 
since the "final" design is frequently not available until well into the study, and the 
construction time (and cost) of a full elastic model are to be undertaken only if 
lesser cost methods are determined to be inadequate. When evaluated in smooth 
air, the section model does indicate changes that would reduce undesirable motions, 
and the section model data do agree fairly well with the full bridge model, both in 
smooth air, but they both have been found to give conservative results. Full models 
in turbulent air are the best. To be most useful, the turbulence properties must be 
scaled to the model size, and such real-air turbulence is very large. Whereas a 
typical general-purpose tunnel might have a ul/U 
of 0.5%, the real air might have 
a value of 10% 
or more [u' is the root-mean-square 
(RMS) variation in the horizontal 


48 
WIND TUNNELS 
wind velocity, and U 
is the mean horizontal wind measured over a long time] 
WardlawZ6 
considers scaling laws for bridge experiments. 
2
.
1
0
 ENVIRONMENTAL WIND TUNNELS 
These are tunnels designed to simulate Earth's natural boundary layer, which typi- 
cally has a thickness of 1000-2000 ft. They are used to determine wind loads on 
buildings, air pollution dispersion patterns, soil erosion, snow drifts, flow patterns 
in the vicinity of building complexes, and so on. These are sometimes referred to 
as "meteorological wind tunnels." In contrast to most tunnels intended for vehicle 
development studies, the airstream in an environmental wind tunnel is not expected 
to be straight and smooth. Instead it is manipulated to obtain a flow distribution 
that is nonuniform in time and space to represent the atmospheric boundary layer.27 
The features of the atmospheric boundary layer are very different for various terrain 
characteristics so the tunnels must have ability to adjust the flow to simulate a 
variety of circumstances. This is accomplished by having adjustable roughness 
elements along the floor of the tunnel for as much as 10-15 test-section widths 
upstream of the zone in which the model is positioned. The Boundary Layer Wind 
Tunnel Facility at the University of Western Ontario even has an extended water 
pool to help 
in simulating 
flow in the marine boundary layer. Fortunately, the required 
flow speeds are typically 
quite low so the power requirements 
for environmental 
wind 
tunnels are not so high as for vehicle development wind tunnels. 
The material in this section is complementary to material in Chapter 16 on 
wind engineering. 
Experimental methods for environmental studies were done first in general- 
purpose wind tunnels, with considerable 
effort going into methods to develop appro- 
priate 
simulation 
of the planetary boundary layer in the minimum possible 
streamwise 
distance. However, the methods have developed over the last two to three decades 
into quite specialized and sophisticated procedures that are required to deal with 
the highly nonuniform and unsteady flows and their effects. A new term has entered 
the technological lexicon. It is wind engineering. Wind engineering combines the 
fields of meteorology, fluid dynamics, structural mechanics, and statistical analysis 
to minimize the unfavorable effects of the wind and maximize the favorable ones. 
In general four separate areas are studied: 
Wind Forces on Buildings and Structures. These problems are concerned with 
forces, moments, deflections, local pressures, and velocities. 
Dynamics of Structures. This area includes buffet, flutter, swaying, and 
breathing. 
Local Winds. These problems require measuring mean wind velocities, turbu- 
lence, and turbulence energy and scales. 
Mass Transport by Winds. This covers soil erosion, pollution, blowing soil, 
efflux from smokestacks, and diffusion. 


2.10 ENVIRONMENTAL WIND TUNNELS 
49 
Research and practice in the field are very active and are reflected by the publica- 
tions in the Journal o
f
 Wind Engineering, which was first published under the title 
of Journal o
f
 Industrial Aerodynamics. 
Cermakn,28 
and Plate and C e m ~ a k ~ ~  
describe five requirements for experiments 
in meteorological or environmental wind tunnels: 
1. proper scaling of buildings and topographic features; 
2. matching Reynolds numbers, pVw1~; 
3. matching Rossby numbers, VILC2, 
4. kinematic simulation of air flow, boundary layer velocity distribution, and 
turbulence; and 
5. matching the zero pressure gradient found in the real world. 
Reynolds number effects are usually small due to the sharp edges of most objects 
under study, but check runs should be made at varying speeds to make sure. If 
problems show up, they may usually be cured through the use of trip strips, as 
discussed in a later chapter. Reynolds numbers for buildings are commonly based 
on width w. 
The Rossby number is concerned with the effect of the rotation of Earth on its 
winds. It accounts for a change of wind direction of perhaps 5" in 600 ft. This is 
of little significance and would be hard to simulate if it were necessary. 
The velocity distributions in the natural boundary layer should be simulated as 
completely as possible. For example, at a scale 1 
: 
450 a 900-ft building will be 2 
ft high. The boundary layer must be matched to at least 3 ft high, and preferably 
all the way to the test-section ceiling. The boundary layer velocity distribution and 
turbulence can be well duplicated by an installation of spires in the entrance cone 
followed by a roughness run of 10-15 test-section heights often made with small 
cubes on the floor. The building or locale to be evaluated and its environs are placed 
on a turntable, and rotations are then made such that the test area is subjected to 
winds from all directions. There is a small error in that the boundary layer and 
turbulence in the real world may be different according to the approach direction. 
Sometimes, especially when a building is on a lakeshore, a different wind structure 
is employed. 
The longitudinal pressure gradient normally found in a wind tunnel and exacer- 
bated by the very thick boundary layer needed can be made negligible by providing 
an adjustable test-section roof that may be adjusted to provide the extra cross- 
sectional area needed. 
While it is necessary to provide cooled or heated air and test-section floor areas 
for some types of experiments on pollution, the tunnel engineer gets a break for 
force, pressure, and dynamic experiments, because when the wind blows bard, it is 
so well mixed that temperature 
gradients do not occur. For these experiments 
simulat- 
ing the boundary layer structure and turbulence is adequate. Ground conditions 
influence the boundary layer [see Eq. (9.1)] and so no single boundary layer works 
for all experiments. Nor does the atmosphere have only one temperature gradient 
as both daily and seasonal changes occur. 


50 
WIND TUNNELS 
There is an advantage in having a straight-through tunnel in this type of work 
(or a closed circuit tunnel that may be converted to open circuit) because tests are 
often made that could damage a closed circuit type. These include smoke, "snow 
material," erosion experiments with sand, when model failure is part of the experi- 
ment (roofing material or gravel), or when a water trough or structural failure may 
damage or rust balance compments. 
Air pollution experiments sometimes require that the tunnel be run at very low 
velocities. A direct-current drive motor plus a variable-pitch propeller is the best 
arrangement for this, but an alternating-current motor with a variable-pitch propeller 
is cheaper and usually adequate. Adjusting tunnel speed by rpm is less necessary 
with thick boundary layer flow because the flow pattern is adjusted by the spires 
and roughness. Atmospheric test engineers like to hold flow speeds to within 1-2%, 
which is on the high side for uncertainty for vehicle experimental work but is a 
challenge in the lower speed and unsteady environment of atmospheric boundary 
layer simulation. 
Static Loads and Associated Experiments on Buildings 
Wind tunnel engineers may be called upon to help correct buildings already built 
and in trouble or to guide the architect in a new design. "Trouble" can mean any 
of a long line of complaints, including building swaying, losing glass or cladding, 
losing roofing, people getting knocked down by wind,30 
whistling noises, smoke or 
other fumes coming in the ventilation system, and so on. These experiments are 
more tense than those on proposed buildings because the architect is usually very 
defensive. On proposed designs it is less costly to make changes. A full building 
experiment program encompasses the following: 
1. Preliminary smoke experiments to search for possible trouble spots where 
pressure ports are needed. 
2. Static wind loads, which may lead to dynamic experiments later. 
3. Ventilation intake studies with smoke being emitted by nearby factories or 
efflux from the proposed building itself. (The high wind velocities near the 
top of a building result in a higher total pressure near the top and wind blowing 
downward. This can lead to a variety of unexpected intake problems.) 
4. Local high-velocity areas that might cause problems for people. 
5. Detailed smoke studies after force experiments have been made and the model 
painted a dull red to make the smoke show up better are used to convince 
the architect and his or her backers that the suggested changes are needed. 
Sometimes a location problem is identified so that simply moving the proposed 
building will solve the pr~blem.~' 
Pressure measurements are needed in order to ensure the integrity of cladding and 
windows, and this requires high-bandwidth instrumentation to obtain in very turbu- 
lent flow. Current practice is to use transducers that have a flat frequency response 


2.10 ENVIRONMENTAL WIND TUNNELS 
51 
to say 150 Hz and then to average samples taken at rates of 50-150 s-' for say 
20 s. Locations for pressure ports are from item 1 above and from the tunnel 
engineer's experience. 
A special case of wind loading occurs when one tall building is adjacent to 
another. Usually this produces shielding from winds in some directions and more 
serious buffeting in others. Buffeting from adjacent cylindrical or hexagonal struc- 
tures can be reduced by fixing transition through added roughness.32 
If the actual boundary layer is known at the location of a proposed site, the same 
boundary layer should be simulated. If not, the maximum speed at 30 ft altitude is 
measured or estimated and the boundary layer is structured according to the general 
properties of the local topology. 
The dynamic pressure used for reducing the forces and moments to coefficient 
form may be taken as an average value over the model, the value noted at the 
middle of the model, or free stream q. It must be defined or the data are useless. 
Dynamic Loads on Buildings 
Buildings with more than a 6 : 
1 
ratio of height to width are apt to develop accelera- 
tions that are quite discomforting to the occupants. There are two approaches to 
solving this problem: 
1. The building structural engineer knows the natural frequencies of the building, 
but not the buffet frequencies expected. Experiments using a rigid model on a high- 
response balance can obtain the needed information, and added stiffening can then 
be incorporated into the design. 
2. An elastic model can be built and actual accelerations and displacements 
measured for the various wind speeds and wind directions, 
but a number of uncertain- 
ties remain. For example, the reference velocity is unknown, and there are some 
uncertainties as to the dynamic characteristics that should be built into the model. 
Dalgliesch, 
Cooper, 
and T e m ~ l i n ~ ~  
and the references 
therein consider 
the comparison 
between a model and a building that has already been built, noting a fair agreement 
with dynamic data from each but acknowledging that the experimental program 
was helped by having a building already constructed from which coefficient ranges 
could be determined. The model had 21 degrees of freedom, sensors that measured 
three displacements, and 15 accelerometers. Of interest was finding that torsional 
motion resulted in accelerations in some parts of the building that were 40% higher 
than in others. 
Unsteady Aerodynamics in Wind Engineering 
The wind can produce structural oscillations and other phenomena in several ways. 
Some typical cases are indicated .here. 
Simple Oscillations All natural and man-made structures have one or more natural 
frequencies at which they will readily oscillate unless critically or over damped. 
The natural frequencies of many items (trees, signposts, etc.) are close enough to 


those of wind puffs that it is not unusual for a failure to result from successive 
puffs arriving in such a way as to amplify the motion to a failure condition. These 
are cases of forced response at a resonant frequency. 
Aeolian Wbrations Long, simply supported structures such as smokestacks and 
towers have a tendency to oscillate in a direction normal to a relatively smooth 
steady wind and at their natural frequency. This phenomena is a result of the 
combination of the structural tendency to vibrate at a natural frequency and aerody- 
namic phenomena of slender bodies shedding vortex streets. Vortex shedding from 
circular cylinders is one of the most studied problems in fluid dynamics. There is 
a range of Reynolds numbers over which there is an alternating shedding with 
corresponding unsteady side force and drag. Over a wide range of conditions the 
shedding frequency corresponds to a Strouhal number, fdlK of about 0.2. As can 
be seen, there is likely to be some wind speed at which the shedding frequency and 
thus the side-force frequency will be equal to a natural frequency of the structure. 
When such a coincidence occurs, there is likely to be a significant vibration. Such 
an oscillation is called Aeolian, although sometimes the term is restricted to the 
case when the structure has a high natural frequency (10-100 Hz) and displacements 
are small. Such oscillations 
are the source of the tones in an "Aeolian Harp" 
produced 
by the wind.34 
Structures that are noncircular and elements of structures such as 
the individual beams in a tower or bridge may experience periodic shedding and 
corresponding aerodynamic excitation that can be damaging if any forcing frequency 
approaches a lowly damped natural frequency of the structure. 
Galloping A second type of motion arises when a body has a negative slope of 
the lift curve, and motion across the wind then produces a force in the direction of 
the wind. This is not unusual for buff bodies whose in-wind side becomes unstalled 
with a small angle of attack, and Bernoulli-type flow then is able to act. Galloping 
oscillations are usually violent and must be eliminated through design changes. For 
instance, twisting stranded wires or adding spiral wrappings has been found effective 
in many cases. 
Bredhing Sometimes large-diameter stacks and other structures will distort at 
some natural frequency such that the flow pattern is changed toward that frequency. 
This is different from motion of the body in the absence of distortion. 
Transmission lines exhibit both Aeolian and galloping oscillations. The Aeolian 
singing is understood, usually occurs at from 10 to 100 Hz full scale, and is suppressed 
by dampers. Galloping produced by wind loads is reasonably well understood, but 
unfortunately very large deflections (of say 100 diameters) are not uncommon and 
are hard to accommodate in a tunnel. Experiments have been made on spring- 
mounted sections employing a bare wire, stranded wire, and wires with simulated 
ice accretion. Here some galloping has been developed, but apparently only small 
deflections have occurred. 


2.10 
ENVIRONMENTAL WIND TUNNELS 
53 
Windbreaks can be used in connection with reducing the loads on structures. A 
second and important use is to reduce winter heating loads by reducing the convective 
cooling of a house, and a third is to increase the yield from some types of wheat 
that do not like being blown about. Instrumentation downstream of the windbreak 
should continue for at least six times its height, and data averaging should be 
employed to determine the windbreak efficiency. 
Pollination for many agricultural products is by the wind, and thus plant distribution 
and planting patterns must be properly employed. Trees near the edge of the fields 
may need to be cut to improve the natural winds. On the other hand, some plants 
do better without a lot of buffering by the wind, and these need special attention. 
The area of wind engineering as applied to agriculture is only in its infancy. 
AgriculturaVSoil Erosion 
Soil erosion caused by wind is of interest to the agronomist from the standpoint of 
losing topsoil. The road engineer, on the other hand, would like to see his or her 
roads stay clear. Another facet of soil erosion is the damage done to car windshields 
and paint by windbome particles. 
The mechanism of natural soil pick-up is beginning to be under~tood.9~ 
Submi- 
crometer particles will not erode from a smooth surface in a wind of gale velocities, 
but mixed with 5- to 50-pm grains they become highly erodible. Fundamental 
studies of large-scale grain loads have been made using strain-gage-mounted 
grains. 
Much of the correlation with full scale is encouraging. 
Another type of erosion is the determination of the wind speed at which gravel 
begins to be eroded from the roof of a 
damaging the roof, nearby parked 
cars, and passersby. 
Snow Drifting 
Many people in warmer regions do not realize the yearly cost of snow removal, 
and many in colder areas do not realize the savings possible by wind tunnel studies 
of ameliorating changes (preferably before but sometimes after construction) that 
reduce local drifting about access areas. 
Drifting snow can block doorways and roads and may even inactivate a facility 
completely. Fortunately, the problem can be studied in a tunnel with good correlation 
to full scale. Snow patterns that might take years (in the Arctic) to accumulate may 
be duplicated in a few hours. 
Kabayashi?' Strom et 
and Kind'q present thorough discussions covering the 
snow-drifting phenomena. The basic parameters of snowdrift and erosion problems 
are discussed below. 


54 
WlND TUNNELS 
When a stream of wind flows over a bed of loose particles, those higher than 
the others produce more drag until finally they roll and bump in the wind direction. 
This process is called "saltation" and is responsible for most of the motion (and 
end deposits) that form snowdrifts or soil erosion. When the wind velocity exceeds 
about five times the threshold speed, the particles bump hard enough to bounce into 
the stream when they are then A d  
to be "in suspension." Saltation and suspension 
can occur at much lower speeds in the presence of falling particles. Modeling to 
match this phenomenon is by the following ratios: 
Scale factor dlL, where d is the diameter of simulated snow particle and L is the 
length of a full-scale reference dimension. 
Coefficient of restitution e. This concerns the rebound distanceldrop distance and 
is 0.555 for ice. 
Particle velocity V
J
Y
 where V
,
 is the velocity of simulated snow particle and V 
is the velocity of real snow particle. 
Fall velocity Vf/V where 
is the free-fall velocity of simulated snow particle. 
Here we have one of the rare instances where we may "scale gravity"-
at 
least to the extent that the fall velocity may be varied by changes in the 
particle density. 
Particle Froude number VZlgd, 
where g is acceleration of gravity. 
Selecting a model scale of h
,
 we find that the experiment velocity becomes 0.316 
full-scale velocity. 
The fall ratio may be maintained by using borax (NaZB2O7), 
whose 
density providentially yields the right value and whose coefficient of restitution is 
0.334--lower than ice but possibly close to snow-
and whose diameter may be 
controlled to be one-tenth that of snowflakes. 
In a tunnel saltation has been found (for the above-simulated snow) to occur at 
11 mph without snow falling and at lower velocities when snow is falling. 
Data for snow experiments are obtained in the form of photographs and depth 
contours. One substantial contribution from tunnel experiments is the technique of 
reducing drifting by erecting a building on piles with a free space beneath. This 
has been applied in Arctic buildings with good results. Figure 2.14 is a from a wind 
tunnel study of snow drifting. 
Evaporation and Related Issues 
The growing need for studying transpiration from plants and evaporation from open 
bodies of water has resulted in the construction of wind tunnels in which the moisture 
content of the air and its temperature may be controlled. Tunnels of this type are 
in Japan, 
at the University of Nottingham in England, at the 
Colorado State University 
in the United States, and elsewhere. They are all low-speed tunnels employing 
controlled air exchange. 
Transpiration experiments are full scale in that the weight of moisture removed 
from actual plants is studied. Electric lights or other heaters are used for tempera- 
ture control. 


2.10 ENVIRONMENTAL WIND TUNNELS 
55 
FIGURE 2.14 
Snowdrift study for lodge, near building in photo, at a ski resort. Note the 
effect of tower at left rear, which provides self-removal of snow from entrance with prevailing 
wind from left. 
Evaporation is of interest both to agronomists who are concerned with the loss 
of water from storage areas and channels and to process engineers who have drying 
problems. Both types of experiments have been explored in wind tunnels. 
Evaporation experiments employ open bodies of water, and the surroundings are 
changed to study the increase or decrease of evaporation. Evaporation, as one might 
guess, depends on the surface area, the relative dryness of the air, and the effective 
wind velocity. This last term is the "catch," since the effective velocity may vary 
from a fraction of 1% to perhaps a few percent of the nominal velocity, depending 
on the type of boundary layer formed by the air over the water. 
Pollution Dispersion 
For all of the various types of pollutants being discharged into the air, it is important 
to know not only where they will go but also how far they must go before diffusion 
reduces their concentration sufficiently to render them harmless. The number and 
types of pollution problems are astounding. They include industrial smoke, throw- 
away gases from chemical processes, efflux from nuclear power plant holding tanks, 
using wind to carry 
silver iodide 
aloft to 
increase the probability of rain, the necessary 
distance from a liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) spill to obtain a noncombustible 
mixture, getting rid of hydrogen sulfide smell from a geothermal power plant, the 
dispersal of pesticides through trees, and so on. Furthermore, it is necessary to 
consider the wide range of 'weather conditions and assess the worst circumstance 
that is "likely" to occur. 
Skinner and L u d w i p 3  
made a great contribution to methods for experimenting 
on dispersal in wind tunnels. They argue that (1) the dominant feature of plume 


56 
WIND TUNNELS 
mixing is turbulent exchange and (2) fluid viscosity is not important. They also 
note that there is a minimum Reynolds number below which there will be a laminar 
sublayer in the tunnel that cannot be tolerated, or conversely, when experiments are 
done above that speed, a greater area can be examined by going to larger model- 
scale ratios as long as the tunnel speed is increased proportionately. 
Their conclusion, 
provided the stack flow is "reasonably turbulent," is that by exaggerating the buoy- 
ancy of the exit momentum of the stack effluent and compensating with an increase 
of tunnel speed, the same dispersion is obtained as when modeling the ratio of stack 
exit density to ambient density. Thus hot stack gases are not necessary for this type 
of experiment, permitting larger ground areas to be simulated by a model of fixed 
diameter. Having the plume in the tunnel, its dispersion rate may be measured, or 
a program of changes may be studied to move its location away from certain areas. 
Another type of pollution experiment employs a pollutant distributed at various 
locations to see how the dispersal is affected by changing conditions. 
A few examples are given of smoke visualizations from pollution dispersal 
studies. Figure 2.15 and Figure 2.16 show the effect of a nearby building on plume 
height. Figure 2-17 shows how smoke (or pollutants) can blanket an entire fac- 
tory under inversion conditions. Figure 2.18 shows the path of stack gases for a 
container ship. The objective is to keep the stack gases from impinging on the con- 
tainers. 
In addition to a need for studies of the above problems for engineering purposes, 
there is now a legal reason in the United States in that the Clean Air Act (Public 
Law 95-95) describes "good engineering practice" as including pollution effects, 
and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency reserves the right to require fluid 
modeling or field experiments for proposed installations. 
FIGURE 2
.
1
5
 Efflux velocity is equal to wind speed and stack height is 1.5 times building 
height. Building is downstream of stack. (Courtesy National Physical Laboratory.) 


FIGURE 2.16 
Same conditions as for Figure 2.10 except building is upstream or stack. 
(Courtesy National Physical Laboratory.) 
FIGURE 2.17 Smoke covering factory during an inversion simulation. (Courtesy Verdian- 
Calspan Operations.) 


WIND TUNNELS 
FIGURE 2.18 Measuring stack gas path. (Courtesy Colorado State University.) 
REFERENCES AND NOTES 
1. H-ond, 
D., AIAA Conference on Multidisciplinary Optimization, Panama City, FL, 
Sept. 1994. 
2. Ockendon, H., and Ockendon, J. R., Viscous Flow, Cambridge University Press, Cam- 
bridge, 1995. 
3. Speziale, C. G., 'Turbulence Modeling for Time-Dependent RANS and VLES: A Re- 
view,"AIAA J., 36, (2), 173-184, 1998. 
4. Doering, C. R., and Gibbon, J. D., Applied Analysis of the Navier-Stokes Equations, 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1995. 
5. Jacobs, E. N., "The Variable Density Tunnel," NACA TR 
416, 1932. 
6. Abbott, I. H., and von Doenhoff, A. E., Theory of Wng Sections. Including a Summary 
of Ailfoil Data, Dover, New York, 1959. 
7. Cole, S. R., and Rivera, J. A., "The New Heavy Gas Testing Capability in the NASA 
Langley Transonic Dynamics Tunnel," Paper No. 4 presented at the Royal Aeronautical 
Society Forum on Wind Tunnels and Wind Tunnel Test Techniques, Cambridge, UK, 
April 14-16, 1997. 
8. Nicks, 0. W., and McKinney, L. W., "Status and Operational Characteristics of the 
National Transonic Facility," AIAA Paper 78-770, presented at the Tenth AIAA Aemdy- 
namic Testing Conference, San Diego, CA, April, 1978. 
9. See SATA web site referenced [in Appendix 1 for additional information on specific 
wind tunnels.] 
10. Mort, K. W., Engelbert, D. E, and Dusterbemy, J. C., "Status and Capabilities of the 
National Full Scale Facility," AlAA Paper 82-0607, paper presented at the Twelfth AIAA 
Aerodynamic Testing Conference, Williamsburg, VA, 1982. 


S. J., "The NA 
REFERENCES AND NOTES 
59 
CA Full-Scale Wind Tunnel," NACA TR 459, 1933. 
12. Chambers, R. J., Bowman, J. S., Jr., and Malcolm, G. N., "StalYSpin Test Techniques 
Used by NASA," AGARD Flight Mechanics Panel Specialists Meeting on StalWSpin 
Problems on Military Aircraft, Brussels, 1975. 
13. Zimmennan, C. H., "Preliminary Tests in the NACA Free-Spinning Tunnel," NACA TR 
557, 1936. 
14. Niehouse, A. I
.
,
 "Design and Operating Techniques of Vertical Spin Tunnels,'' AGARD 
Memorandum AG171P7, 1954. 
15. Discolor, M. B., and Barlow, J. B., "Determination of the Spin and Recovery Characteris- 
tics of a Typical Low-Wing General Aviation Design," AIAA Paper 80-0169, presented 
at the Eighteenth AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting, Los Angeles, CA, Jan. 1980. 
16. Aero Machi wind tunnel, Torino, Italy, for example. 
17. Bird, J. D., Jaquet, B. M., and Cowan, J. W., "Effect of Fuselage and Tail Surfaces on 
Low Speed Yawing Characteristics of a Swept Wing Model as Determined in Curved 
Flow Test Section of Langley Stability Tunnel," NACA TN 
2483, 1951. 
18. Stack, J., "The NACA High Speed Wind Tunnel and Tests of Six Propeller Sections," 
NACA TR 463, 1933. 
19. Mueller, T. J., "On the Historical Development of Apparatus and Techniques for Smoke 
Visualization of Subsonic and Supersonic Flows," AIAA Paper 80-0420, presented at 
the Eleventh AIAA Aerodynamic Testing Conference, Colorado Springs, CO, March, 
1980. 
20. The use of the term environmental wind tunnel by the automotive industry indicates a 
very different type of facility from that described later in the section on Environmental 
Wind Tunnels, which describes facilities used to study problems associated with the 
natural wind. 
21. R. N. Meroney, "Sites for Wind Power Installations," in Proceedings of the Workshop 
on Wind Energy Conversion Systems, Washington DC, June 9-11, Energy Research and 
Development Adrnin., 1975. 
22. R. N. Meroney, "Prospecting for W~nd: 
Windmills and Wind Characteristics," 
Transpoi? 
Eng. J., ASCE, 107, 413-426, 1981. 
23. Randall, D. R., McBride, D., and Tate, R., "Steady State Wind Loading on Parabolic 
trough Solar Collectors," Sandia National Laboratories, Report No. 79-2134, 1980. 
24. Marchaj, C. A., Aero-Hydrodynamics of Sailing, Adlard Coles Nautical and Intemational 
Marine, Camden, 1979. 
25. Marchaj, C. A., Sail Performance, Techniques to Maximize Sail Power; Adlard Coles 
Nautical and Intemational Marine, Camden, 1996. 
26. Wardlaw, R. L., "Sectional vs. Full Model Wind Tunnel Testing of Bridge Road Decks," 
DME/NAE Quarterly Bulletin No. 1978 (4). 1979. 
27. Cermak, J. E., "Wind Tunnel Design for Physical Modeling of the Atmospheric 
Boundary 
Layer," Pmc. ASCE, 107, 623-642, 1981. 
28. Cermak, J. E., "Wind Tunnel Testing of Structures," J. Eng. Mech. D
i
v
.
 
ASCE, 103, 
1125-1140, 1977. 
29. Plate, E. J., and Cermak, J. E., "Micrometeorological Wind Tunnel Facility, Description 
and Characteristics," 
Colorado State University Civil Engineering Report, CER 63, 1963. 
30. Local ground winds can be as much as four times those aloft. 


60 
WIND 
TUNNELS 
31. If Candlestick Park had been built one playing field to the north, much of its wind 
problems could have been avoided. (J. E. Cermak, Science Year: World Book Annual, 
Field Enterprise Education Corp., Chicago, 1978.) 
32. Peterka, J. A,, and Cermak, J. E., "Adverse Wind Load Induced by Adjacent Buildings," 
ASCE Preprint 2456, 1976. 
33. Dalgliesch, W. A., Cooper, K. R., and Templin, J. T., "Comparison of Model and Full- 
Scale Accelerations of a High Rise Building," 
NRC Presentation Paper, 1983. 
34. Aeolus was the Greek God 
of the wind. 
35. Cermak, J. E., "Note on the Determination of Snow Drift Locational Stability," 
Colorado 
State University Civil Engineering Report, CER 66, 1966. 
36. Kind, R. J., "Further Wind Tunnel Tests on Building Models to Measure Wind Speeds 
at Which Gravel is Blown Off Roofs," NCR LTR LA-189, 1977. 
37. Kabayashi, D., "Studies of Snow Transport in Low Level Drifting Snow, Institute of 
Low Temperature Science," Sapporo, Japan, Report A-31, 1958. 
38. Strom, G., "Scale Model Studies of Snow Drifting," Research Report 73, U
.
S
.
 
Army 
Snow, Ice, and Permafrost Research Establishment, 1962. 
39. Kind, R. J., A Critical Examination of the Requirements for Model Simulation of Wind 
Induced Phenomena Such as 
Snow Drifting, Atmospheric Environment, Vol. 10, Perga- 
mon, New York, 1978, p. 219. 
40. Ludwig, 
G. R., "Wind Tunnel Model Study of the Hot Exhaust Plume from the Compressor 
Research Facility at Wright Patterson Air Force Base," Report No. AFAPL TR 77- 
58, 1977. 
41. Ludwig, G. R., and Skinner, G. 
T., "Wind Tunnel Modeling Study of the Dispersion of 
SO, in South Allegany County," EPA 90319-75-019, 1976. 
42. Skinner, G. T., and Ludwig, G. R., "Physical Modeling of Dispersion in the Atmospheric 
Boundary Layer," 
Calspan Report No. 201, Buffalo, NY, 1978. 
43. Skinner, G. T., and Ludwig, G. R., "Experimental 
Studies of Carbon Monoxide Dispersion 
from a Highway Model in the Atmospheric Simulation Facility," Calspan NA 5411- 
A-1, Buffalo, NY, 1976. 


3 Wind Tunnel Design 
A considerable variety of wind tunnels have been designed and constructed to 
perform a wide range of aerodynamic tests. A number of special-purpose wind 
tunnels were mentioned in Chapter 2. These included spin tunnels, icing tunnels, 
meteorological tunnels, tunnels designed for the testing of buildings, and others. 
Many low-speed tunnels, however, can be classified as general-purpose tunnels. 
These tunnels are equipped with mounting systems and instrumentation that can be 
readily adapted for many types of tests of air, ground, and marine vehicles, vehicle 
components, plus many other items including buildings, flutter, store separations, 
windmills, skiers, skydivers, and dynamic tests. A few of these tunnels have suffi- 
ciently large test sections to accommodate full-scale 
smaller aircraft and automobiles 
and are well suited for V/STOL testing. A growing number of tunnels have multiple 
test areas so that a wider range of tests can be readily accommodated. This type of 
arrangement leads to some 
compromises but is being found to be an overall advantage 
in some cases. In the medium-size tunnels with test-section area around 100 ft2 
large amounts of both research and vehicle development testing are accomplished. 
Tunnels with smaller size test sections are mostly used for research and instructional 
purposes. Ideally, the size of the tunnel is determined by its purpose. It is axiomatic 
that economics indicates that any given project should be carried out in the smallest 
size tunnel that will provide the needed simulation with the proviso that data from 
an improper and misunderstood simulation can be much worse than no data at all. 
In this chapter, we present an approach to wind tunnel design that is appropriate 
for general-purpose wind tunnels. The principles are the same for other types of 
tunnels. A study of the basic aspects of wind tunnel design is useful to those who 
may be users or potential users of wind tunnels as well as those who may consider 
acquiring a wind tunnel. The material in this chapter will assist readers to gain an 
understanding of principal features of wind tunnels. 
The first step in the design of a tunnel is to determine the size and shape of the 
test section based on the intended uses of the facility. A major part of the following 
discussions address tunnels for which the primary use is vehicle and vehicle compo- 
nent testing, since many tunnels are built for this purpose. It is also assumed that 
a major part of the testing will be force testing, where information is sought for 
performance, fuel efficiency, stability, or control of a vehicle that may be an aircraft, 
an automobile, a submarine, a racing yacht, or possibly others. Sections of this book 
addressing instrumentation bill, however, consider a full range of measurement 
techniques for pressures, flow field variables, and other parameters. 
The cross-sectional area of the test section basically determines the overall size 
of the facility. The test-section size, speed, and design will determine the required 
61 


62 
WIND TUNNEL DESIGN 
power. The size of h e  
facility will be the primary factor in determining the structural 
or shell costs, and the power and operating hours will determine the energy portion 
of the operational cost. Although the major cost of operation is the salaries of the 
tunnel personnel, the electrical energy cost to run the tunnel and its auxiliaries is 
not an insignificant cost, and it is doubtful that this cost will decrease in the long 
term. Thus, in the design there is a balance between initial costs and operating costs. 
In the past many tunnels have been built with short diffusers and related features to 
allow 
short circuit length to holddown initial costs while 
accepting 
higher energy costs 
of operation. 
This trade-off should be carefully 
examined with due consideration 
given 
to anticipated energy costs. The cost issues will not be treated further as they are too 
dependent on local circumstances both geographically and in time. 
3.1 OVERALL AERODYNAMIC OBJECTIVE 
The overall aerodynamic objective for most wind tunnels is to obtain a flow in the 
test section that is as near as possible to a parallel steady flow with uniform speed 
throughout the test section. Perfection is not possible so every design is bounded 
by constraints that include maximum cost, available space, available time, and 
available knowledge. It is almost always desired to obtain the largest size of the 
test section and the highest speed for the available funds. High speed and large size 
are of course competing demands. 
Aeroacoustic evaluations and experiments have become of great importance in 
low-speed aerodynamics 
for a number of applications. The requirement for a facility 
to be a useful aeroacoustic facility is that the background noise level be sufficiently 
low. One very specialized tunnel for this purpose was described in the previous 
chapter. However, there are now many tunnels that have been modified to various 
degrees to reduce the background noise level. The specifications for many new 
tunnels include the requirements on background noise. It is also the case that more 
sophisticated measurement techniques and instrumentation are making it possible 
to obtain useful acoustic measurements in environments with higher background 
noise. We will not give a basic quantitative treatment of design for acoustic purposes 
as we will for aerodynamic performance. We will provide some descriptive informa- 
tion on the treatments that have been applied to some facilities. 
There are some wind tunnels for which nonuniform and unsteady flow is desired. 
For such tunnels specifications on the spatial and time variations in the test section 
are given. The design of these tunnels is not treated here explicitly, although they 
will have many of the features of more conventional tunnels. 
3.2 BASIC DECISIONS 
Unit Reynolds Number 
From the discussions in Chapters 1 and 2, it can be concluded'that a central issue 
in the sizing of a low-speed wind tunnel will be the achievable Reynolds number 


3.2 BASIC DECISIONS 
63 
for the models that can be accommodated. The same question arises for vehicle 
developers who must select from available wind tunnels one in which to carry out 
the tests in a development program. The equation for Reynolds number as given in 
both Chapters 1 and 2 is Re = p,V,Nk,. 
We will choose a Mach number of 0.3 as 
the upper limit of Mach number for the free stream beyond which we may be 
concerned about the effect of Mach number on a typical study. Considering sea 
level standard atmospheric conditions,' the maximum for V, will be -330 ftlsec, 
or -100 mls, and the "unit Reynolds number" will be -2.13 X lo6 
ft-I, or 6.98 
X lo6 
m-'. These numbers and the appropriate 
characteristic length of the test article 
give a good approximation to the available Reynolds number in an atmospheric 
wind tunnel. 
For vehicles including aircraft and racing automobiles that can operate at speeds 
of Mach 0.3 or greater in the atmosphere, test articles would have to be at least full 
scale to achieve operational Reynolds numbers in an atmospheric wind tunnel. This 
is either impossible or very costly for many vehicles. As a consequence there has been 
and continues to be much attention focused on obtaining effective results with less 
than full-scale test articles or with various separate component tests. An important 
example of the contribution of component testing 
is the development 
of airfoil profiles 
for various purposes that are then incorporated into three-dimensional 
wing designs. 
Another widely used method is to test half models since many vehicles have a plane 
of symmetry. Most important of all is the careful study of aerodynamic phenomena as 
they are affected by variation of Reynolds number so that useful conclusions can be 
obtained from tests that do not duplicate the operating Reynolds number.' 
For many studies it is not necessary to produce the full-scale Reynolds number, 
but it must be of a "reasonable" value. Much low-speed testing involves aircraft 
takeoff and landing configurations where the Mach number is typically in the 
0.1513.3 range. Both the lift curve slope and maximum lift coefficient are affected 
by Mach numbers as low as 0.2. This tends to require a tunnel speed approximately 
equal to the full-scale landing speed. In an unpressurized 
tunnel using air, this means 
that the Reynolds number ratio of model to full scale is approximately equal to the 
size ratio between the scale model and the aircraft. 
A primary decision is the choice of the minimum acceptable value of Reynolds 
number. Because much of low-speed testing is at high-lift conditions, the effect of 
Reynolds number on airfoils at high lift must be considered. Maximum lift and lift 
curve shape near stall for single-element airfoils vary considerably with Reynolds 
number up to at least one million. For multielement airfoils this range is much 
greater. The continuing need for testing facilities that allow near-full-scale Reynolds 
number testing of transport aircraft high-lift systems is a primary reason that the 
United States in the mid-1990s seriously considered construction of major new 
wind tunnek3 
In any case, the lower boundary for testing airfoils and wings for vehicles that 
will operate at higher full scale values is a Reynolds number in the range of 
1,000,00&1,500,000 based on chord. At these values of Reynolds number, the 
model is likely to have an extensive region of laminar flow, and the possibility 
exists of poor simulation owing to separation of the model's laminar boundary layer. 


64 
WIND TUNNEL DESIGN 
It is assumed that laminar separations are unlikely to occur at full scale in the normal 
operating conditions. Therefore, flow similar to full scale is more likely to be 
achieved by fixing the transition location on the model? If the Mach number is 
taken as 0.2, then the tunnel velocity is about 150 mph. For this speed the unit 
Reynolds number is a little less than 1,500,000 
f t - I .  Although the minimum Reynolds 
number cannot be rigidly defined, the above rationale has been used to define a 
minimum Reynolds number of between 1,500,000 and 2,500,000 based on wing 
chord for low-speed tunnels to be used for aeronautical development testing. There 
are some flight vehicles that operate at lower Reynolds numbers. There is, in fact, 
a whole series of airfoils for soaring gliders that are especially designed to operate 
at Reynolds numbers below 1,000,000. There are also an increasing number of 
small 
low-speed unmanned vehicles. Operational Reynolds numbers 
for these aircraft 
are often obtainable in a medium-sized wind tunnel. 
For vehicles that operate in the atmosphere at speeds such that the Mach number 
is less than 0.3, the operational Reynolds number can be duplicated in an atmospheric 
wind tunnel with a scaled model. Consider a production automobile operating at 
60 mph. The operating Reynolds number can be obtained using a three-eighths- 
scale model with an atmospheric tunnel test speed of 160 mph. 
For marine vehicle testing, it is necessary to compare the properties of water 
and air and consider the differences in typical vehicle speeds. The ratio of the 
kinematic viscosity of air to the kinematic viscosity of water at a temperature of 
15°C is about 13. A test of a marine vehicle in air at equal size would require an 
air flow speed 13 times greater than water flow speed to obtain equal Reynolds 
numbers. Or if a one-third-scale model is used, the air flow speed required would 
be 39 times the operational speed in water. In such a case the Reynolds number for 
an operational speed of 5 knots would be duplicated with an air flow speed of 195 
knots. This approximate combination has proved to be quite useful in the develop- 
ment of keels for racing yachts. As with aircraft, the achievable Reynolds numbers 
are not as high as the development engineer would like. Great diligence in assessing 
the effect of Reynolds number is required. The kinematic viscosities of air and 
water vary significantly with temperature so the above ratio, taken at 15°C. must 
be adjusted according to expected operational conditions. 
As reflected in the above discussions, it is not possible to give a rigid rule for 
the minimum acceptable Reynolds number. It has been suggested by Bradshaw and 
Pankhurst5 
that the laminar boundary layer momentum thickness Reynolds number, 
~V~,/J.L, 
at the minimum pressure point on the test body should be at least 320. This 
has been given by Preston6 as the minimum at which a fully developed turbulent 
boundary layer can exist. 
Test-Section Size 
This is commonly the starting point in the design of a wind tunnel. The choice will 
follow from considerations of the desired Reynolds number capability, the budget 
for tunnel construction, and the costs for tunnel operation and tunnel users as 
reflected particularly in required model characteristics. 


3.2 BASIC DECISIONS 
65 
Airplane Models For a mean geometric chord of 1 ft and aspects ratio of 8-
9 for 
an aircraft wing, the span is between 8 and 9 ft. The maximum span should be less 
than about 0.8 of the tunnel width due to effects of tunnel walls on the flow,' which 
leads to a width of 10-11.25 ft. For rectangular solid-wall tunnels, wall correction 
factors given in Chapter 10 show that for a small wing the wall correction factor 
will be minimum for a width-to-height ratio of about 1.5. The above considerations 
indicate why so many tunnels have been built in the 7 X 10- to 8 X 1 2 4  
size 
range with maximum speed in the range of 20G300 knots. In addition to the 
consideration of flow properties, a model for a tunnel of this size is large enough 
so that the smaller parts are relatively easy to build. 
Test-section lengths based on transport type aircraft testing or even fighter types 
of the World War I1 era were chosen to be -1-1.5 times the width based on the 
fact that span-to-length ratios tended to be greater than 1. Fighter aircraft and others 
for operation at transonic and higher speeds have much lower aspect ratios. Optimum 
test sections for these vehicles have greater lengths, perhaps on the order of 2 times 
the width. 
V/STOL Aircraft For V/STOL models in a STOL descent case the speed will be 
near 70 knots due to model power limits or tip Mach number on propellers and 
rotors. The reduction in test speed will require a larger model to maintain reasonable 
Reynolds numbers. To minimize the wall corrections due to large downwash angles 
from these models, the model-span-to-tunnel-width ratio must be smaller, typically 
between 0.3 and 0.5. Thus the V/STOL tunnels built in the 1960s have test sections 
that are 20-30 f
t
 wide. 
Automobiles A key issue for automobile tunnels is the blockage based on frontal 
area. The flow around automobiles is often more characteristic of "bluff bodies" 
than of "streamlined bodies." 
This means that there is almost always a sizable region 
of separated flow. The wind tunnel test section needs to be sufficiently long so that 
these separated flow regions "close" 
before encountering the end of the test section 
and the entry of the diffuser. Otherwise the pressure in the separated region will 
not be correct and a large influence on drag will exist. In addition, the length- 
to-width ratio of automobiles is greater than for aircraft while the width-to-height 
ratio is much less. A wind tunnel test section sized for automobiles is therefore 
typically longer than a test section sized for aircraft and the width-to-height ratio 
approximates the width-to-height ratio of standard automobiles. Ideally the blockage, 
the ratio of model frontal area to test-section area, will be -5% or less. This is 
based on confidence (or rather lack of confidence) in blockage correction methods. 
Sufficient progress in correction methods has been made in recent years so that 
higher blockage factors are increasingly accepted as a trade against cost. At the 
same time, slotted-wall test sections have been found to provide good results with 
larger blockage than either completely open or completely closed test sections. 
Keels, Submarines, and Sails Submarines and surface ships obviously have large 
length-to-width ratios. In addition, their operational range for "leeway" is smaller 
than that for angle of attack or sideslip for aircraft. A test section chosen for testing 


66 
WIND TUNNEL DESIGN 
these vehicles would have a length-to-width ratio of 2 or greater. Yacht keels are 
sufficiently similar to aircraft wings that they fit comfortably into conventional 
aircraft test sections. Test configurations that include both keels and rudders would 
be better accommodated in test sections with higher values of length-to-width ratio. 
Sail testing for both main sails and spinnakers has difficulties associated with 
the variability of the shapes under load. There are no currently available "rules of 
the road" to guide such tests. 
Instructional and Other SmaU Tunnels For small research tunnels and student 
tunnels at universities and elsewhere, the prospect of achieving or even approaching 
operational Reynolds numbers is usually beyond the available budget. In many 
instances the problem of building models accurately may be a critical factor. Assum- 
ing that students can hold an airfoil dimension to 0.01 in. and that it is sufficient 
to hold the model to 1-
2% tolerance, the following results can be reached. For a 
12% thick airfoil with 2% tolerance the minimum thickness equals 0.50 in., and 
the chord is 4.16 in. Using a mean chord of 4.0 in. and aspect ratio of 8, the span 
is 32.0 in. As the maximum span is 0.8 of the tunnel width, the width is 40 in. 
Using a width-to-height ratio of 1.5 for a minimum wall correction factor, the height 
is 26.7 in. The cross-sectional area is then -7.5 ft2. A minimum test velocity would 
be about 100 Wsec or a dynamic pressure of 12 lb/ft2 because lower speeds and 
corresponding dynamic pressures would require instrumentation sensitivities that 
either are not readily available or are more costly than necessary. 
Many demonstration tunnels and calibration tunnels have test-section areas of 
1 ft2 
or less. These are very useful for observation of basic flow phenomena and 
calibration of instrumentation probes. However, they are 
of little use for doing vehicle 
component studies except in cases for which Reynolds numbers are quite low? 
For a rectangular tunneI the width determines the model size and the Reynolds 
number at a fixed speed. The cost of the tunnel shell and its required power tend 
to vary with the square of the test-section width. Since funds for a tunnel are usually 
fixed, the largest tunnel that the funds will buy is generally built. 
The size of smaller tunnels is frequently determined in the final analysis by the 
size of the room that will house the tunnel. 
The Reynolds number per foot for a given size tunnel can be increased by building 
either a pressure tunnel or a cryogenic tunnel using a cold gas such as nitrogen. 
Other working fluids such as Freon and sulfur hexafluoride have been used to obtain 
desired conditions. These are special-purpose tunnels, and the need for their special 
capabilities must justify the cost as with any other tunnel. The time required for 
model changes will be long unless special provisions are made because the test 
section must be isolated before workers can enter to work on the model. Test 
productivity, as well as flow characteristics, is an important characteristic of a 
wind tunnel. 
Open or Closed Return 
Another basic design consideration 
is whether the tunnel will be of return 
or nonreturn 
(open circuit) type. Almost all of the small research tunnels are of the nonretum 


3.2 BASIC DECISIONS 
67 
type, usually because of the lower construction costs. Power consumption for such 
tunnels is usually not a significant factor in overall cost. Although there exist some 
larger tunnels of nonreturn design, most of the larger tunnels are of the return type, 
the majority being single return. A few of the earlier tunnels were of double-return 
type. However, it has been more than 50 years since the double-return design has 
been chosen for a new wind tunnel. 
Open or Closed Test Section 
Open jet tunnels will have a lower energy ratio than a closed jet wind tunnel owing 
to the jet entraining stagnant air as it passes from the contraction cone exit to the 
collector inlet. If the tunnel has an external balance, the balance usually has to be 
shielded from the air jet and one of the boundaries tends to be closed. Open throats 
do not work for an open circuit tunnel with a propeller in the diffuser unless the 
test-section region is enclosed in an air-tight plenum or room. Open throat tunnels 
often suffer from pulsations similar to vibrations in organ pipes. An open throat 
gives easy access to the model in small tunnels. In large tunnels scaffold of some 
type is required to gain access to the model. The setting up and removal of the 
scaffold requires additional model change time. Since the jet length is usually kept 
short to reduce losses, there is the possibility that high-lift models may deflect the 
wake enough to miss the collector or that the wake of a bluff body will interact 
with the collector. An open jet provides easier access for traversing devices to move 
instrumentation to any point in the flow. 
In general, the advantages appear to be with the closed throat tunnel for aeronauti- 
cal testing. However, considerations of bluff body aerodynamics and overall size 
requirements have led to a number of open, partially open or slotted wall, and 
convertible jet tunnels built by automobile companies and others who engage in 
automobile test work or V/STOL development. These arrangements provide greater 
flexibility in uses of a tunnel provided the staff are sufficiently knowledgeable about 
the variety of wall effects that must be understood. 
Closed throat tunnels that are vented to the atmosphere not at the test section 
but at another location will have the test section below atmospheric pressure. Thus 
they can suffer from leaks either through holes cut in walls for probes, wires, pipes, 
and so on, or through the struts required to mount the model. These tunnels usually 
have a sealed room or plenum around the test section. When running, the plenum 
will be at the same static pressure as the test section. Most small open circuit tunnels 
are not built this way and suffer from leaks. This makes wood an ideal material for 
such tunnels because it is easy to patch. 
Aeroacoustic testing has become an important area of work in the development 
of a number of vehicles. Although such tests are done in both open and closed test- 
section facilities, an open test section provides the possibility for more complete 
test cell antireflection or anechoic treatment. 
General Layout: Closed Return 
The general layout 
for closed return tunnels has reached a form generally agreed upon 
for reasons of construction economy and tunnel efficiency. A thorough discussion of 


68 
WIND TUNNEL DESIGN 
design issues is given by Bradshaw and Pankhurst? Starting with the test section 
and going downstream the common configuration includes the following elements: 
(a) The test section, which may be closed, open, partially open or convertible. 
The test-section-length-ta-hydraulic-diameterg 
ratio may typically be chosen 
to be 2 or more, in contrast to the shorter test sections of earlier era tunnels. 
(b) A difiser of at least three or four test-section lengths. The typical equivalent 
cone angle is in the range of 2-33" with the smaller angles being more 
desirable. The area ratio is typically 2-3, again with the smaller values being 
more desirable. 
(c) "First comer" inco?porating fuming vanes. 
(d) Second leg that may continue the diffuser or may be constant area. 
(e) Safety screen to prevent parts of failed models or other unintended flying 
objectsfrom reaching the fan. This screen is usually just ahead of the second- 
comer turning vanes. 
(f) "Second comer" incorporating tuming vanes that may be essentially copies 
of the first comer vanes solely to gain a small engineering and construction 
cost reduction. 
(g) Transitionhm rectangular to circular cmss section to takeflow into the fan. 
(h) Fan and straightener section. Other drive devices such as ejectors have also 
been used. 
(i) Return or second diffuse]: 
This will commonly incorporate a transition back 
to rectangular from the circular cross section at the fan. The transition will 
likely have begun in the straightener section. The second diffuser should 
follow similar design guides as the first diffuser. 
( j )  "Third corner" incorporating tuming vanes. 
(k) Third leg that may be constant area. 
(1) Heat exhangel: 
(m) "Fourth comer" incorporating turning vanes that may be copies of the 
third-corner vanes. 
(n) Wide-angle diffuser with separation control screens. Typical properties are 
angles of about 45" and area ratios of 24. 
(0) Settling area. 
(p) Flow conditioners typically including jlow straighteners and turbulence 
control screens. 
(q) Contraction or node. Typical area ratins are in the range of 7-12, although 
lower and higher values are not uncommon. 
The plane of the return passage is almost always horizontal to save cost and 
make the return passage easier to access. A vertical return is justified only when 
space is at a premium and has only been used for small-sized tunnels. 


3.2 BASIC DECISIONS 
69 
FIGURE 3.1 Layout of a closed single-return wind tunnel. 
A representative layout of a closed return tunnel with notation for our analyses 
is given as Figure 3.1. 
Ewald and co-authorslo have presented a concept for obtaining economies in 
wind tunnel construction by producing a series of various sizes for which there are 
many common components. The first- and second-comer assemblies for one size 
would be the same as the third- and fourth-comer assemblies for the next larger 
size tunnel. The fan diffuser for one size would be the test-section diffuser for the 
next larger size. The engineering and construction drawings would be the same for 
all sizes except for the specified scale for each instance. 
There are many very innovative configurations to accommodate particular 
needs that are quite different from the typical 
circuit described above. Planners of new 
facilities should consult more specialized literature for descriptions and discussions. 
General Layout: Open Circuit 
A typical layout of an open circuit tunnel is given in Figure 3.2, again w
i
t
h
 notation 
for reference in the analyses. 
This type of tunnel is widely used for instructional purposes and for investigations 
of fundamental flow phenomena. 
General Layout: Blower Tunnel 
Another type of open circuit flow facility is the "blower tunnel" 
or "free-jet" 
facility. 
These are also widely used for instructional purposes and for calibration of flow 
FIGURE 3.2 Elevation cross section of a typical small open circuit wind tunnel. 


70 
WIND TUNNEL DESIGN 
Centrifugal 
Blower 
FIGURE 3.3 Typical layout of a blower driven free jet. 
devices. A characteristic design problem for these facilities is choice of details of 
a wide-angle diffuser between the fan or blower and the settling area prior to the 
contraction. Mehta" gives a very useful discussion of the design of this class of 
flow facility. A typical facility layout is shown in Figure 3
.
3
.
 The design guides for 
the wide-angle diffuser of a facility of this type are also applicable to a wide-angle 
diffuser to be a part of a closed return wind tunnel. 
3.3 POWER CONSIDERATIONS 
A measure of merit with regard to energy consumption and a framework for consider- 
ation of the energy consumption of various elements of a wind tunnel are developed 
in this section. All of the analyses given here are "one dimensional" 
in nature. The 
conditions at any cross section of a wind tunnel circuit are considered to be repre- 
sented by the area-weighted average value of the flow parameters over the section. 
Consider the static pressure p at location c in a wind tunnel circuit that has cross- 
sectional area A,. The static pressure 
p, at c is characterized by the weighted average 
given by the equation 
Some ambiguity and inaccuracy is introduced by the assumption of one dimen- 
sionality, but the results are quite valuable in gaining an understanding of the 
behavior of flow in a wind tunnel circuit. It is likely that most existing wind tunnels 
have been configured using this assumption for the design calculations. 
Jet Power 
It is instructive to consider the power in a flowing jet to get an idea of the magnitudes 
involved. The power in a flowing jet, for example the flow in a wind tunnel test 


3.3 POWER CONSIDERATIONS 
71 
Air Sped, mph 
FIGURE 3.4 Jet power per unit area as a function of air speed for standard sea level density. 
section, can be expressed in terms of density, test-section area, and test-section flow 
velocity as given in the equation 
Figure 3.4 shows a plot of jet power per unit area for standard sea level air 
density as a function of jet speed. 
Table 3.1 gives some specific values. The jet power for a tunnel with a test 
section of 100 ft2 
running at 200 mph is 5456 hp. Values are taken from the graph. 
The values of jet power are proportional to density so jet power at a given speed 
TABLE 3.1. Jet Power per Unit Area at Selected Speeds 
V ( m ~ h )  
v 
( d s )  
Mach Number 
hp/ft2 
kW/mz 


would vary accordingly if the density in the jet is different from the standard sea 
level value of 0.002378 slug/fP. 
The data shown in Figure 3.4 and Table 3.1 are a good indication of the upper 
limits on flow speed obtainable from a known power source in a blower tunnel 
where all of the energy in the open jet is simply-dissipated in the surrounding air. 
This is also characteristic of simple heating and ventilating fans or blowers such as 
leaf blowers. Both closed return and open circuit configurations with diffusers can 
sustain test-section or jet flows with power greater than that of the power source, 
as will be developed in the following. 
Energy Ratio 
The ratio of the power in the test-section flow to the rate of "flow losses" around 
the circuit is a measure of the energy efficiency of a wind tunnel, although it is by 
no means a measure of the value of the tunnel for research and development. Other 
denominators in the definition of energy ratio are sometimes used. For example, 
the denominator might be chosen as the electrical power input to the motor or the 
mechanical power applied to the shaft of the fan. The definition chosen here provides 
a focus on the aerodynamic aspects of the energy budget and serves to separate 
clearly the circuit flow properties from the efficiency of the driving fan and the 
electrical or other driving equipment. 
If we denote the rate of "flow losses" 
in the circuit by PC, 
then the "energy ratio" 
can be expressed by 
The energy ratio for closed return wind tunnels and open circuit tunnels other 
than free-jet facilities is nearly always greater than unity. It is typically in the range 
3-
7 for closed throat tunnels. The energy ratio for a free-jet facility is always less 
than 1, which is an important reason there are no large-size facilities using the free- 
jet configuration. We now turn to methods for estimating the energy balance in 
various parts of a wind tunnel so that the energy ratio for various wind tunnel 
configurations can be estimated. 
Wind Tunnel Component Energy Losses 
Wattendo~f'~ 
considered the losses in a return-type wind tunnel by splitting the 
tunnel into component parts and analyzing the losses in each component in succes- 
sion. Typical components are considered as (1) cylindrical sections, (2) corners, (3) 
expanding sections or diffusers, (4) contracting sections, (5) annular sections, (6) 
straightener section, and (7) fan. The fan is exceptional since energy is supplied to 
the airstream at that location. Wallisi3 provides a similar but much more extensive 
discussion. Eckert, Mort, and Jope" use the same approach and give an early 


3.3 POWER CONSIDERATIONS 
73 
FORTRAN computer code along with results for several existing wind tunnels. 
These breakdowns can be compared to the typical layout given earlier for the closed 
return wind tunnel configuration. 
In each of the sections except for the propeller or fan, it is commonly said that 
a loss of energy occurs. Actually there is an energy transformation from mechanical 
form to heat that results in raising the temperature of the flowing gas and the solid 
materials with which it is in contact. The energy transformation comes about due 
to the viscous action between the flowing gas and the solid boundaries. 
We will refer to this transformation from mechanical energy to heat as a "loss" 
in the following discussion. Although the treatment later includes compressibility, 
the discussion given here is for incompressible flow. 
If Bernoulli's equation, p,,,. + ipv2 
= 
= const, were written between two
locations in a duct, it would apply only if there were no losses between the sections. 
Naturally, in practice, there are always losses, and one or the other of the two terms 
at the second section must show a diminution corresponding to the loss in head. 
The law of continuity for an incompressible fluid, AIV, 
= A,V,, where A and V are 
areas and velocities 
at the two stations, constrains the velocity, and hence the velocity 
head or dynamic pressure at the second location cannot decrease. But there will be 
equal drops in static head and in total head corresponding to the friction loss. 
Throughout the wind tunnel the losses that occur appear as successive pressure 
drops to be balanced by the pressure rise through the fan. The total pressure drop 
AH will be the pressure rise required of the fan. 
The loss in a section is defined as the mean loss of total pressure sustained by 
the stream in passing through the particular section. The loss in a section is given 
in dimensionless form by the ratio of the pressure loss in the section to the dynamic 
pressure at the entrance to the section. For a typical "local" section this is given by 
This definition of loss coefficient is both important and convenient. It is con- 
venient because the total pressure loss and the dynamic pressure 
are easily measurable 
quantities. We now consider further its importance. The time rate of energy loss in 
a section can be expressed as the product of the total pressure loss times the volume 
rate of flow through the section, AEl = AIVl AHl, which with AHl from Equation 
(3.4) gives AEl = Al&Klqi, 
and finally 
Equation (3.5) shows that the loss coefficient defined by Equation (3.4) on the 
basis of total pressure loss and dynamic pressure also is the ratio of the rate of 
energy loss to the rate of flow of kinetic energy into the section. 
Following Wattendorf these local losses are referred to the test-section dynamic 


74 
WIND TUNNEL DESIGN 
pressure, defining the coefficient of loss of the local section referred to the test- 
section dynamic pressure as 
Using the definition of P, 
as given by Equation (3.3) with Equations (3.5) and (3.6) 
provides a test-section referenced result: 
The total rate of loss in the circuit is obtained by summing the rate of section 
losses for each of the individual sections: 
The energy ratio as defined by Equation (3.3) can be expressed in terms of theloss 
coefficients of the various sections as 
As noted previously, this definition of energy ratio excludes the energy losses 
associated with the fan and the motor. The total rate of loss in the circuit as 
represented by Equation (3.8) is the net power that the tunnel drive device must 
deliver to the airstream to maintain steady conditions. 
Losses in a Constant-Area Section 
Here we discuss an approximation for the loss in a constant-area section. It is usually 
the case that even the test section has a small variation in cross-sectional area 
with streamwise coordinate. But the relations for constant-area sections with fully 
developed flow are the basis for a number of loss estimates so that treatment is 
given here rather than in connection with a particular section analysis. 
In the literature on hydraulics, there is a long history of expressing the flow 
losses in constant-area pipes in the form 
where A
p
 is the pressure drop over the length L of pipe of hydraulic diameter Dh, 
- 
U 
is the mean speed of flow, and f is the "friction factor" 
or "friction coefficient". 
The parameter p is the density of the fluid as usual. The hydraulic diameter is 


3.3 POWER CONSIDERATIONS 
75 
related to area by Dh 
= 
2
m
.
 
Comparing Equation (3.10) to Equation (3.4) shows 
that the local section loss coefficient is related to the friction factor by 
A relation to the wall shear stress can be given for constant-area sections. In a 
constant-area section the pressure drop is entirely balanced by the skin friction T
,
 
on the walls. In this case L,;i,C, = A,, X Apcp,, 
where L
,
 
is the length, C, is the 
circumference, and the overbar indicates an average of the wall shear stress. We 
obtain Equation (3.12) for a circular pipe with fully developed flow so that the wall 
shear stress is constant: 
The loss 
in a 
sectionis 
clearly 
dependent oncross-sectional 
shape 
since 
shapes 
other 
than circular 
will have 
circumferentially 
varying wall shear stress. 
The 
circumferential 
variation will be dependent on the geometric 
shape. That dependence will not be con- 
sidered here as the range of cross sections that are suitable for wind tunnels is rather 
limited. Some discussion of cross sections is given by Shames.I5Here 
the cross section 
will be considered to the characterized by the hydraulic diameter, which is defined 
above. For smooth pipes at high Reynolds number Shames15 
gives the Prandtl univer- 
sal l
a
w
 offriction relating the Reynolds number and the friction factor: 
where 
where V,, is the mean speed in the section. The friction factor f decreases with Re. 
Here, f ranges from 0.013 at R, = 500,000 to 0.010 at R, = 2,500,000 to 0.007 at 
R, = 30,000,000. 
A convenient form of Equation (3.13) for an iterative solution algorithm is 
given by 
A starting value as far away as f = 1 will lead to convergence to four significant 
figures or better within four to six iterations. 
Friction Factor and Skin Friction Coefficient 
The skin friction coefficient for a flat plate in a uniform stream is defined by the 
relation T
,
 = iPV?+ The analogous expression for flow in a circular pipe would 


76 
WIND TUNNEL DESIGN 
be 7
,
 = f p ~ k c f .  
comparing this last expression to Equation (3.12) shows that 
u
z
 
= 
1-
2
 
m a x f  
4UfrOr 
These relations provide a framework within which to apply available theory and 
experimental data in an approximate way. There is no part of a wind tunnel circuit 
where the flow is actually close to fully developed pipe flow. 
Dynamic Pressure Ratios and Reynolds Numbers 
The task of finding the power required to drive a wind tunnel with a given PI is 
now broken down into the subtasks of evaluating the K
,
,
'
s
 for all subsections of the 
wind tunnel. In turn from Equation (3.6) it is seen that this task for each section 
can be subdivided into the evaluation of a loss coefficient based on local entry 
conditions and the ratio of local dynamic pressure to test-section dynamic pressure, 
q,/q,, 
which in turn can be rewritten as 
The factor represented by Equation (3.16) is evaluated using either an assumption 
of incompressible 
flow or an assumption of one-dimensional isentropic compressible 
flow. If the flow is assumed to be incompressible, then the condition of constant 
mass flow rate at each section yields 
The application of mass conservation including consideration of compressibility 
yields Equation (3.18), in which M 
is the Mach number at the location indicated 
by the subscript. In this equation, the areas and the test-section Mach number would 
be given but the local Mach number would not be known and must be determined: 
The local Mach number is a function of the test-section Mach number and the 
ratio of the local area to the test-section area. The equation is transcendental, which 
prevents the functional relation from being explicitly written down. The area-Mach 
number relation is often given in terms of the area A* for choked flow and is shown 
here as Equation (3.19) (see Anderson16 
for development of these relations): 


3.4 SECTION LOSS COEFFICIENTS 
77 
If the ratio of Equation (3.19) applied to the test section is taken to the same 
equation applied to a local section, Equation (3.20) 
is obtained: 
h+lN-l) 
1 + [(y - 
1)/2]M: 
1 + [(y - 
1)/2]Mf 
In the case of air as the working fluid for which the ratio of specific heats is 
1.4, Equation (3.21) 
is obtained: 
This can be put in the form of Equation (3.22), which is convenient for an 
iterative algorithm to obtain the local Mach number when test-section Mach number, 
test-section area, and local area are given. A starting value of M, 
= 0 can be used 
for subsonic wind tunnels: 
After obtaining the local Mach number, Equation (3.18) can then be used to 
obtain the ratio of local dynamic pressure to test-section dynamic pressure. 
In the following discussion of losses in the various sections, the Reynolds number 
will be a needed parameter for each section. The test-section Reynolds number 
would usually be assumed given, which is Re, 
= (p,V,D,)/~,, 
where the test-section 
reference length is taken as the test-section hydraulic diameter. The local Reynolds 
number is related to the test-section Reynolds number by 
1 Gk- 
1 + [ ( y  
- 
1)/2]M: 
Re, 
= Re, - 
- 
R ,  
- 
- 
(3.23) 
0
1
 
~tvt 
CLI 
1 + [(y - 
1)/2]M: 
3.4 SECTION LOSS COEFFICIENTS 
The losses in various sections and components will not be considered. The treatment 
will be based on a typical closed return wind tunnel. Discussions of considerations 
in the design of typical wind tunnel sections will be given followed in each instance 
by the development of the loss analyses. We begin with the test section and proceed 
in the flow direction around the circuit. Three example wind tunnel designs are 


78 
WIND TUNNEL DESIGN 
considered at the end of the chapter. Figure 3.1 and the related description provides 
nomenclature for the various sections. 
Test Section (a)" 
Over the years many shapes have been used for test sections, including round, 
elliptical, 
square, rectangular, 
hexagonal, octagonal, rectangular 
with 
filleted comers, 
flat ceiling, and floor with half round ends. The cost and power are directly deter- 
mined by the cross-sectional area and the length. The difference in losses in the 
test section due to the cross-sectional shape are negligible. Therefore, the shape of 
the test section should be based on the utility and considerations 
of the aerodynamics 
of the models to be tested. 
For ease in installing models, changing models, instaIling ground planes, calibrat- 
ing external balances, installing 
splitter 
plates for half models, or other modifications 
for nonstandard tests, no alternative can match a test section with flat walls. The 
flat ceiling and floor simplify the installation of yaw turn tables for a three-strut 
mounting system and its image. A flat floor is a major advantage if surface vehicles 
are to be tested. The walls, ceiling, and floor allow easy installation of windows to 
view and photograph the model when flow visualization is used. Some early wind 
tunnels had circular or elliptic shaped test sections due to availability of functional 
mathematical expressions for certain types of wall corrections for wings. This was 
of considerable importance when calculations were done by slide rule and by hand, 
but the currently available and growing computational power makes such considera- 
tions of little consequence today. 
As the air proceeds along the test section, the boundary layer thickens. This 
action reduces the effective area of the jet from that of the geometric dimensions 
and causes an increase in the flow speed outside the wall boundary layers. If the 
geometric area is constant, the speed increase in turn produces a drop in local static 
pressure, tending to draw the model downstream. This added drag is commonly 
called "horizontal b~oyancy"'~ 
as its action is analogous to the buoyancy due to the 
vertical pressure gradient in the atmosphere and the ocean. If the cross-sectional 
area of the jet is increased enough to allow for the thickening boundary layer, a 
constant value of the static pressure may be maintained throughout the test section. 
No exact design method is available that ensures the development of a constant 
static pressure. For a first approximation the walls of a closed jet should diverge 
about 
each; finer adjustments may be necessary after the tunnel is built and the 
longitudinal static pressure is measured. Some tunnels whose test sections have 
comer fillets have these fillets altered until a constant static pressure is obtained. 
The advantages of such a flow are enough to justify a moderate amount of work 
in obtaining it. 
To minimize secondary flow problems in the comers of rectangular contractions, 
a 45' fillet is often installed at the start of the contraction to form an octagonal 
shape. These fillets are, in many tunnels, carried through the test section to prevent 
boundary layer growth in the comers of the test section and down the diffuser 
tapering out at the end of the diffuser. 


3.4 SECTION LOSS COEFFICIENTS 
79 
The length of the test section in tunnels designed with aeronautical work as the 
primary focus varies from one to two times the major dimension of the section. 
The power losses in the test section are sizable, as will be seen shortly owing to 
the high speed; thus power can be saved by keeping it short. However, contractions 
do not deliver a uniform velocity distribution to the beginning of the test section. 
Therefore, a constant-area duct before the test section is usually employed. The 
lengths of test sections of wind tunnels that are expected to be used to test articles 
with large volumes of separated flow need to be sufficiently long so that all separated 
flow zones will close before the beginning of the diffuser. 
A practical detail in the test-section design is the installation 
of sufficient windows 
for viewing the model. In the course of testing it will become necessary to see all 
parts of the model: top, sides, bottom, and as much of the front as is reasonably 
practical. For safety reasons, windows in the test section should be made of shatter 
resistant material. For many years the material of choice was plate safety glass. 
There are now plastics that can be used with lasers about as well as any glass short 
of optical flats. If propellers and rotors are to be tested, the manufacturers of the 
window material chosen should be consulted to determine the energy absorption 
capability and large safety factors should be applied. What used to be called bullet- 
proof glass (which never was bulletproof) is no longer sold under that name owing 
to product liability laws. It is a peculiar and interesting fact that despite the hazards 
of testing, more windows have been broken or otherwise damaged by overheating 
with photographer's lights than by model failure. 
Adequate lighting is needed both to work on the model and for photographic 
purposes. It is very useful in tunnels with fillets in the test section to have lights 
built into them. Current developments in measurement methods such as pressure- 
sensitive paint and shear-sensitive liquid crystals will make the optical access of 
test sections even more critical than has been the case in the past. 
Solid-Wall Jets As mentioned above, test sections will normally have a slight 
divergence in an effort to obtain a constant static pressure. The analysis given 
here, however, is based on the relations for a constant-area duct given earlier. The 
subsequent section on the diffuser gives a treatment that can be adopted for the test 
section as well. Equations (3.11) and (3.14) are used to evaluate the test-section 
loss coefficient for a specified Reynolds number. 
It is seen from the range of values given for f along with Equation (3.11) that 
the power loss in the test section of a closed-wall tunnel is of the order of 1% to 
several percent of the jet power with the test-section length that is chosen having 
an important part since the loss will be directly proportional to the length. Test 
sections for wind tunnels over many decades have tended to grow longer. Many 
tunnels built prior to 1960 have relatively short test sections of the order of 1-
1.5 
times the hydraulic diameter. The major test articles were expected to be high- 
aspect-ratio airplanes. In more recent times, tunnels tend to have somewhat longer 
test sections to accommodate many other test articles. 


80 
WIND TUNNEL DESIGN 
FIGURE 3.5 Diffuser geometry and notation. 
Open Jets For open cylindrical sections such as an open jet, a reasonable value 
for friction factor is f = 0.08. This is nearly an order of magnitude larger than the 
friction factor for a solid wall. This is a rather large penalty and will influence 
decisions for tunnels in which power consumption will be a significant factor in 
operating costs. 
Diffusers (b), (d), and (i) 
The diffuser" 
of a return wind tunnel typically extends from the downstream end 
of the test section to the third comer of the tunnel. It is divided into two parts by 
the tunnel fan. The second diffuser and fan section is often called the return duct 
or passage. The first diffuser usually extends to the first comer. Since the power 
losses at any point in the tunnel are expected to vary as the speed cubed, the purpose 
of the diffuser is to reduce the speed with as little energy loss as possible. Minimum 
energy loss corresponds to maximum pressure recovery. It is generally desirable to 
reduce the speed in the shortest possible distance without incurring flow separation. 
This will obtain good efficiency and will help to reduce construction costs by 
reducing the overall size of the tunnel shell. Obtaining good performance from the 
diffuser is critical to the success of the tunnel. Diffusers are sensitive to design 
errors that may cause either 
intermittent separation or steady separation. Such separa- 
tions can be hard to localize but can cause vibrations, oscillating fan loading, 
oscillations in test-section velocities (often called surging), and increased losses in 
the tunnel downstream of their origin. 
The primary parameters for a diffuser are the equivalent conical expansion angle 
and the area ratio. Consider a conical diffuser with a radius R, at the entrance, radius 
R, 
at the exit, and length L as indicated in Figure 3
.
5
.
 Most wind tunnel diffusers 
are not conical. 
Commonly used cross sections are rectangular or nearly rectangular with reasons 
closely paralleling the reasons given for choosing test sections with plane walls. 
The equivalent conical angle is defined as follows. Let R1 be one-half the entrance 
hydraulic diameter Dl. Let R, be one-half the exit hydraulic diameter D2 
and AR 
be 
A21AI. 
Then the equivalent conical expansion angle is given by 


3.4 SECTION LOSS COEFFICIENTS 
81 
Some discussions of diffuser angles use twice the equivalent angle defined here 
so care should be taken when reviewing data on diffuser performance. 
Diffusers are common elements in fluid flow devices, and in many applications 
the equivalent cone angle can be quite large. The principal constraint on the angle 
is that it be sufficiently small so that the turbulent boundary layer does not separate. 
Relatively large angles are possible for the case of uniform flow entering the up- 
stream end of the diffuser. The flow leaving a wind tunnel test section, however, 
is anything but uniform. There can be wakes from model mounting struts and ground 
plane support struts; deflected wakes from the model, both laterally and vertically; 
large separated wakes when a model is stalled in pitch and yaw; or simply a large 
wake from bluff body models such as automobiles or parachutes. Also, the influence 
of the corner vanes in the first comer may have adverse effects. Current practice 
calls for an equivalent cone angle of 3
.
0
"
 
or less in conjunction with typical area 
ratios of around 3. The pressure recovery and pressure gradients and therefore the 
risk of separation are dependent on both the cone angle and the area ratio.19 
Thick 
boundary layers at the diffuser entrance will increase the risk of separation. If a 
very long 2.5" diffuser is used to obtain a large contraction ratio, there is danger of 
separation. Therefore, the total (both halves of the diffuser) tends to be limited to 
area ratios of 5 : 
1 or 6 : 
1, half of the area ratio in each half of the diffuser. This 
area ratio limits the tunnel contraction ratio. To achieve larger contraction ratios, a 
wide-angle diffuser is used before the settling chamber. These are typically diffusers 
with an area ratio in the range of 2-4 and an equivalent 22.5" cone angle. Screens 
may be used to smooth out the velocity variations and maintain satisfactory flow. 
More will be said about large angle diffusers in a subsequent subsection. In the 
present section, relations will be given for typical conditions for the first and 
second diffusers. 
The retum passage will need access doors and windows, usually near the fan. 
The doors and windows should be sealed and of adequate size to allow for instal- 
lation and removal of the fan blades and the drive motor if it is placed in the 
fan nacelle. Built-in lights near the fan are most useful. Provisions for pressure 
rakes about a half-tunnel diameter ahead of the fan are very useful. The rake will 
be used to adjust the first- and second-comer vanes to obtain a uniform velocity 
front at the fan. Drains at the lowest point in the tunnel are also needed since 
the tunnel will have to be either washed or steam cleaned at intervals during its 
lifetime. 
Diflzcser Loss Coeflcients 
In the divergent or diffuser sections, both wall friction 
and expansion losses occur. The fluid mechanics of diffusers is quite complex since 
the flow can depend on the details of the incoming flow profiles, which in turn will 
vary with the specific test model setups in a wind tunnel. For preliminary design 
purposes several assumptions are commonly made. The first is that the loss coefti- 


82 
WIND TUNNEL DESIGN 
cient can be decomposed as a sum of a friction loss coefficient and an expansion 
loss coefficient, as indicated by 
Assuming the skin friction coefficient and density are constant along with the 
"one-dimensional" 
treatment yields a relation between the friction loss coefficient, 
conical angle, and diffuser area ratio. The result is given by Equation (3.26). 
The 
friction factor is evaluated as in the case of the constant-area section using the entry 
Reynolds number: 
The 
expansion loss is more difficult 
and is obtained presently only by experimental 
correlation. The expansion loss coefficient 
is represented as a product of two factors. 
One factor is a function of the equivalent conical angle and the other is a function 
of diffuser area ratio. The result is 
The factor K,(O) 
depends significantly on the diffuser cross-sectional shape. The 
forms, based on experimental data and taken from Eckert et al.,I4 for circular and 
square cross sections are given here as Equations (3.28) 
and (3.29), 
respectively: 
0.1033 - 
0.023890 for 0 < 
0 < 
1.5" 
0.1709 - 
0.11700 + 0.0326002 
+ 0.00107803 
Keic+tw 
= -0.000907604 - 
0.M)M)133105 
+ 0.0000134506 
for 1.5" 5 
0 5 
5" 
-0.09661 + 0.046728 for 5" < 
8 
0.09623 - 
0.0041520 for 0 < 
0 < 
1.5" 
0.1222 - 
0.045900 + 0.0220302 
+ 0.00326903 
-0.000614504 - 
0.00M)280005 
+ 0.0000233706 
for 1.5" 1 
0 
5" 
-0.01322 + 0.058660 for 5" < 
0 
Equations (3.25)-(3.29) may be used to estimate the local loss coefficient for 
circular and square cross-sectional diffusers. 
Smaller expansions yield smaller losses up to the point where the skin friction 
of the added area becomes excessive. For reasonable values of h the most efficient 


3.4 SECTION LOSS COEFF'iCIENTS 
83 
divergence is about 5". However, as discussed elsewhere, space limitations for the 
tunnel as well as the cost of construction may dictate that a slightly larger divergence 
be employed at an increase in cost of operation. 
It is found that the losses in a divergent section are two to three times greater 
than the corresponding losses in a cylindrical tube, although the progressively 
decreasing velocity would seem to indicate losses between that of a cylindrical 
section with the diameter of the smaller section and that of one with the diameter 
of the larger section. The reason for the added loss is that the energy exchange near 
the walls is of such a nature that the thrust expected from the walls is not fully 
realized. Effectively, a pressure force is thereby added to the skin friction forces. 
The adverse pressure gradient in a diffuser will lead to separation if it is made 
too large. Since the return passage downstream of the fan will usually have a more 
uniform flow than the first diffuser just downstream of the test section, the expansion 
angle is sometimes larger. An additional argument for this type of design is that the 
disturbance caused by a model in the test section may limit satisfactory diffuser 
angles below smooth flow values. This is certainly the case for models that are 
bluff rather than streamlined. 
Corners (4, (0, 
C
i
)
,
 and (m) 
To avoid large losses and to maintain relatively straight flow throughout the circuit, 
the comers are equipped with turning vanes. Comers are usually, but not always, of 
constant area. The shape of turning vanes varies from bent plates to highly cambered 
airfoils. Provisions should be made to adjust 
the vanes either by pivoting the vanes or 
by trailing-edge tabs. If tabs are used, there should be some method of locking them 
to prevent their movement after the flow is acceptable. 
In the initial 
startup of a tunnel 
the vanes should be adjusted to ensure that the air is neither over- nor underturned. 
The first two corners are the most critical in terms of losses (owing to higher dynamic 
pressure) and the need for a uniform velocity entering the fan. 
The losses in the comer vanes can be made small by selecting an efficient cross- 
sectional shape and by using an appropriate 
chord-to-gap ratio. Vanes using cambered 
airfoils and relatively blunt leading edges will be less sensitive to approaching air 
flow angularities than sharp leading-edge vanes. 
The vane camber lines can be designed by cascade theory with good results. The 
geometry of a comer is indicated by Figure 3.6, which shows the flow between two. 
typical vanes. It is usually assumed that this flow can be adequately approximated 
as two dimensional. The exit velocity angle is exaggerated in the figure. The desired 
angle is usually $ = $, 
that is, 9 = 0. The mass flow per passage per unit depth 
is pUihi. 
The local comer loss coefficient is denoted by 
where q, = i p ~ ? ,  
AH, = pi + q, - 
(po + go), and qo = ipu; 
with all quantities 
being evaluated far enough away from the vanes so that the dividing streamlines 


84 
WIND TUNNEL DESIGN 
7
t
 
Turn angle, 
= - 
+ 
2 
Uo 
FIGURE 3
.
6
 
Geometry of cascade flow with area change from entrance to exit. 
are straight and the flow is uniform. Measurements must actually be made much 
too close for these conditions to pertain, and therefore the quantities must be taken 
as area averages. 
A comer without vanes may show a loss of 100% of the velocity head or more, 
that is, Kc 2 
1.00. With carefully designed vanes a Kc of 0.10 or less is achievable. 
For a right-angle turn the component perpendicular to the incoming velocity of 
the rate of change of momentum through a constant-area comer is phiUiUi. 
This 
may be equated to the vane lift coefficient 4 p c ~ f ~ L ,  
where h is the vane gap and c 
is the vane chord, to determine that the vane lift coefficient is 2hilc. Accordingly, 
to employ a reasonable C,, the gap-to-chord ratio should be 1 
: 
3 or smaller. The 
drag coefficient is equal to the lift coefficient for the constant-area and 90" turn. 
For the more general case of an expanding comer and general turn angle the 
expressions for "lift" and "drag" based on momentum relations are the following: 
cos 0 
L = puiltiu0 
cos e = - 
e 
D 
= pUihi(Ui 
+ Uo 
sin 8) = pUZh, 1 + - 
( 
s
i
:
 
Several vane profiles are 
shown in Figure 3.7, and each is labeled with the loss 
experienced under test conditions by various early experimenters2g23 
at Reynolds 
numbers of about 40,000. Since these data are limited and are for relatively low 


3.4 SECTION LOSS COEFFICIENTS 
85 
FIGURE 3.7 
Turning vane profiles. 
Reynolds number, the data should be verified for large chord vanes, but it is felt 
that an increase is justified for the usual installations. SalteP gives results of tests 
at R, = 
500,000 for 90" circular-arc vanes with a gap-chord ratio of 1 : 
4, 
a leading- 
edge angle of 4'-5", and a trailing-edge angle of 0" that show a loss coefficient of 
0.06. This was certainly a good value. Winterszs obtained additional data for the 
type of comer vane illustrated in Figure 3.7b indicating that it probably has a 
lower loss coefficient than the value given from the earlier data. WallsI3 
provides 
a discussion of comer treatment with some additional data correlation. Sahlin and 
JohanssonZ6 
provide a design of turning vanes for constant-area comers that are very 
efficient with loss coefficient as low as 0.036 at chord Reynolds number of 154,000. 
Lindgren, Osterlund, and Johansson2' extended that design to expanding comers 
and obtained a loss coefficient of 0.054 at a chord Reynolds number of 200,000 
and an expansion ratio e = 4. Their results for e = and Reynolds number of 
200,000 give a loss coefficient as low as 0.08 and for e = as low as 0.14. These 
results point to new design possibilities for more compact circuits andor simpler 
geometries for the diffuser walls with possible improvements in circuit efficiencies. 
We do not explore such possibilities in this book. 
Estimating Corner Loss Coefficients Early experiments at GottingenI2 
produced 
local loss coefficients of the order of 0.15 at a Reynolds number of about 500,000. 
It was concluded there that skin friction on the vanes accounted for about one-third 
of the loss and that the remaining two-thirds is probably due to the creation of 
longitudinal vortices or eddies arising when three-dimensional flow is diverted 
around a comer. Wattendorflz 
made the assumption that the local comer loss coeffi- 
cient could be decomposed into two parts: Kf 
due to skin friction and K, due to 
flow rotation. The part due to skin friction was assumed to vary with the Reynolds 
number in a manner similar to skin friction on a flat plate. Based on these arguments 
and results, Equation (3.35) 
was used as a reasonable 
estimate of local loss coefficient 
for comers of the type shown in Figure 3.7. The Reynolds number to be used is 
the local comer value based on the vane chord: 
Equation (3.35) is clearly a conservative estimate with regard to what is obtainable 
using the recent work on comer designs cited above. 


86 
WIND TUNNEL DESIGN 
Screens (e) and (n) 
The safety screen is chosen to provide the necessary protection for the fan. It 
represents a significant loss element due to the fact that it is located in a relatively 
high speed part of the circuit. The other screens serve othei purposes, including 
separation control for screens in&e wide-angle diffuser and turbulence control for 
the flow conditioning screens at the nozzle entrance. Only the energy loss aspects 
of a screen will be discussed in this section. 
Eckert et aI.l4 
give a relation for screen loss coefficient based on data given by 
1del'~hik.~~ 
%o basic parameters are used to characterize a screen. These are the 
"porosity" P
,
 
and the wire Reynolds number R, = pVd,lp,. A third parameter, the 
"mesh factor" Kmcsh 
is used to differentiate among smooth and rough wire (or 
whatever the screen material may be). 
Porosity is a function of wire diameter and weave density. It is also dependent 
on geometric factors, but it is rare for other than a square weave to be used. Let d, 
be the wire diameter and w, 
the width of one square mesh cell. Then the mesh 
density p, = l/Wm 
and the porosity is related to these by 
The complement of screen porosity, screen solidity us 
= 1 - 
P
,
,
 is sometimes 
used in the literature. Porosity would be zero for a solidly packed weave and one 
in the l i t  
of a vanishing screen. mica1 
values for wind tunnel screens are in the 
range of 0.5-0.80. More discussions on details will follow in the later section on 
turbulence control screens. 
The wire Reynolds number is typically very low compared to other Reynolds 
numbers encountered in wind tunnel work. For standard conditions in air, Reynolds 
number per foot at a flow speed of 1 ft/sec is 538 or Reynolds number per millimeter 
at 1 m/s is 69.1. Wire Reynolds numbers for safety screens may be up to a few 
thousand. For the turbulence control screens, values are likely to be only up to a 
few hundred. 
Mesh factors are given by 1del'chikz8 
as 1.0 for new metal wire, 1.3 for average 
circular metal wire, and 2.1 for silk thread. We will assume 1.3 for all example 
work here. 
The expressions to approximate the local loss coefficient for a screen are 
where the referenceI4 
gives, for 0 5 
R, < 
400, 
and, for R, 2 400, 


3.4 SECTION LOSS COEFFICIENTS 
87 
Other expressions are given in the literature for the screen Reynolds number 
sensitivity. Idel'chikZ8 
gives a plot that is only roughly matched by Equation (3.38). 
A much better fit to the given plot is obtained by Equation (3.40). The accuracy of 
predictions of screen loss coefficients is not good except on the basis of data taken 
on screens very nearly of the type to be used and in a very similar environment. 
More will be said in the next section on theoretical treatments of the effect of 
screens on flow passing through: 
Consider an expression for the drag of the wire screen and its implied loss 
coefficient. We might represent the drag as the product of the dynamic pressure of 
the incoming flow, the drag coefficient of the screen, and the area of the solid 
cylinders of wire. If this is done per unit area, we have 
and observing that the drag per unit area may be equated to the total pressure drop 
across the screen, this would give 
For screens used as safety screens, the porosity is quite high (and solidity corres- 
pondingly low), the wire Reynolds number is large, and the drag coefficient is nearly 
the same as an isolated wire cylinder. For more dense screens such as are used for 
turbulence management and similar purposes, the typical Reynolds numbers are 
lower and the interactions among the elements of the screen are much greater. These 
effects are reflected by the functions in Equations (3.37)-(3.39), which could be 
manipulated to obtain expressions for the drag coefficient of Equation (3.41). 
Power Input Section 
The most common device for driving the flow in subsonic wind tunnels is an axial 
flow fan. Axial flow fans, or propellers, will produce swirl in the flow they induce 
unless some combination of prerotation vanes and straightening vanes are provided. 
The fan itself is the source of power input while the vanes absorb some energy in 
the process of carrying out their function. However, in the present treatment, the 
fan and straighteners are considered together as the power input unit. Their combined 
function is to provide a rise in pressure as the flow passes through the section. The 
increase in pressure provided must be equal to the pressure losses throughout all 


88 
WIND TUNNEL 
DESIGN 
Realistic Static Pressure 
Distribution 
Ideal Static Pressure 
Distribution 
Flow Direction 
Test Section 
FIGURE 3.8 Schematic pressure variations around a circuit. 
other sections of the tunnel at any given steady flow operating condition. A notional 
sketch is given as Figure 3.8 on which the variation of static pressure is shown as 
a function of location around a typical wind tunnel circuit. Two distributions are 
shown. The dashed line is the variation that would exist if there were no losses as 
is postulated for "ideal" nonviscous fluids. The solid line is an indication of the 
variation with losses. The scale of changes is exaggerated. The variation is taken 
from the pressure at the end of the test section, where many tunnels have their 
"breathers," which set the pressure there at ambient pressure. Some details of fan 
design will be addressed in a later section. 
Wide-Angle 
Diffusers (m) 
Wide-angle diffusers are used to obtain a higher overall area ratio for a given circuit 
length rather than for pressure 
recovery. 
Of course the pressure loss is to be minimized 
to the extent possible while achieving the other objectives. A diffuser is classed as 
"wide angle" when its cross section increases so quickly with axial distance that 
separation can be avoided only by use of boundary layer control. There are 
several 
means of boundary layer control, including suction, blowing, and insertion of fine 
mesh screens. The latter is the most common since it is usually the most economical. 
Mehta and BradshawZ9 
have given guidelines for wide-angle diffusers in terms of 
four parameters: area ratio AR, 
diffuser angle 20, number of screens n, and total loss 


3.4 SECTION LOSS COEFFICIENTS 
89 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
Total Diffuser Angle, 20 
Total Screen Loss 
FIGURE 3
.
9
 Design boundaries for diffusers with screens. (Based on Figures 3 and 4 from 
Mehta and Brad~haw.~~) 
coefficient K
,
.
,
.
 For a tunnel that will be outfitted with a heat exchanger, it could 
be used as a loss element in the wide-angle diffuser. Figure 3.9 gives boundaries 
for number of screens as a function of diffuser area ratio and divergence angle. The 
total loss coefficient required of the screens is larger as the area ratio increases. The 
boundary is given as Equation (3.42), where K,,, 5 
Z Aplq: 
It is best if the screens are made perpendicular to the walls at their intersections SO 
that the tendency of the screens to turn the flow toward the screen normal will not 
itself tend to induce separation. 


FIGURE 3.10 Four types of honeycomb. 
Honeycombs and lbrbulence Screens (0) 
The objective of obtaining a spatially uniform steady stream of a
i
r
 throughout the 
volume of a wind tunnel test section has been pursued for nearly a century. Over 
that time, as already indicated, a general arrangement of elements has been settled 
upon, but there remain problems in many details and the result is still not viewed 
as truly optimized. One area that continues to resist fully rational quantitative design 
treatment is the management and control of "turbulence" in the flow. To be sure, 
there exist some "design rules," but they have been obtained through observations 
of many arrangements and the corresponding theoretical bases rest on a considerable 
bed of assumptions that may or may not be applicable in a particular wind tunnel 
application. The problem is of such complexity, however, that all rational theoretical 
guidance, even though imprecise, is of very great value. 
The story here will be started from Prandtl's discussion30 
of obtaining stream 
uniformity more than 60 years ago. The approach then, as now, was to use "honey- 
combs" to force the flow to all go in essentially the same direction and screens to 
bring the various parts of the flow closer to a constant speed. 
Honeycombs According to Prandtl,3° "a honeycomb is a guiding device through 
which the individual air filaments are rendered parallel." (p. 11) Figure 3.10 shows 
some streamwise views of typical implementations of honeycomb as mentioned by 
Prandtl and that encompass the majority of honeycomb types in use today. The 
design parameters for honeycombs are the ratio of streamwise length to single-cell 
hydraulic 
diameter and the porosity or solidity defined as for screens. The operating 
state parameter is the Reynolds number with the characteristic length scale typically 
chosen to be the cell hydraulic diameter. Typical length-to-cell-diameter ratios are 
in the range of 6-8 
and porosity is typically in the vicinity of 0.8. Such values lead 
to honeycomb loss coefficients of about 0.5. As will be seen, this means that such 
honeycombs, while effective as flow straighteners, are not so effective as typical 
screens in smoothing nonuniformities in flow speed. 
Honeycomb Loss Coeficients An expression for losses through honeycombs is 
given by Eckert, Mort, and Jope.14 
It is given here as 


where 
(0.375(;YRa1 
for Rd 6 275 
The parameters in these expressions are hydraulic diameter of a honeycomb 
cell, Dh; Reynolds number based on honeycomb material roughness and incom- 
ing flow speed, Reb; 
honeycomb porosity, Ph; and honeycomb thickness in flow 
direction, Lh. 
Some specific data for losses in honeycombs 
are given by Scheiman and Brooks:' 
by Loehrke and Nagib,sz and by Roberts.33 
For honeycombs of the types shown in 
Figure 3.10 with LJDh = 6.0 and equal tube areas, the values of Kh are found to 
be 0.30,0.22, 
and 0.20 for a, b, and c, respectively. Loehrke and Nagibj2 
give data 
specifically for flow straighteners made from packing ordinary drinking straws, 
which have the attraction of low cost and ready availability, although they are not 
suitable for large tunnels due to strength and long-term stability. Their cross section 
corresponds to Figure 3.10~. 
Roughly speaking, the loss in the honeycomb in a 
wind tunnel is usually less than 5% of the total tunnel loss. 
Mehta and BradshawZ9 
indicate that about 150 honeycomb cells per settling 
chamber diameter, or about 25,000 total cells, are adequate. This would lead to 
larger cells than are used in many of the larger tunnels. 
Turbulence Screens There seems no better introduction to screens for flow control 
than that of Prandt130 
(p. 14): 
A standard reference velocity is not obtained with the honeycomb, but can be achieved 
with screens. The flow resistance of a wire screen is approximately proportional to 
the square of the speed. Consequently, the resistance in a flow which locally manifests 
different speeds, is greater at the points of higher speed than at the points of lower 
speed. Together with the fact that the final pressure drop is about the same for all 
stream filaments the result is that the speedier filament expands upon striking the 
screen, the slower one contracts, and so the speeds become comparable upon passing 
through the screen. But this comparableness is always obtained at the expense of 
a great pressure drop in the screen. Putting the pressure drop in the screen at Ap, = 
K, . q,, where34 
K, is a typical screen density factor, a previously existent moderate 
1 
velocity difference is approximately lowered to - 
1 + K.' Disposing n screens, not too 
closely spaced, one behind the other, the pressure drop is nK,q, and the discrepancies 
(, 
1 
5. 
It is readily proved that such an arrangement of 
are reduced in the ratio of - 
n screens with moderate K, 
factors, say with K, = 1, is more promising than one single 


FIGURE 3.11 Flow passing through a screen. 
screen of very close mesh and a resistance figure of K
,
'
 = 
nK,. 
For reasons of energy 
conservation, the screens are as far as possible mounted in a section in which the 
stream manifests lower speed. 
The above account by Prandtl has been elaborated by subsequent efforts, but his 
discussion is still a sound starting point. In the same article Prandtl went on to give 
a basic statement of the effect of contractions on flow nonuniformities. Those 
concepts will be included in a later section. 
Batchel09~ 
gives a theory of the effect of a screen modeled as an actuator sheet 
on the passage of an arbitrary velocity field subject to the assumption that the 
nonuniformities are small compared to the mean flow speed. The action of the 
screen is modeled by two parameters, the resistance coefficient and the deflection 
coefficient. Both parameters are in principle functions of the angle the incoming 
flow makes to the normal line to the screen. The notation is indicated in Figure 
3.11. Although the basic theory assumed that K, and a could be functions of the 
incoming angle 0, these parameters are taken to be constants viewed as the function 
values at 0 = 0. So the first two equations in Figure 3.11 are the assumed action 
rules for the screen at each point for all time. The third equation is a result obtained 
by Schubauer, Spangenberg, and KlebanofP6 
from experimental data. The results 
of Batchelor's theoretical analysis gives 
and 
where the primed quantities are the deviation of the flow components from the 
mean values in their respective regions. The turbulence factors are defined by 


3.4 SECTION LOSS COEFFICIENTS 
93 
where the subscript u denotes the component normal to the screen and the subscript 
I denotes a component parallel to the plane of the screen. Many experiments have 
been conducted to measure the turbulence factors. A basic deficiency of the theory 
cited is that it does not take into account the fact that the screen itself generates 
turbulence. It is not simply a passive operator on the incoming nonuniform flow. 
Nevertheless, the trends predicted by the theory are representative of much of the 
available data. Note that the loss coefficient is an input parameter to this theory. It 
must be obtained by additional theory or by experiment. We have previously given 
one approximation in Equation (3.37). The turbulence reduction factor f is defined 
for experimental purposes as the turbulence with manipulators installed divided by 
the turbulence without manipulators. 
There are a number of papers in the literature that give summaries of work on 
flow through screens and other "turbulence manipulators." In addition to those 
already cited, useful discussions and results are given by Laws and Livesey?' by 
Bradshaw and Pankhurst: by Loehrke and Nagib?' and others. 
Scheiman and Brooks3' conducted a study in which they compared results of 
experiments and the available theories. The study included both screens and honey- 
combs. The porosity of the screens varied between 59 and 67% 
for mesh sizes from 
4 to 42. The honeycombs had cell sizes from & to in. and the length-cell size ratio 
varied between 6 and 8. 
For the screens the values of loss coefficient calculated from theory differed 
from the experimental values by up to 50%. 
The turbulence reduction factors (f) for both axial and lateral turbulence showed 
data scatter but no consistent pattern with velocity (i.e., screen Reynolds number). 
The range of screen Reynolds number based on wire diameter varied from 70 to 
300. As there was no trend off with speed, the average value over the speed range 
was used. 
The upstream turbulence for the screens was close to isentropic. The average 
measured values of f, showed good agreement for axial turbulence with Prandtl's 
equation, which is obtained from Batchelor's result, Equation (3.44, by setting 
a = 0, and in the lateral direction with Dryden and Schubauer's result given 
previously as Equation (3.45). 
When multiple screens are used, the turbulence reduction factors are the product 
of the individual screens. The pressure drop is the sum of the pressure drops of the 
individual screens. For two screens with spacing beyond the minimum either dou- 
bling the spacing or at the initial spacing, rotating one screen 45" had little effect 
on the turbulence reduction factor. Multiple screens must have a finite distance 
between them so that the turbulence induced by the first decays to a significant 
degree before the next screen is encountered. Spacing values based on mesh size 
of greater than 30 have been suggested as well as spacing based on a wire diameter 
of about 500. 


94 
WIND TUNNEL DESIGN 
When a honeycomb was used (data for the $in. cell), the axial reduction was 
the same as the 20-mesh screen. The lateral reduction was equal to three 20-mesh 
screens. The pressure drop for the honeycomb at 50 ftlsec was slightly less than 
the calculated value at 50 ftlsec for the 20-mesh screen. The honeycomb plus one 
20-mesh screen is equal to three 20-mesh screens for axial reduction and is about 
twice as effective in the lateral direction. The honeycomb was installed upstream 
of the screens, as suggested by various previous investigators. 
The flow behind the honeycomb was not isentropic (see Loeherke and Nagib32 
for a discussion of upstream turbulence effects). When the screen turbulence reduc- 
tion factors were based on the turbulence behind the honeycomb, the turbulence 
reduction predicted by Equation (3.44) with the value of a 
from Equation (3.45) 
gave the best match. 
Scheiman and Brooks3' data for pairs of screens with different honeycombs 
illustrate an important problem that occurs when using hot-wire anemometers. 
Some 
of their data was taken with a 2-Hz bypass filter and other data was taken with a 
100-Hz filter. The results of hot-wire anemometers depend strongly on the lower 
frequencies; thus the effect of the frequency cutoff should be determined and the 
cutoff frequency should be stated when the turbulence level is given. The likely 
variation of low-frequency 
cutoff filters chosen may explain some of the inconsisten- 
cies in published turbulence reduction data. 
This low-frequency cutoff problem with hot wires makes it attractive to include 
parallel measurements using the classical turbulence sphere and critical Reynolds 
number as a method of comparing the turbulence of various flows. If spheres with 
different diameters are used, one has a measure of the relative scales of turbulence 
and turbulence intensity with tunnel speed. 
Selection of honeycomb and screens for a wind tunnel is very much dependent 
on the purposes to which the tunnel is intended. It is also somewhat artful since 
some means of making adjustments after the tunnel is in operation is needed but 
very difficult to arrange for a large tunnel. 
Screens used for turbulence reduction should have porosity greater than 0.57. 
Screens with smaller porosity suffer from a flow instability that appears in the 
test section.36 
Most theoretical treatments of turbulence assume that the initial flow has isen- 
tropic turbulence. Most data for turbulence reduction are taken in flows that are 
either isentropic or very close to isentropic. This is done by inserting turbulence 
generators well upstream into a uniform flow (screens, an array of bars, or porous 
plates). After pasHing through this turbulence generator the turbulence approaches 
an isentropic state. In most cases the actual turbulent flow in a wind tunnel is not 
isentropic. In general, the mechanism of turbulence and its manipulation is very 
complex and not completely understood. These facts often lead to the unpleasant 
result that the predicted reduction of turbulence by screens or honeycombs does not 
agree with the measured results. Nonetheless, the theory combined with data can 
be used to compare various turbulence reduction schemes in a preliminary design 
trade-off. The difficulty is primarily related to obtaining an economic result. If a 
designer is not constrained by either construction cost or operating cost, then very 


3.4 SECTION LOSS COEFFICIENTS 
95 
low levels of turbulence 
can readily be achieved by including sufficient straighteners 
and a large enough number of properly chosen screens. Bradshaw and Pankhurst5 
give a very concise and useful set of guidelines. 
Practical Issues An operational problem with screens is their amazing ability to 
accumulate dust. The dust always 
has a nonuniform distribution. Thus the screen's 
porosity and pressure drop will change, which in turn will change the velocity and 
angularity distribution in the test section in an unpredictable way with time. This 
problem will be aggravated when the tunnel is used for flow visualization studies 
using china clay, oil flow, or vaporized oil for smoke or when oil is used for seeding 
lasers. When screens are used, they must be installed so that they can be cleaned, 
and the quality of the test-section flow must be monitored. 
For larger tunnels it is difficult to obtain either screens or honeycombs in widths 
adequate to span the tunnel ahead of the contraction cone. This means that screens 
must be spliced together. The splice is often accomplished by brazing widths of 
screens together, which must be done with extreme care. The individual screen 
mesh must be on top of each other and should not be filled with the brazing material. 
If the splice is semisolid, it will introduce turbulence. A poor splice can be detected 
in the test section as a band of higher turbulence and possibly lower velocity. The 
same problem can occur with cables across the screen's face, with tension cables 
to the fourth comer to carry part of the screen load. Honeycombs are often mounted 
in a shadow-box-type structure and this also can give the same effect. 
Ideally a tunnel should be designed with screens in mind: with slots ahead of 
the contraction cone for mounting screens. Then the screens are mounted on a 
support frame and slid into the tunnel. This also facilitates cleaning the screens. 
The slot must be sealed, of course. 
I
f
 screens are added to an existing tunnel, the screens can be brazed to a support 
ring that has radial screws to pull the screen tight. For multiple screens this type 
of installation can be difficult. Screens also have been attached to cables that are 
then attached to the tunnel walls. It is not unknown for a screen to tear loose from 
a tunnel. 
The radial force per foot of perimeter due to the pressure drop will be Cdqd2/86, 
where 6 is the screen sag in feet, and the wire tensile strength may then be computed 
using the total wire cross-sectional area per foot of perimeter. 
Contraction "Cone" or Nozzle 
The contraction "cone" or nozzle takes the flow from the settling chamber to the 
test section while increasing the average speed by factors up to 20 or more, although 
typical values are in the range of 6-
10. The nozzle is in fact never conical in shape 
in spite of the term sometimes being used to refer to this section of a wind tunnel. 
A sketch indicating a typical arrangement is given in Figure 3.12. A one-dimensional 
analysis of the flow for such a segment actually misses entirely the main problems 
of design of a nozzle. The application of Bernoulli's equation and mass conservation 
in a one-dimensional sense indicates a continuously falling pressure as the flow 


96 
WIND TUNNEL DESIGN 
Settling 
I 
Chamber / 
1 Test section 
FIGURE 
3.12 Contraction section. 
moves from the entrance to the exit of the nozzle. If a pressure coefficient is defined 
as C = ( p  
- 
p,)l(1/2)pV2,, then the "one-dimensional" 
relation for pressure coefi- 
p
.
.
 
cient is 
where A
,
 is the area of the test section and A(x) is the area as a function of the 
streamwise coordinate. The pressure coefficient is near 1 in the settling chamber 
and falls to 0 in the test section. At this level of analysis there would be no indicated 
problem of likely boundq 
layer instability since the pressure gradient would appear 
to be favorable throughout the nozzle. 
However, a potential flow calculation for an axisymrnetric nozzle shows that the 
flow along the wall at both the entrance and the exit to a typical smooth shape is 
slower (and the pressure higher) than the one-dimensional approximation. MoreP8 
reports a study of axisymmetric nozzles in which these problems are discussed. If 
either of the adverse gradients at the beginning or the exit of the nozzle becomes 
severe enough for the boundary layer to separate, there will be degradation of the 
quality of the test-section flow, an increase in the power required, and an increase 
in the acoustic noise. 
An additional problem arises for non-axisyrnmetric 
nozzles. For rectangular 
cross 
sections the surface streamlines intersect the side walls. This leads to secondary 
flow in the comers with attendant lower velocities and possibility of separation. 
This tendency has been alleviated in many tunnels by making the nozzle octagonal. 
This is done by beginning a 45" fillet at the start of the nozzle and carrying the 
fillet through the test section and fist diffuser. 
Until the advent of the digital computer there was no wholly satisfactory method 
of designing nozzles. The nozzle was designed either by eye or by adaptations of 
approximate methods. Experience has shown the radius of curvature should be less 
at the exit than at the entrance. Most of the early work on nozzles was based on 
potential 
Once the wall shape was determined, the regions of adverse 
pressure gradient were checked to make sure that they were not too sharp. The 
following paragraphs give brief discussions of nozzle design studies that reflect 
application of substantial computational effort. 


3
.
4
 SECTION 
LOSS 
COEFFICIENTS 
97 
Nozzle Design Chmielewski4' 
specified a distribution for a streamwise acceleration 
for a quasi-one-dimensional flow. Long constant-area ducts were used, one on each 
side of the nozzle, to ensure parallel flow. The velocities obtained from potential 
theory were checked by Stratford's separation criteria.42 
A characteristic feature of 
the velocity distribution was a velocity peak on the centerline of the constant-area 
inlet that persists well into the nozzle, where the velocity then decreases, ending in 
a centerline velocity deficit. The velocity deficit continues for about one radius 
beyond the nozzle exit. The wall velocity decreases at the inlet and increases at the 
exit. This leads to a cup-shaped velocity profile in the constant-area exit duct. This 
type of velocity profile has been measured in wind tunnels. The rapid growth in 
the boundary layer thickness in the constant-area inlet makes an inlet separation a 
possibility. For the contours used, the length of the nozzle decreased as the inlet 
radius was decreased and the exit radius increased. If, however, the area reduction 
is too gradual, the boundary layer will be subjected to a mild pressure gradient over 
a long distance, increasing the risk of separation. 
M ~ r e l ' ~  
considered uniform flow at the exit as being the basic requirement for 
a nozzle. He also pointed out that as the nozzle ratio decreases beyond 4 the length 
will decrease for fixed exit requirements. BorgeP3 
recommended a slight expansion 
near the nozzle exit to improve the exit flow uniformity. 
Mikhail and R a i n b i ~ d ~ ~  
were able to control the wall pressures and gradients and 
flow uniformity at the exit by controlling the distribution of wall curvature. The 
length of the exit section was defined on the basis of 0.25% flow uniformity at the 
centerline at one radius from the exit. The nozzle exit length (from the wall inflection 
point to constant-area duct) is sensitive to the required length in the test section for 
a uniform velocity profile. For an area ratio of 8 
the inlet section length varied from 
0.15 to 1.00 times the inlet radius, while the test-section settling length varied from 
1.5 to 0.5 of the exit radius. 
It is desirable to keep the length of the nozzle as short as possible, the length of 
the nozzle being defined as the sum of the settling chamber length plus the nozzle 
plus the settling length of the exit section. The settling chamber length is required 
for honeycombs and/or screens to reduce turbulence, if they are to be used. A 
settling chamber length of 0.5 times the inlet diameter is often used. 
Quite often, for a new tunnel, either a complete model or models of parts of the 
tunnel are built to check the design. Although the model tunnel can duplicate the 
velocities of the full-scale tunnel, the Reynolds number will be reduced by the scale 
factor. Thus, the boundary layer will be thicker in the model tunnel than in the full- 
scale tunnel. Despite this problem, those facilities that have models of their tunnels 
have found them to be invaluable, both as a check of modifications to the full-scale 
tunnel and as a facility for experiments that would be too expensive to run in the 
large tunnel. 
If a complete model tunnel is not built, often parts of the full-scale tunnel are 
simulated. Because the nozzle section is critical to the flow quality in the test section, 
quite often models of this part are built. The model may include the fourth comer. 
This model will need a bellmouth at its entrance and should include the test section 
to the first diffuser. The flow should be sucked through the model. This model type 


98 
WIND TUNNEL DESIGN 
can be used to chwk the test-section settling length. The nozzle's sensitivity to 
nonuniform flow can be checked also. The effect of honeycombs andfor screens in 
the settling chamber or turbulence both at the entrance to the nozzle and in the test 
section can be determined. 
Nozzle Loss Coefficient We give here a rudimentary method to estimate the nozzle 
loss coefficient. This level of analysis is sufficient for energy considerations since 
the nozzle will consume a small part of the drive power. The losses in the nozzle 
are considered to be from friction only so that the pressure drop is obtained by 
integrating the standard pipe friction law: 
where L. is the length of the nozzle, D. = D,(x) the local nozzle hydraulic diameter, 
and V,, the local section mean speed. Continuity 
gives 
= v:= 
where V
,
 is 
6
9
 
the speed in the settling chamber and therefore at the entrance to the nozzle. The 
nozzle loss coefficient 
is K,, = 
Ap,/qs,, which, using Equation (3.49), 
can be written as 
Since K,,, = K,,(q$q,), we also have 
Since the integrand of Equation (3.51) is always less than 1, it is seen that the 
nozzle loss coefficient based on test-section dynamic pressure is less than the test- 
section loss coefficient for equal length-to-hydraulic-diameter 
ratios. For a typical 
nozzle shape, the integral of Equation (3.51) has been found to be approximately 
0.32. The friction factor can be retained inside the integral if a numerical integration 
is being evaluated. It is reasonable to take the friction factor as the average of the 
values for nozzle entrance and exit Reynolds numbers. A reasonable approximation 
for nozzle loss coefficient that was originally given by Wattendorfl' is 
Since the loss in the nozzle is typically of the order of 3% of total losses in the 
circuit, errors in estimating nozzle loss coefficient are much less important than 
errors in estimating losses in the high-speed part of the circuit. 


3.5 ENERGY RATIOS OF SOME TYPICAL CIRCUITS 
99 
b
-
 
48.5' -
4
 
FIGURE 3.13 Example basic single-retum circuit. 
3
.
5
 
ENERGY RATIOS OF SOME TYPICAL CIRCUITS 
We give results for selected wind tumel circuit designs in this section. The first 
example is for a circuit of very conventional design, as shown in Figure 3.13. The 
details of the geometry are given for this example along with tabulated results. We 
then give a synopsis of results for several circuits by Eckert.I4 
The losses calculated for the single-return tunnel of Figure 3.13 based on a tunnel 
temperature of 1009; (pip = 5560) and a test-section speed of 100 mph (44.7 
mls) are shown in Table 3.2. 
TABLE 3.2. Section Loss Calculations for Example Circuit 
~ - 
~- 
Section 
KI 
KIZ 
Total Loss (%) 
Jet 
- 
0.0093 
5.10 
Divergence 
- 
0.0391 
21.3 
Comer 
- 
0.0460 
25.0 
Cylinder 
- 
0.0026 
1 
.
4
0
 
Comer 
- 
0.0460 
25.0 
Cylinder 
- 
0.0020 
1.10 
Divergence 
- 
0.0160 
8.90 
Corner 
- 
0.0087 
4.70 
Corner 
- 
0.0087 
4.70 
Cylinder 
- 
0.0002 
0.10 
Cone 
- 
0,0048 
2.70 
Total 
- 
0.1834 
100.0 
E, = I E K ,  = 5.45 


100 
WIND TUNNEL DESIGN 
Contraction Ratio = 
5. 
I 
I \  
I 
I 
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 
Divergence Angle, degrees 
FIGURE 3.14 
Effect of diffuser divergence angle on energy ratio. 
This energy ratio estimate should probably be reduced about 10% for leaks 
and joints. 
The effect of varying the angle of divergence or the contraction ratio for a family 
of tunnels similar to the one of Figure 3.13 may be seen in Figures 3.14 and 3.15. 
The overall size of the tunnels is changing as the divergence angle varies with 
constant contraction ratio or as contraction ratio varies with constant divergence 
angle. There are several possibilities for attaining higher energy ratios. One funda- 
mental effect is that an increase of efficiency accompanies larger Reynolds numbers. 
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 
Contraction Ratio 
FIGURE 3
.
1
5
 Effects o
f
 contraction ratio and divergence angle on energy ratio. 


3.5 ENERGY RATIOS OF SOME TYPICAL CIRCUlTS 
101 
That is, a large tunnel similar to a small tunnel will have the greater efficiency of 
the two. Reduction of the losses in the divergent passage is limited, as previously 
stated, to a certain minimum angle between opposite walls. The use of this minimum 
angle would, however, yield smaller losses than are customarily encountered. 
Corner 
losses might be reduced through the use of two relatively untried innovations. The 
first is to break the four 90" turns into several vaned turns of less than 90°, as 
described by Dar~ius.~~ 
The second is to employ potential elbows for the turns, as 
described by Harper.46 
Increasing the contraction ratio through use of a longer return 
passage will also increase the energy ratio but at an added cost in tunnel construction. 
Increased length before the first turn is particularly effective. 
An entirely different approach, particularly useful for high-speed tunnels, is to 
reduce the power required for a given speed by reducing the air density by partly 
evacuating the entire tunnel. This procedure greatly complicates model changes, 
since the tunnel pressure must be relieved before the tunnel crew can enter. (Pressure 
doors that seal off the test section from the rest of the tunnel can be used; this 
reduces the pumping between runs.) Since the power required is a function of pV3, 
by reducing the pressure to one-fourth its former value, the speed may be increased 
by the ratio fl 
to 1 for the same power input. Stated differently, a 59% higher 
Mach number will be attained with the lower pressure. 
When estimating power requirements for a proposed design, consideration must 
also be given to (a) the power required to overcome model drag under the most 
extreme cases and (b) the power required to overcome the increased tunnel losses 
due to stalling of parts of the diffuser from the effects of the model wake. 
For (a) the power required to fly a model whose span is 0.8 tunnel diameter, 
AR 
= 5 and CD 
= 1.00 is probably sufficient. Item (b) for conventional tests is 
covered in (a) above, but for wingtip mounting or section tests as much as 150% 
more 
power may be needed if the diffuser is seriously stalled and large rotational 
and diffusion losses are created. Bluff bodies such as truck models or parachutes 
can increase the tunnel power required by sizable factors. 
The methods given in the preceding were applied by Eckert, Mort, and JopeI4 
to seven tunnels, and comparisons were given to available measurements for the 
seven tunnels. The program implementing the methods is based on the assump- 
tion that all component parts of the tunnel being analyzed are properly designed. 
If there are design errors, it does not predict them or their effects on other parts of 
the tunnel, including test-section flow quality. Table 3.3 gives a summary of the 
results. Considering the rather low level of detail of the input parameters used in 
describing the tunnels to the methods, the results are quite good for the conven- 
tional designs. 
A point made earlier is reemphasized here. The energy ratio achieved by a tunnel 
design is significant, but it is never nearly so important as other factors such as 
appropriate quality of flow for purposes intended, efficiency of available support 
equipment and people, quality and efficiency of instrumentation for acquiring data, 
and the effectiveness of the integrated environment in assisting users to plan and 
execute focused experimental programs. 


102 
WIND TUNNEL 
DESIGN 
TABLE 3.3. Measured and Computed Energy Ratios for Selected Facilities 
Eneqy Ratio 
Test-Section 
Facility 
Speed (ds) 
Actuala 
Computed 
Difference (%) 
NASA Ames, 40 X 80 f
t
 
107.3 
7.88 
7.96 
1 
.O 
NASA Ames, 7 X 10 ft 
133.0 
7.85 
8.07 
2.8 
Lockheed Martin 
low-speed wind tunnel 
52.3 
1.10 
1.12 
1.8 
Indian Institute of Science, 
14 X 9 ft 
96.3 
6.85 
6.83 
-0.3 
Hawder Siddeley 
Aviation, 15-ft V/STOL 
45.7 
2.38 
3.97 
66.8 
University of Washington, 
8 X 12 ft 
117.7 
8.3 
7.20 
-13.3 
NASA Langley, 30 X 60 ft 
52.7 
3.71 
4.73 
27.4 
"The quoted energy ratios are the best available and the best reported for each facility. 
3.6 FANSTRAIGHTENER SECTION 
This section will deal with the fan nacelle, the fan, prerotation vanes, and flow- 
straightener vanes as a unit. The purpose of the fan-straightener combination is to 
take the incoming stream, usually assumed uniform, and produce an outgoing stream 
that is uniform with an increased total pressure. The increase in total pressure must 
match the integrated loss of total pressure throughout the other parts of the wind 
tunnel. Fan design will be considered in some detail in the next section. 
There is now general agreement that the wind tunnel fan should be located 
downstream of the second comer. A fan position between the first and second 
comers is rarely used and a fan position between the test section and the first comer 
is even more rarely considered. Let us first rule out the positions that we may say 
are definitely undesirable. The fan develops its highest efficiency if it is located in 
a stream of a fairly high velocity, and its cost is at least partially proportional to its 
diameter squared. These two items rule out a fan in a very large part of the retum 
passage or in the settling chamber. Damage from a failing model and poor flow 
distribution make a position in the diffuser moderately risky. Attenuation of fan 
noise requires that the fan be as far from the test section as possible. This consider- 
ation eliminates at least the settling chamber and the diffuser to the first corner. 
The argument for a position just downstream of the second turn is that the flow has 
by then been in a section of constant or nearly constant area for a considerable time 
and therefore should be relatively smooth when it meets the fan, and at this location 
the velocity is desirably high. In addition, the location is as good as one can choose 
for noise considerations since the fan noise must propagate around two comers in 
either direction to reach the test section. 
A number of configurations are in current use. Three basic systems are (1) a fan 
with straightener vanes behind it (see Figure 3.16); (2) a fan with prerotating vanes 


3.6 FANSTRAIGHTENER SECTION 
103 
FIGURE 3.16 Nacellefan installation. The antitwist vanes are between us and the fan. 
(Courtesy of Glenn L. Martin Wind Tunnel.) 
ahead of it as well as straightener vanes behind it; and (3) counterrotating fans in 
which the second fan removes 
the rotation imparted by the first. A fourth arrangement 
is to have multiple fans, each of which passes a part of the flow. Among more 
recent tunnels, 1 and 2 are by far the most prevalent. 
The counterrotating fan can remove all the twist for all tunnels speeds and power 
inputs. Since two fans can obviously be designed to develop more thrust than one, 
counterrotating 
fans may become more competitive in high-power installations. The 
drive is more complicated, however, as equal torque needs to be applied to the 
airstream by both fans. 
For tunnels of moderate size and power a single fan is usually quite satisfactory. 
If it is properly designed, a straightener system can be devised that will remove 
the twist for all power inputs and speeds. Such straighteners are discussed in the 
following paragraphs. 
A variable-pitch fan is of great value even when a variable-rpm drive is available, 
since it gives much quicker speed control than varying the drive rpm. In tunnels 
with large contraction ratios the change in velocity distribution in the test section 
with change in fan-blade angle does not seem to be measurable. Also, when the 
the drive motor is of the synchonous type, the fan can be put in flat pitch for low 
pull-in torque and then opened out to develop the tunnel speed. This action may 
lead to greater power outputs from this type of motor, since the pull-in torque is 
often the limiting factor. For those tunnels that may be operated with two-dimensional 


104 
WIND TUNNEL DESIGN 
inserts, the vaiiable-pitch fan is definitely advantageous in achieving optimum 
operation. 
The area ratio between the fan and the test section is usually between 2 : 
1 or 
3 : 1. If the ratio is made larger, there is the risk of a poor velocity profile before 
the fan and an increase in cost due to size. If the area ratio is smaller, the incoming 
velocity will be higher and the fan rpm will be larger to maintain reasonable blade 
angles. However, the tip speed is limited by the practice of keeping the tip Mach 
number low enough to avoid formation of shock waves. The fan-nacelle diameter 
in large tunnels is about 30-50% of the fan section diameter. 
The fan motor is either mounted in the nacelle or outside the tunnel. 
When the motor is in the nacelle, this usually requires cooling for the motor. 
The cooling air can often be ducted through the nacelle supports. If the motor is 
outside the tunnel, it can drive the fan either through a gear box in the nacelle or 
the more usual method of a long shaft passing through the second comer. This shaft 
will have to be held in careful alignment by bearings and may or may not be 
enclosed in a fairing to reduce losses and the effects on the flow between the outside 
wall and second-comer turning vanes. 
The fan may or may not have prerotation vanes upstream of the fan. The prerota- 
tion vanes are designed to produce a swirl opposite to the fan's swirl and hence 
zero swirl after the fan. This may not occur at all rpm. Thus, in most cases flow 
straighteners or antiswirl vanes are installed after the fan as a safety factor. The 
prerotation vanes are a stator and the fan spinner is attached to their inner end. 
These stators increase the velocity of the fan blade relative to the airstream. To 
avoid vibration between the prerotation vanes and the fan for N fan blades, do not 
use N, 3Nl2, or 2N prerotation blades. Similar constraints should be used between 
the fan blades and the nacelle supports. If prerotation vanes are not used, straightener 
vanes must be used downstream of the fan. 
There are major structural design problems in the fan and nacelle regions, and 
the location of the motor will have a strong influence. As an example, if the motor 
is in the nacelle, then the nacelle struts must carry the torque and thrust of the fan 
to the tunnel shell, rather than only the thrust. 
The nacelle should have a length-to-diameter ratio of about 3 with 3040% of 
its length of constant diameter. The equivalent closing cone angle should be 5" or 
less. An excessive adverse pressure gradient over the rear portion will lead to 
separation and a persistent wake that may show its shadow in the test sec- 
tion. Expansion of the walls over the rear of the nacelle should be avoided. The 
effective duct areas may yield an expansion angle of 10"-12" for short nacelles. If 
the nacelle does separate, a vortex generator installation may help. Their angle of 
attack should be relative to the local flow direction, which may change with fan 
speed. Extending the aft nacelle fairing may also help if flow problems occur in 
this area. 
The wind tunnel fan is quite different from an airplane propeller. It is a ducted 
fan, and because it operates in a constant-area 
duct, continuity considerations 
enforce 
the condition that there is no increase in axial velocity across the fan. The fan in a 
wind tunnel "merely" replaces the total pressure losses of the tunnel and model. 


3.6 FAN-STRAIGHTENER 
SECTION 
10s 
FanStraightener Design 
Colld7 has given a considerable discussion of the design of wind tunnel fans. 
However, a method proposed by Patter~on~~ 
and subsequently evolved and elaborated 
by Walli~'~ 
is presented here because it considers the fan-straightener system as a 
unit and does not concern itself merely with the fan. It uses assumptions referred 
to as the "free-vortex theory" for fan design. The assumptions will be elaborated 
in the following sections. The treatment is most advantageous for design studies in 
which the fan geometry is being sought for given flow conditions rather than 
addressing the problem of computing the performance of a given fan with given 
geometry and given rotational speed. The theory presented here assumes there is 
no radial flow and that there is a radial balance that corresponds to this assumption. 
Treatments that consider more general cases are given by Lewis49 
and others. It 
would be possible to do extremely detailed computational analyses today if the 
resources were available for a particular design project. Such high-cost approaches 
are not justified and are not needed to obtain quite good design results for most 
wind tunnel fan applications. 
The present treatment neglects losses associated with the necessary tip clearance 
at the tunnel wall and is based on assumptions that lead to no radial flow. There 
are small tip clearance losses that contribute to efficiencies slightly lower than 
indicated by this theory. The loss due to tip clearance adds to both the friction and 
the expansion losses that occur at the walls of a wind tunnel and indicates that 
instead of constant thrust the wind tunnel fan should perhaps have a graded thrust 
loading curve, greatest at the walls in order to best develop a uniform velocity front. 
This refinement is beyond the scope of this presentation. 
Flow Geometry As detailed in the preceding sections, the losses that occur 
throughout the wind tunnel circuit appear as successive pressure drops to be bal- 
anced by the pressure rise through the fan. The total pressure drop Ah must be 
known for any desired operating condition to proceed with a design of the fan. The 
methods previously given may be used to obtain the needed results. Alternatively, 
if a physical model of the tunnel is available or can be produced, the necessary 
pressure rise may be measured across the fan and extrapolated to full-scale Rey- 
nolds number. 
A schematic of a fan-straightener unit is shown in Figure 3.17. The incoming 
flow speed is u,, defined as the test section speed times the ratio of test section area 
to fan area. Typically ul is of the order of one-third of the test-section speed for 
low-speed wind tunnels. The flow is analyzed based on the assumption that it 
proceeds in annuli, each of which can be treated independent of the others except 
that there is a balance of the radial pressure gradient and the centrifugal forces 
consistent with the assumption of no radial flow. A cut through a typical annulus 
is shown in Figure 3.17 along which three planes perpendicular to the tunnel axis 
are indicated. The flow variables at plane 1 are the incoming values. At plane 2 
the flow values are the result of the fan acting on the incoming flow. At plane 3 
the flow values are those resulting from the action of the straighteners on the flow 


106 
WIND TUNNEL DESIGN 
3
\
 
/
y
 
Analysis 
planes 
FIGURE 3.17 Schematic of fan-straightener unit. 
with the properties at plane 2. The incoming stream at plane 1 is assumed to 
be uniform with no tangential (swirl v) component. The fan acts on this incom- 
ing stream and produces a flow assumed to have a constant total pressure H, at 
every point in plane 2, and the values of u2, 
p2 are such that the radial static pres- 
sure variation and centrifugal acceleration associated with v2 
are balanced. This 
is the assumed "free-vortex" 
condition. The straighteners acting on the flow are as- 
sumed to remove the swirl component so that the flow at plane 3 is uniform and 
axial. Fan design by the present method consists of finding relations so that the 
fan geometry at a chosen operating condition is consistent with the above set 
of assumptions. 
At each plane the standard Bernoulli relations are valid: 
The total pressure rise through the fan-straightener unit can be considered to be 
the "ideal" value minus the losses as the flow passes through the fan and then the 
straightener, with concepts being the same as the earlier analyses of various sections 
of the tunnel circuit. This can be expressed first dimensionally and then nondimen- 
sionally as follows. The subscript on u 
has been dropped since the axial component 
is constant under the assumptions of the analysis: 
H3 - 
HI = AHi - 
Ahf - 
Ah, 
(3.56) 


3.6 FANSTRAIGHTENER SECTION 
107 
Analogous relations can be written between planes 2 and 1. Introducing the 
definition of swirl coefficient as used by Wallis,so 
E2 = 
v2/u, 
the static pressure rise 
across the fan, which will vary with radius, can be expressed as 
where the subscript on the swirl coefficient has been dropped since it is non- 
zero only at plane 2. The subscript on the swirl component of velocity will sim- 
ilarly be dropped. The thrust that the fan must deliver to the flow in the elemental 
annulus is 
dTf = 2ar dr(p, - 
p,) 
(3.59) 
The power that the fan must deliver to the flow in the elemental annulus is 
related to total pressure rise and flow rate by 
The torque that the fan must apply to the flow in the elemental annulus is given 
by the rate of change of angular momentum: 
The power and torque are related by the angular velocity of the fan: 
We define the "flow coeffi~ient"~~ 
as X -- u l f i  (also as used by WallisM) and 
obtain the following relation between ideal total pressure rise coefficient, flow 
coefficient, and swirl coefficient: 
Equation (3.63) shows that the swirl coefficient and the swirl component of 
velocity will be inversely proportional to the radius if the ideal total pressure rise 
is uniform over the fan. This is assumed to be the case. 
The useful power output from the fan-straightener unit in the elemental annulus 
may be expressed as 


108 
WIND TUNNEL DESIGN 
The efficiency of the fan-straightener unit can usefully be defined as the ratio 
of the useful power output divided by the power input. We have two expres- 
sions for the power input: Equations (3.60) and (3.62). 
The efficiency expressions 
are 
dPo - 
( 2 m  
dr)u(AHi - 
Ahf - 
Ah,) - 
A(Ki - 
kf - 
k,) = 
)IKf, (3.65) 
Vs"&- 
Qp(2nr dr)uvr 
- 
2~ 
2s 
where the overall pressure rise coefficient Kf, 
= 
Ki - 
kf - 
k, has been introduced. 
An expression for fan efficiency can be immediately produced in a similar way: 
and we also immediately obtain 
and 
and 
which will be key relations as they will be used in the fan design procedure to be 
outlined later. 
It is very useful to consider another view of the fan operation and an alternative 
expression for the useful power output. The fan power output can be written as dPf, 
= (2ar 
dr)u(& - 
HI) 
= (2rrr dr)u AHf. The total pressure rise across the fan is 
the sum of the static pressure rise and the dynamic pressure associated with the 
swirl component of the flow just downstream of the fan indicated by plane 2 in 
Figure 3.17. This amounts to a rearrangement of Equation (3.58), 
yielding 
The fan power input is as given by Equation (3.62), which combined with 
Equation (3.70) 
gives 


3.6 FANSTRAIGHTENER SECTION 
109 
I
$
.
.
 
_I 
B=@+a 
- 
1 
C
2
r
 - 
- v  
Plane of rotation 
2 
FIGURE 
3.18 Typical fan blade element with velocity and force components. 
The thrust and torque factors are now converted to coefficient form with the 
following conventions in which V is the resultant relative fluid speed at the fan 
plane, c is the blade chord, and N is the number of blades: 
in terms of which Equation (3.71) becomes 
The required torque and power must be delivered to the flow through a finite 
number of blades. A typical low-speed wind tunnel will have a relatively low solidity 
fan so the present treatment will not consider cascade effects. A typical blade 
element 
is shown in Figure 3.18. The swirl component of velocity is taken as the average 
of the values incoming and the value at plane 2. 
The thrust and torque coefficients appearing in Equations (3.72) and (3.73) can 
be written in terms of conventional airfoil parameters by reference to Figure 3.18: 
CT 
= c1 
cos + - 
cd 
sin 4 
CG = c1 
sin + + cd 
cos + 
Equations (3.74)-(3.76) can be combined to give 
q,= 
A ( c h  
- 
tan +) + 
(c,/cd tan r
$
 + 1) 
2 


110 
WIND TUNNEL DESIGN 
which along with 
u 
tan 4 = 
- 
- 
A 
fir - 
(112)~ 1 - 
(1/2)&A 
gives 
This equation is an important equation because it provides the sensitivity of fan 
efficiency to the lift-to-drag ratio of the fan airfoil sections. The other variables are 
the flow coefficient and the swirl coefticient. These are related to the fan-straightener 
pressure rise coefficient and fan-straightener system efficiency by Equation (3.65) 
for our assumed free-vortex design case. This can be used to obtain an alternative 
relation giving fan efficiency as a function of section lift-to-drag ratio, flow coeffi- 
cient, fan-straightener system efficiency, and fan-straightener pressure rise coeffi- 
cient. The result is 
The fan-straightener pressure rise coefficient can be related to the circuit losses 
by noting that we must have 
which is the sum of circuit loss coefficients based on the fan dynamic pressure. 
This shows that the required value of K
,
 is determined by the circuit properties. 
The value obtained from circuit analysis can be used in Equation (3.80) along with 
assumed values of efficiencies to obtain relationships between the flow coefficient 
and the section lii-to-drag ratios. For typical circuits the ratio of the test-section 
dynamic pressure to the dynamic pressure at the fan will be in the range of 2-
10. 
For energy ratios in the range of 4-8, the resulting fan-straightener system pressure 
rise coefficient will be in the range of 0.25-2.5. The flow coefficient varies inversely 
with radius since the incoming flow is assumed to be uniform. It is largest at the 
fan root sections and smallest at the fan tip. It may range over 0.12-1.5 although 
this is not likely over that full range for a single fan. Figures 3.19 and 3.20 are 
based on Equation (3.80). The fan-straightener pressure rise coefficient has been 
chosen as 2.0 for these plots. The result is not very dependent on this choice. It is 
seen that increasing the section lift-to-drag ratio will increase the fan efficiency but 
not nearly in proportion to changes in the lift-to-drag ratio. 


3.6 FAN-STRAIGHTENER SECTION 
111 
. . . . . . . .  
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
 
. . . . . .  
- 
Flow Coefficient, k 
FIGURE 
3.19 
Approximate fan efficiency as a function of flow coefficient for a range of 
section lift-to-drag r
a
t
i
o
.
 
It will be seen from Figures 3.19 and 3.20 that high fan efficiencies are largely 
determined by proper selection of the flow coefficient and utilization of section 
lift-to-drag ratios in the range of 60 and upward. The required pressure rise coeffi- 
cient follows from the circuit properties and the location within the circuit at which 
the fan is located. It remains to demonstrate the methods for satisfying the 
criteria. 
FIGURE 3.20 
Approximate fan efficiency as a function of section lift-to-drag ratio at 
selected values of flow coeff~cient. 


112 
WIND TUNNEL 
DESIGN 
Equation (3.80) can also be put into the forms 
These forms are useful depending on whether we assume we know the lift- 
to-drag ratio or the flow coefficient. Equation (3.82) can be used to solve for 
the flow coefficient in an iterative fashion when the section lift-to-drag ratio is 
assumed known. 
Fan Blade Sections The design of airfoils has received a large amount of attention 
since the beginning of aviation and has been advanced to substantial levels of 
rationality in the last 20 years. Epplei2 
has been a pioneer in airfoil design methods, 
and his work provides 
a good basis for studying the many others who have contributed 
to the area. Section lift-to-drag ratios of 60 and higher are readily obtainable. In 
fact, values of well over 100 have been demonstrated with modem airfoil design 
for carefully controlled conditions. A wind tunnel fan is likely to be required to 
operate over a range of conditions so it is probably not wise to choose a blade 
design that performs well only in a very narrow range of conditions. 
In this presentation we consider a specific airfoil and its properties to illustrate 
the manner of doing a fan design. Type E of the RAF propeller sections has been 
found satisfactory, as has the slightly thicker type D (see Figure 3.21). The ordinates 
of these airfoils are shown in Table 3.4. 
A set of data for RAF section D is given in Figure 3.22. Lift, drag, and lift- 
to-drag ratio are given as functions of chord angle of attack with Reynolds number 
FIGURE 
3.21 Typical early a
i
r
f
o
i
l
s
 for fan sections. 


3.6 FAN-STRAIGHTENER SECTION 
113 
TABLE 3.4. Ordinates of Fan Profiles D and E 
Height above Flat Undersurface 
Distance from Leading Edge" 
D 
E 
0 
0.0135 
0.0115 
0.0125 
0.0370 
0.0319 
0.0250 
0.0538 
0.0442 
0.0500 
0.0780 
0.0610 
0.0750 
0.0925 
0.0724 
0.1000 
0.1030 
0.0809 
0.1500 
0.1174 
0.0928 
0.2000 
0.1250 
0.0990 
0.3000 
0.1290 
0.1030 
0.4000 
0.1269 
0.1022 
0.5000 
0.1220 
0.0980 
0.6000 
0.1 
120 
0.0898 
0.7000 
0.0960 
0.0770 
0.8000 
0.0740 
0.0591 
0.9000 
0.0470 
0.0379 
0.9500 
0.0326 
0.0258 
1 .0000 
0.0100 
0.0076 
L.E. rad 
0.0135 
0.0115 
T.E. rad 
0.0100 
0.0076 
"T.E. means Trailing Edge. L.E. means Leading Edge. 
as a parameter. The effect of Mach number will also be significant for fan design 
and analysis. Application of the Prandtl-Glauert transformation will be satisfactory 
for preliminary designs. 
Inspection of Figure 3.22 shows that the maximum values of lift-to-drag ratio 
occur for chord angle of attack of about 5" for the entire range of Reynolds numbers 
for which data are shown. The maximum lift-to-drag ratios range from 65 to 80 
depending on the Reynolds number. The variation in life-to-drag ratio with Reynolds 
number comes mostly from the variation of drag with Reynolds number. The lift 
coefficient at 5
'
 angle of attack varies only about 5% with the changes in Reynolds 
number from 0.31 to 6.5 X lo6 
but the drag varies by about 80%. 
A few additional steps are required to obtain the set of relations that allow the 
determination of the actual fan geometry. For convenience 
we introduce the definition 
T, 
= Tl(1/2)pu, 
which differs from the definition of CT 
introduction in Equation 
(3.72). Using this definition along with x = rlR and Equations (3.58), 
(3.59), 
and 
(3.66), we obtain 


114 
WIND TUNNEL DESIGN 
KO 
FIGURE 3.22 Characteristics of fan airfoil D, 
infinite aspect ratio. 
If there are N blades, then each blade must cany 1IN of the required thrust, 
torque, and power. Let the following definitions be chosen for "sector length s
f
 and 
solidity u
f
:
 
where c is the chord. Note that the sector length is determined simply by the number 
of blades and the radius of the annulus. The solidity depends on a detail of the 
blade, the chord. From Equation (3.72), Equation (3.73, 
and definitions of the 
variables, we can obtain 
Equation (3.86) will be solved for c and used to compute the chord after the 
other variables have been determined. 


3.6 FAN-STRAIGHTENER SECTION 
115 
Effective Reynolds Number x 10" 
FIGURE 3.23 Effect of interference on stall angle for NACA 0015 section. 
The straightener vane losses must be estimated before the fan-straightener 
design 
procedure can be completed. 
Stmightener Vanes Experiments at the NPL have shown that satisfactory antitwist 
or straightener vanes can be made by using the NACA symmetrical airfoils set with 
their chords parallel to the tunnel centerline provided that the amount of swirl to 
be removed is not too large compared with the axial velocity. The limiting swirl is 
that required to stall the vanes; that is, E = tan T, 
where T = angle of swirl in the 
slipstream must correspond to an angle less than 
of a symmetrical section at 
infinite aspect ratio, including multiplane interference. The interference is an advan- 
tage here because, with the type of straighteners to be employed, it decreases the 
lift curve slope by a factor of 0.75. That is, c
t
,
,
,
,
 
with interference is 33% above the 
free-air stall angle, as shown in Figure 3.23 for an NACA 0015 section. The chord 
for the proposed straightener may be found from 
where N, 
is the number of straightener vanes and c, is the chord of the vane at 
radius I: 
If a constant-thickness ratio is assumed for the straightener vanes, the actual 
thiclcness at the wall would be large owing to the 
large chord. Hence it is advantageous 
to select a constant thickness (not thickness ratio). A reasonable value is that tJc, 
= 0.15 at x = rlR = 0.8 (R = tunnel radius at propeller section). Hence from 
Equation (3.87), 
The number of blades and number of vanes should be relatively prime. This 
avoids simultaneous multiple blade wakes striking straighteners, which will hap- 


116 
WIND TUNNEL 
DESIGN 
pen if there is- a common multiplier between number of blades and number of 
vanes. 
There will be a loss through the straightener, of course, and this loss will 
be greater than the skin friction of the vanes in free air, since the straightener 
is a diffuser, changing the swirl to static head. The pressure loss coefficient of a 
straightener composed of smetrical NASA airfoil sections has been empirically 
determined as 
Substituting from Equation (3.87), we have 
Factors influencing the General Layout Large advance ratios (i.e., higher flow 
coefficients) imply lowered speeds of fan rotation, necessitating a drive motor of 
low rpm or a geared driving system. The size and cost of electric motors are more 
dependent on torque than on power so that a motor of specified power will be lower 
in cost for a higher specified rotation rate. The desire for higher rpm for the driving 
motor indicates that the higher speed regions of the wind tunnel are best suited for 
the location of the fan. Balancing that against the increase of nacelle drag as the 
local speed is increased, the best compromise usually locates the fan downstream 
of the second comer after the test section. If the fan is to be driven by a motor 
outside the tunnel, the comer location offers a short shaft length. 
Maintaining a small tip clearance is important to prevent the development of tip 
losses. A small tip clearance leads to possibilities for structural damage from a 
small hard object, such as screws or bolts getting jammed between the blade tip 
and the tunnel wall. This can be prevented by making the blade ends frangible and 
easily repairable. 
A large nacelle is advantageous from a number of considerations. By decreasing 
the tunnel cross-sectional area at the propeller, a higher velocity is achieved, and 
higher motor speeds are possible at the same advance ratio or flow coefficient. A 
large boss also encloses the fan root sections that must be thicker for structural 
reasons, leaving only thinner, more efficient sections exposed to the airstream. 
Frequently it is possible to use an airfoil of constant thickness in the exposed portion, 
thus facilitating the design. Relatively small gains are to be found from utilizing 
section lift-to-drag ratios greater than 60, so that the airfoil selection can accommo- 
date some compromise with structural considerations. Although the optimum boss 
diameter increases with advance ratio and may be as large as 0.6-0.7 times the fan 
diameter, smaller values of 0.3-0.5 
are frequently more practical for low-speed wind 
tunnel use. A larger boss requires a larger and longer nacelle for proper streamlining, 
which in tum involves increased cost, construction difficulties, and greater power 


3.6 FAN-STRAIGHTENER SECTION 
117 
losses from the diffusing action as the area of the passage is increased. It would be 
possible to prevent the diffusing losses by shaping the tunnel so that the area 
throughout the fan nacelle region remains constant. This is sometimes done despite 
the added expense. Certainly the equivalent conical diffusion angle should be kept 
to 7' or less. 
The number of blades on the fan is somewhat arbitrary from the point of view 
of aerodynamic performance, for the product of the number of blades and their 
chord represents the total area and must be aligned with the thrust requirements. 
Several factors influence the selection of the number of blades. The minimum 
number probably is 4, as the amplitude of pulsation at blade passage frequency 
increases as the number of blades is decreased. Aeroacoustic considerations therefore 
call for a large number of blades. The maximum number of blades will doubtless 
be limited by strength considerations. The maximum value of the sum of the blade 
chords Nc should not exceed the local circumference at the root if excessive interfer- 
ence is to be avoided. The Reynolds number of the blade chord should be above 
700,000 in order to keep the section drag low, and the tip speed should be low 
enough to avoid compressibility problems. This means that the blade tips should 
not come too near the critical Mach number. Since the number of blades is not 
critical, a reasonable procedure is to estimate the number needed and examine the 
final design to see whether alterations are in order. 
Design Procedure 
Fan design is an iterative procedure, as is the case with all engineering systems. 
The starting point is some set of assumptions about the configuration and assumed 
values for a set of parameters. Other pertinent parameters can be determined from 
relations based on physical principles where possible or other considerations if there 
are no usable physically based relations available to the designer. The example that 
follows outlines a procedure. 
Example Fan 
Design A fan is required for a wind tunnel whose circuit has been 
analyzed and found to have an energy ratio equal to 5.0. The area of the test section 
is 56.4 ft2, 
and the design test-section speed is 193 mph, or 283 ftlsec. The density 
and viscosity are taken to be standard sea level atmospheric values of p = 0.002378 
sluglft3 
and p = 3.74 X 10-I lh-seclft2. The wind tunnel duct diameter at the fan 
has been chosen to be 13 ft. A boss diameter of 0.60 and N = 12 blades are values 
selected for preliminary calculations. The airfoil section for the blade is chosen as 
the RAF section D, whose shape has been given in Table 3.4. The flow area is A, 
- 
Ab = 133 - 
47.8 = 85.2 ft2, and u = 284 X 56.4185.2 = 188 ftlsec. The ratio 
of dynamic pressure in the test section to dynamic pressure at the fan is 2.27 and 
the overall fan-straightener pressure coefficient must be K, = 0.454. 
Step 0. We assume we can achieve a fan-straightener system efficiency 
= 0.93. 
This gives an ideal pressure rise coefficient Ki 
= 0.488. 


118 
WIND TUNNEL 
DESIGN 
Step 1. We assume a thickness-to-chord ratio for the straightener vanes of 0.12 at 
the tip and obtain k, 
using Equation (3.89) and then obtain qs 
= 0.0172 using 
Equation (3.69). 
Finally we obtain q, 
= 0.947 using Equation (3.67). 
Step 2. If we assume a value for section lift-to-drag ratio, we can evaluate the 
coefficients in Equation (3.82). 
In the present example we choose U D  
= 
45 and 
obtain X = 0.470 as the solution. Note that the variation of the flow coefficient 
must be inversely proportional to radius so once it is chosen for any annulus, it 
is determined for all radii by the llr relation. We have computed it for the tip 
radius here. Also note that the assumed W D  will hold only at the tip. The 
assumptions of the free-vortex design procedure lead to a varying WD with 
radius. The values of U D  
for the other radii will be calculated later. Calculate 
the flow coefficient for the various radii. 
Step 3. We can now obtain the fan notation rate as R = (2ulflDJ (6012~) 
= 587 
rpm and the rotational component of tip speed as C
I
R
 = 400 ftlsec. This gives 
a tip Mach number of about 0.38, which is high enough to warrant applying a 
Prandtl-Glauert correction-to-lift curve, but this is not done in this example. 
Step 4. The swirl coefficient at the tip is now computed using Equation (3.65). 
obtaining G~~ 
= 0.115. As with the flow coefficient, the swirl coefficient varies 
inversely with radius so the values at other radii can be obtained. We check the 
value at the blade root to see if the straighteners will be stalled. The result is 
I
&
,
 = E,,~(D~/D~) 
= 0.191 or T 
= 10.8", which is well below the stall limit, as 
indicated by Figure 3.23 for any reasonable Reynolds number. Calculate the swirl 
coefficient for the various radii. 
Step 5. The straightener vane chords are summed to be given by Equation (3.87) 
and to have constant thickness. Equation (3.90) 
is used to calculate straightener 
pressure loss coefficient as a function of radius. 
Then the "straightener efficiency" 
for all radii can be calculated using Equation (3.69). 
The values of all other parameters are to be calculated for the various radii 
assuming unchanging values for the fan-straightener pressure rise coefficient Kfi 
and the overall fan-straightener system efficiency v
,
 
Step 6. Calculate the resulting fan efficiency values at the various radii. 
Step 7 .  Calculate the U D  
values at the various radii using Equation (3.83). 
Step 8. Calculate the inflow angle 4 at the various radii using Equation (3.78). 
Step 9. Calculate the approximate chord using Equation (3.86) with Cr 
= 
~,,~,cos 
4 
where c,,~, 
is an estimated value for the section lift coefficient. This would be 
chosen consistent with the U D  
values from step 6. 
Step 10. Calculate the approximate Reynolds number using the approximate chord 
from step 8 and the known relative air speed as a function of radius. 
Step 1
1
.
 Using the approximate Reynolds numbers and the W D  values from steps 
6 and 9 along with the airfoil section data as given by Figure 3.22, find the 
angles of attack, the section lift coefficients, and the section drag coefficients. 
Step 12. Using the inflow angles and the angles of attack, calculate the blade pitch 
distribution: P = 4 + a. 
Step 13. Calculate the chord values using Equation (3.86). 


3
.
6
 FAN-STRAIGHTENER 
SECTION 
1
1
9
 
A program that implements the above in the data processing language IDL is 
available f
r
o
m
 the authors. 
A sample output for the example is: 
Test-section 
area 
- 
- 
Test-section speed 
- 
- 
Circuit energy ratio 
- 
- 
Fan diameter 
- 
- 
Boss diameter 
- 
- 
Number of blades 
- 
- 
Number of straightener vanes 
- 
- 
Straightener 
tip-thickness-to-chord 
ratio 
= 
Section lift-to-drag 
ratio 
- 
- 
Fan-straightener 
target efficiency 
- 
- 
+++++++++++ Computed Results +++++++++++ 
Fan-straightener pressure rise coefficient = 
Ideal pressure rise coefficient 
- 
- 
Straightener loss 
- 
- 
Fan efficiency 
- 
- 
Flow coefficient 
- 
- 
Fan rotation rate 
- 
- 
Tip speed due to rotation 
- 
- 
Swirl coefficient a
t
 tip 
- 
- 
Swirl angle a
t
 tip 
- 
- 
Tip Mach number 
- 
- 
Swirl coefficient at root 
- 
- 
Swirl angle a
t
 root 
- 
- 
--------------- Radial Distributions --------------- 
X 
- 
- 
0.60 
0.68 
0.76 
0.84 
0.92 
1.000 
KS 
= 
0.01200 0.01090 
0.0101 0.00943 0.00887 0.00841 
ETAF = 
0.9545 
0.9524 
0.9507 
0.9493 
0.9481 
0.9472 
LAMA= 
0.7833 
0.6912 
0.6184 
0.5595 
0.5108 
0.4700 
Output LoD = 
40.1 
40. 
140.8 
41.9 
43.3 
45.0 
PHI (degrees) = 40.25 
36.27 
32.97 
30.18 
27.82 
25.78 
dTcdx = 
0.5150 
0.5932 
0.6704 
0.7467 
0.8225 
0.8979 
yCt 
= 
0.2150 
0.2077 
0.1985 
0.1888 
0.1791 
0.1698 
clapprox = 
0.5017 
0.5017 
0.5102 
0.5243 
0.5421 
0.5625 
yapprox 
= 
0.5617 
0.513 50.4638 
0.416 60.3736 
0.3353 
capprox = 
0.9558 
0.8739 
0.7892 
0.7089 
0.6358 
0.5707 
RNaprx = 
1.685e+6 1.694e+6 
1.673e+6 
1.635e+6 1.586ec6 
1.532e+6 
alpha = 
0.1643 
0.1622 
0.2464 
0.3858 
0.5633 
0.7681 
cl 
- 
- 
0.5316 
0.5314 
0.5395 
0.5530 
0.5702 
0.5899 
cd 
= 
0.01323 0.01322 0.01320 0.01316 0.01312 0.01309 
cl/cd 
= 
40.18 
40.18 
40.89 
42.04 
43.47 
45.07 
beta = 
40.42 
36.44 
33.21 
30.57 
28.38 
26.55 
chord = 
0.92 
10.840 
0.758 
0.68 
10.612 
0.550 


120 
WIND TUNNEL DESIGN 
The usual requirement that propeller blade sections be thin (especially at the 
tips) does not rigidly hold in wind tunnel fans. The reasons are two: The air speed 
at the fan is often sufficiently low so that compressibility effects are not serious, 
and high enough UD 
ratios are obtained easily so that straining for small increments 
through the use of thin sections is unnecessary. The thicker sections are stronger, 
too, but peculiar high-frequency vibrations that occur in many wind tunnel fans and 
the possibility of the propeller being struck by airborne objects make it advisable 
to incorporate margins of safety of the order of 5.0 into their design. An advantage 
accrues from having removable blades, since a damaged blade may then be replaced 
without rebuilding the entire fan. However, the replacement blade must be mass 
balanced to match the first moment of the other blades, as a minimum. 
Tests of fans designed by the above method indicate that actual efficiencies will 
be from 3 to 5% less than theoretical, owing to tip clearance and boundary layer 
effects at the boss and tip. 
If changes are made to the tunnel after it has been built, it may be necessary to 
make a fan revision. Though an entirely new fan would be best, flaps have been 
installed in several tunnels with satisfactory results and, of course, at much less 
cost than a whole new fan. The procedure is to rivet or screw a flat sheet at the 
desired flap angle until the chord is satisfactory to meet the new condition. 
It is interesting to note that modified aircraft propellers have been used success- 
fully in many tunnels. The remote-control variable-pitch feature that most of these 
have is most desirable. 
3.7 RETURN 
(OR SECOND) DIFFUSER 
The second diffuser usually extends from the fan section to the third comer. As 
indicated in the earlier discussion, in many tunnels this diffuser continues the 
expansion to the desired total area ratio. Again, the equivalent cone angle should 
be 5" or less. A favored design in recent facilities is to have a wide-angle diffuser 
following 
the third comer so the second diffuser may not provide the final expansion. 
The fan at the entrance gives an almost constant total pressure profile. 
There are two likely sources of trouble in the second diffuser. The first is flow 
separation on the aft portion of the nacelle. The second in many rectangular tunnels 
is that the flow downstream of the fan may have nonuniform velocity distribution. 
In a flow improvement program at the University of Washingtons3 model tunnel 
studies showed very low velocities in the comers. The flow at the third comer was 
higher on the inside of the turn. However, the upflow-cross-flow distribution prior 
to the turn did not exhibit a discemable flow pattern similar to the test section. 
After the tum there were two distinct rotations in the upper and lower half of the 
duct. A model tunnel test section exhibited a similar cross-flow gradient to that 
present in the full-scale tunnel. Although this problem sounds like a secondary flow 
produced by the velocity gradients prior to the tum, in all cases the sense of the 
rotation was reversed. 


3
.
8
 COOLING 
121 
It was discovered that when the antiswirl vanes were uniformly deflected either 
positively to reduce fan swirl or negatively to increase fan swirl the comers were 
filled and the cross-flow gradient was reduced but not eliminated. In the final tunnel 
modification the antiswirl vanes, which originally were simple flat plates hinged to 
the nacelle supports, were redesigned. 
The chord of the antiswirl vanes was increased. 
They were made into cambered airfoil sections using the nacelle struts for a leading 
edge. This modification filled the comers of the second diffuser and eliminated flow 
separation regions on the original flat-plate vanes. The new cambered vanes were 
deflected to 12" and resulted in a much more uniform velocity distribution with all 
four comers filled with higher energy flow. This flow improvement in the second 
diffuser and fourth comer also reduced the power consumption at all speeds by 
about 2.0%. 
3.8 COOLING 
All the energy supplied to the propeller driving a wind tunnel finally emerges as 
an increase of heat energy in the airstream. This increases the temperature of the 
tunnel air until heat losses balance the input. For low-power tunnels (and particularly 
those with open jets) this balance is realized at reasonable temperatures, the heat 
transfer through surface cooling and air exchange being sufficient. For tunnels with 
high-power inputs and high jet velocities this low-temperature balance no longer 
occurs. For example, the heat rise incurred by bringing air to rest at 450 mph is 
about 36°F. With an energy ratio of 8.0, the heat rise in the airstream would be 
4S°F per circuit, leading very shortly to prohibitive temperatures. Obviously, tunnels 
in this class require cooling arrangements to augment the inherent heat losses. It 
should be readily realized that steady-state operation with no net air temperature 
increase above ambient would require that there be a cooling apparatus absorbing 
energy at the same rate at which the fan is applying energy to the airstream. 
Additional cooling may be accomplished by four means: (1) an increase in 
transfer of heat through the tunnel shell by external surface cooling, which at some 
facilities is obtained by running water over the tunnel exterior, (2) interior cooling 
by the addition of chilled turning vanes, (3) a heat exchanger in the largest tunnel 
section, or (4) a continual replacement of the heated tunnel air with cooler outside 
air by means of an air exchanger. 
Some tunnels use an air exchanger to replace the lower energy boundary layer 
with cool outside air, having exchange towers to ensure adequate dispersion of the 
heated air and fresh air that is free from surface contamination. Assuming the 
previously mentioned rise of 45°F per circuit, a 10% exchange would limit the rise 
to 45"F, excluding heat losses elsewhere. (Ten percent is a lower than average 
amount of exchange.) 
One difficulty associated with an air exchanger is that it puts the highest pressure 
section of the tunnel at atmospheric pressure, and hence the jet pressure is below 
atmospheric. This leads to troublesome but by no means insoluble problems of 
sealing off the balance room. (The same lower than ambient static pressure at the 


122 
WIND TUNNEL 
DESIGN 
test section is present in open circuit tunnels.) Another difficulty that must be 
considered is the possible effects of weather conditions on a tunnel with a large 
amount of air being exchanged. 
It should be mentioned that a breather slot at the downstream end of the test 
section can be used in conjunction with the air exchanger to get the jet up to 
atmospheric pressure and heme avoid balance sealing troubles. However, this ar- 
rangement with the air going in the breather and out the exchanger requires as much 
as 20% of the total power input. 
The internal heat exchanger needed for high-powered wind tunnels require an 
immense amount of surface, a great deal more than is offered by all four sets of 
guide vanes. Accordingly, a special installation is needed, and there is almost no 
way to avoid a very large amount of drag. In a preliminary study reported by 
SteinleS4 
pressure drops of 8 to 189 were measured across exchangers; another 
design, unreported, bad 49. Thus the heat exchanger must be placed in the largest 
section of the tunnel where q is lowest. Fortunately the temperature of the stream 
is highest at this point and heat exchange, consequently, is most easily accomplished. 
In view of its power cost a great deal of thought should go into the design of a 
heat exchanger, and it should be remembered that normal streamlining should be 
used here as well as elsewhere. The unknowns of internal and external boundary 
layer thicknesses make the problem of cooling through the walls quite difficult. In 
discussing internal cooling, Tiffords5 
agrees that a radiator has possible advantages 
over cooled turning vanes. 
The obvious disadvantages of high temperatures in the wind tunnel include added 
trouble cooling the drive motor (if it is in the tunnel and does not have separate 
cooling), the rapid softening of the materials commonly used for model temporary 
fillets, and increased personnel difficulties. Another deleterious effect is the drop 
in Reynolds number that occurs with increasing temperatures whether the tunnel 
is run at constant speed or at constant dynamic pressure. Figure 3.24 illustrates 
this effect. 
Temperature. Degrees F 
FIGURE 3.24 
Effect of temperature on test Reynolds number. 


3.10 
TEST-SECTION FLOW QUALITY 
123 
Since most electric motors have high efficiencies, placing the motor outside the 
tunnel is probably not justified by the small amount of tunnel heating saved thereby, 
but the ease of motor repairs and tunnel repowering without a nacelle change are 
strong arguments for the external drive motor. 
3.9 BREATHER: VIBRATIONS 
If the tunnel is to be operated with an open jet, due consideration must be given to 
the possibility of pulsations similar to the vibrations in an organ pipe. Other oscilla- 
tory effects have been experienced that appear to be associated with unstable condi- 
tions as the open jet enters the diffuser collector. These phenomena, believed to be 
a function of jet length, can be quite serious. Some insight into these phenomena 
may be gleaned by studying the flow modeling discussed in the chapter on tun- 
nel corrections. 
A relatively simple solution that has proved successful in some cases consists 
of putting a slot (about 0.05 diameter wide) into the diffuser that connects it to the 
atmosphere. Such an arrangement is called a "breather." 
If the slot is properly made 
and adjusted so that it is just large enough to prevent organ piping, the losses can 
be kept low. In some open jet tunnels alterations to the exit cone proved sufficient 
to prevent the vibration, but in others no satisfactory exit cones or breathers have 
been found that would permit operation above 200 mph. 
The NASA Langley 4 X 7-m tunnel, when run in a closed-on-bottom-only test- 
section configuration, has exhibited periodic flow pulsations in the axial direction 
at three dynamic pressures. The magnitude of the velocity peaks increased with the 
addition of flapped vanes between the first and second comers. The addition of 
triangular vanes with alternate deflections on the side walls and ceiling of the exit 
cone removed these pulsations at the higher dynamic pressures and reduced the 
width of the peak at the lowest dynamic pressures. The vanes are mounted inboard 
of the walls and ceiling. Model tunnel studies show that the remaining pulsation 
can be eliminated by modifying the reentry cone. The modification consists of a 
tapered cone forward of the original reentry cone. 
Closed jet tunnels usually require breathers too, because the entire return passage 
is above atmospheric pressure, and some air may leak out. In turn the loss of air 
would drop the jet pressure below atmospheric unless it were replenished through 
a relatively low loss passage. The proper place for a closed jet tunnel breather is 
at the downstream end of the test section, and like that for an open jet tunnel a slot 
about 0.05 diameter wide usually suffices. It is available that it be covered with a 
fine screen to prevent papers and such from entering the tunnel. 
3.10 TEST-SECTION FLOW QUALITY 
For an empty test section the traditional view of the ideal flow outside the boundary 
layer would be the following. The velocity passing through each plane normal to 
the centerline would be uniformly parallel to the centerline and would have no 


124 
WIND TUNNEL DESIGN 
variation with time; that is, there would be no upflow or cross-flow and there would 
be no turbulence. Since it is doubtful that such flow can be obtained in a wind 
tunnel, the question then becomes what flow quality is acceptable at a reasonable 
tunnel performance level and operating cost. The tunnels constructed for wind 
engineering 
studies have quite 
different 
"ideal" 
flow requirements. They are designed 
to reproduce, insofar as possiBle, characteristics of Earth's boundary layer flow in 
some representative circumstances. 
This requires producing a nonuniform but speci- 
fied mean flow and turbulence with specified integral scales and spectra. 
Values for velocity variation across the test sections of general-purpose tunnels 
are often quoted in the range of 0.20-0.30% variation from average. This gives a 
dynamic pressure variation of 0.4-0.6%. Values for angular variation are often 
quoted in the range of 0.1" from the average flow angle. The upflow variation is 
the critical flow angle for most aeronautical tests. The drag data for lifting systems 
must be corrected for upflow, as is detailed in the chapter on tunnel corrections. 
The first requirement is "steady flow," or sufficiently close to steady for the 
purposes of the facility, since it is not possible to achieve a flow of the magnitude 
envisioned without measurable unsteadiness. In general, unsteady flow is a result 
of flow separation(s) at one or more locations, either continuous or intermittent. 
The distinction between separated unsteady flow and turbulence is somewhat arbi- 
trary, the latter term commonly applied to flow arising from wakes of vanes, noise, 
and so on. A specification is needed that is based on temporal and spatial fre- 
quency content. 
Unsteady flow caused by a flow separation that either steadily or intermittently 
deflects the flow may be regarded as irrotational and inviscid outside the separated 
region. The only cure for these is to locate the source and eliminate it. This is not 
an easy task as the effects are usually detected a considerable distance from the 
source. Obvious locations to look for separation are the first diffuser, fust comer, 
fan nacelle, and contraction. If the tunnel has air leaks, the breather may cause 
separation. Usually leaks in a return tunnel will be near doors, drains, access holes 
for instrumentation, and so on, and they can be sealed given sufficient attention. 
Other sources of unsteady flow can arise from the fan through nonuniform 
inflow. 
This will be at the blade frequency or possibly at harmonics. The number of fan 
blades, nacelle supports, and prerotation vanes should never be even multiples of 
each other so that interactions are not synchronous. Mechanical vibration of the fan 
will usually be at the fan rpm. Vibration of turning vanes due to turbulence or 
unsteady flow could occur over a wide frequency range. The vanes can be stiffened 
by horizontal plates, if required. 
Nonuniform distribution of velocity can also occur by either poor vane design 
or improperly adjusted vanes that cause the flow to over- or underturn. Upflow and 
cross-flow distribution in the test section have occurred as a result of poor flow 
into the thud comer and out of the fourth comer. In this region the turning vanes 
are quite long, and in a great many tunnels the trailing edges have a spanwise 
bow. Making sure that the flow is not over- or underturned and converting the 
fourth comer vanes to a large-grid adjustable honeycomb will almost certainly 
improve the upflow, cross-flow, velocity, and turbulence in the test section. There 


3.11 APPROACH TO FLOW IMPROVEMENT 
125 
also needs to be a settling length after the contraction to allow the velocity to 
become uniform. 
Many tunnels suffer from one or more problems of various degrees of seriousness. 
The problems can likely be cured or reduced by the methods that have been discussed, 
but this takes persistence and time. In almost all cases the basic problem is time. 
A new wind tunnel represents a large investment. It usually is behind schedule when 
built, and thus the pressure to begin testing becomes irresistible. The down time 
for correcting problems can be large and, more important, somewhat unpredictable. 
Any time a change is made to a tunnel, a sufficient period of time must be set aside 
to allow for the complete recalibration of the test section. The authors cannot offer 
any solution to this part of the problem. 
The modifications3 to the University of Washington tunnel that has been discussed 
to some extent already and is given more attention in the next section consumed 
about three months of double-shift work. This included the installation of new parts, 
adjustment, and calibration. 
3.11 APPROACH TO FLOW TMPROVEMENT 
The following paragraphs can provide a framework for any project undertaken to 
achieve improvement of flow in a tunnel. 
The first task is to eliminate separation in the first diffuser. Make sure that the 
first two comers do not over- or underturn, that the flow is uniform approaching 
the fan, and that the nacelle flow is attached. The flow in the second diffuser should 
fill the duct. Using vane extensions and horizontal splitter plates, the fourth-comer 
turning vanes should be adjusted to yield uniform upflow and cross-flow and no 
large solid-body-type rotation in the test section. All of these should be done before 
honeycombs or screens are installed. The exception to the screens would be in a 
wide-angle diffuser if one is present. This then should yield a tunnel with the best 
test-section flow for the minimum power. 
Using an axisymmetric contraction cone with a contraction ratio of 11, Ramjee 
and HussainS6 
have shown that the turbulence 
at the contraction 
cone 
exit is essentially 
independent of the screen Reynolds number based on either wire diameter or mesh 
size. For the longitudinal turbulence the values behind the screens ahead of the inlet 
vary from 0.029 to 0.052, while at the exit the variation was 0.0050-0.0054 for 
five different screens. The lateral variation at the inlet was 0.032-0.063 and 0.0060- 
0.0070 at the exit. The pressure loss coefficient for four of the screens varied from 
K 
= 0.65 to K = 2.34, based on the relations previously given, and the porosity 
varied from 0.62 to 0.75 (a screen with porosity of 0.25 has been excluded). The 
screen with K = 2.34, inlet turbulence of 0.29, and exit turbulence of 0.0051 gave 
the same results at the exit or test section as the one with K = 0.65, inlet turbulence 
of 0.052, and exit turbulence of 0.0050. These are the longitudinal values. This 
implies that one should use screens with the smallest pressure loss coefficient, and 
if multiple screens are used, again, screens with the smallest loss should be adopted. 


126 
WIND TUNNEL 
DESIGN 
Ramjee and Hussaid6 
also determined 
that the ratio of rms exit to inlet turbulence 
as a function of contraction ratio (from Prandtl) is overpredicted in the longitudinal 
direction and underpredicted in the lateral direction. These predictions are 
u component turbulence reduction = 113 
v component turbulence reduction = 1Ifi 
The linear theory of turbulence reduction due to a contraction predicted an 
increase in the lateral c0mponent,3~ 
but this is not borne out by experiment, which 
shows a decrease. There does not at present appear to be a good method of predicting 
the effects of contraction ratio on turbulence reduction. The axial and lateral turbu- 
lence should be determined at several speeds, at the start of both the contraction 
and the test section. This will determine the turbulence reduction due to the contrac- 
tion. The effect of filters on the turbulence measurements should be carefully 
evaluated. If the turbulence level is too high, then the installation of a honeycomb 
followed by a screen or screens must be considered. The reduction of axial and 
lateral turbulence and the pressure drops at the contraction can be estimated by 
published values. A better approach, using hot wires, would be to measure these 
values with the same filter settings that were used in the tunnel measurements. 
If screens andlor honeycombs are installed, the reduction in turbulence should 
be checked as each device is installed. This will ensure that the minimum number 
of devices is used, thus holding losses to a minimum. The following values for 
turbulence are suggested. The ideal value would, of course, be zero. The final 
accepted values will be a trade-off between installation costs and reduction in tunnel 
performance and power costs. 
For tunnels intended for research on boundary layers and boundary layer transi- 
tion, the lateral values of the turbulence, which is usually the largest, must be kept 
sufficiently small. Values of about 0.05% have been suggested. 
Tunnels used for developmental 
testing can have larger turbulence values, perhaps 
as high as 0.5% in the axial diction, although some large government tunnels try 
for 0.1%. However, there is no general agreement as to the required absolute value, 
and there are some who argue that tests of terrestrial vehicles should be done in 
streams with turbulence levels of up to 1%. 
Another approach is as follows. The lower limit for the tunnel's Reynolds number 
range was on the order of 1.5 million based on instrumentation sensitivities and 
size of models. At these Reynolds numbers for a smooth model there will be an 
extensive 
region of laminar flow. Thus there is the possibility 
of poor flow simulation 
due to laminar separation on the model that does not occur at full scale. The usual 
practice to improve simulation is to use trip strips on the model to fix the transition 
along lines expected to occur on the full-scale article at some representative condi- 
tion. Considering these practices the following suggestion is made. Test a smooth 
wing without flaps at lift coefficients around 0.2-0.5 without trip strips and check 
the natural transition using either oil flow or sublimation flow visualization. If the 
natural transition occurs, depending on the airfoil section, in the range of 3040% 
of 


3.12 DRIVE SYSTEM 
127 
the chord, the turbulence 
level in the tunnel is acceptable. If this can be accomplished 
without screens or honeycombs, the power consumption will be less and the dirt 
problem with screens changing flow characteristics will be avoided. 
3
.
1
2
 DRIVE SYSTEM 
Since the thrust of the fan and the drag of the various tunnel components vary with 
the square of the fan rpm, it would appear that to maintain an even velocity front 
in the test section, speed adjustments should be made by varying fan rpm rather 
than fan pitch. Although this conclusion 
is justified in short tunnels of low contraction 
ratio, in the larger tunnels, particularly those with dust screens and internal coolers 
to act as flow dampers, it is certainly not essential. Indeed, many of the larger 
tunnels, which are equipped with both rpm and pitch change, use the latter as quicker 
and simpler. It does seem as though provision of both types of control is a good 
design procedure. 
Various drive systems are described subsequently because they are still in use 
in various facilities. New facilities will almost certainly use solid-state controllers 
directly for DC machinery or more likely variable-frequency systems for AC machin- 
ery. The described drive systems are best thought of as basic concepts. The actual 
details of how the drive is accomplished has varied considerably from case to case. 
This field, like the electronics field, continues to change rapidly and solid-state 
devices continue to replace rotating equipment as the solid-state devices become 
less costly and more reliable. 
Considering the drives capable of variable-speed control, we have the following: 
1. Solid State Controller for DC Motol: A system of rectifiers takes the power 
line input and provides variable voltage and variable current to operate a DC motor. 
The system comes as an integrated package with RS 232 input and output so that 
a computer can send the commands for required speed. 
2. Generator and DC Motor A direct-current generator run by a synchronous 
motor and used to drive a direct-current motor in the tunnel electrically is a satisfac- 
tory system below about 200 hp, the costs becoming excessive above that figure. 
It offers excellent speed control. 
3. Tandem Drive. The combination of a DC motor for low powers and a single- 
speed induction motor for high powers is satisfactory for the range of 300-20,000 
hp. With this arrangement the DC motor is used for low-power operation and for 
bringing the induction motor up to running speed. 
4. Variable Frequency. The power range for this approach using solid-state 
variable-frequency systems is now up to at least 10,000 hp. This type of system is 
used at the Boeing Helicopter Company and was installed at the Lockheed Martin 
low-speed wind tunnel in the 1980s as part of a repowering project. The tunnel 
drive in these cases are in the 9000-hp range. The historic arrangement for variable- 
frequency systems involved a synchronous motor driving a DC generator whose 


128 
WIND TUNNEL 
DESIGN 
output was used to run a DC 
motor that in turn powered an alternator. The output 
of the alternator was provided to the fan motor, which could be either a synchronous 
or an induction motor. This is an excellent system but historically quite expensive. 
Solid-state systems are now cost competitive over a wide power range. 
5. Magnetic Coupling. A synchronous motor can be used to drive a-fan through 
a variable-speed magnetic coupling. This is historically one of the least expensive 
setups as far as first cost is concerned and gives excellent speed control from zero 
to maximum velocity since it is virtually "stepless." 
6. Multispeed Squirrel Cage. An induction motor arranged to have several op- 
erating speeds may be used in conjunction with a variable-pitch fan to get a satisfac- 
tory drive. 
7 .  Wound-Rotor Induction Motor In general, one cannot expect wide rpm 
changes, good control, or high eficiency from a wound-rotor induction motor, 
although such a motor has been used with reasonable success in combination with 
a variable-pitch fan. It does offer a low first cost and moderately small motor for 
- 
tunnel installations. 
8. Double-Fed Induction Motol: This arrangement requires a variable-frequency 
power source that is fed into the rotor of an induction motor. Its first cost is high, 
but it is probably the most widely used drive for very high power installations where 
efficiency is important. 
9. Internal-Combustion Drive. The use of an internal-combustion engine is unde- 
sirable because of both high operating cost and lack of long-term reliability. In the 
few tunnels where they have been used the engineers invariably look forward to 
the day when the gasoline engine can be replaced by an electric drive. For reasons 
almost unknown (but surmised to be connected with the lack of a cooling airstream 
over the stationary engine and unskilled maintenance), reciprocating engines rarely 
deliver the life in tunnel use that they do on aircraft, 300 h being a fairly typical 
figure per engine. When an aircraft engine must be used, special care should be 
taken that the exhaust manifold be water jacketed or otherwise cooled. An annoying 
trouble with these engines (as if the above is not sufficient) is that their spark plugs 
foul up under the low-load operation frequently needed in a tunnel. For comparison, 
it is noted that many electric drive motors in wind tunnels operate for several decades 
between major rework. The drive motor of the Glenn L. Martin wind tunnel at the 
University of Maryland operated from 1949 to 1993 with only routine inspections 
and cleaning. Other facilities have had similar long life times. The electric motors 
usually outlast the fan systems by large margins. 
3.13 WIND TUNNEL CONSTRUCTION 
The structural loading on the various sections of a low-speed wind tunnel are usually 
less critical than the strength needed to avoid vibration, a significant exception being 
the assurance that the drive motor will stay in place should it lose one-half of its 
blades. The rest of the tunnel may be examined to withstand 
the maximum stagnation 
pressure with a safety factor of perhaps 4.0. 


3.13 WIND TUNNEL CONSTRUCTION 
129 
Since vibration of parts of the wind tunnel contributes to noise, discomfort of 
the tunnel crew, and possible fatigue failures and usually adds to the turbulence in 
the wind stream, it is good practice to have the natural frequencies of all tunnel 
parts well above any exciting frequencies. Many of these parts of the tunnel are 
directly amenable to basic vibration theory; others must wait for treatment after the 
tunnel is built. At the time, for the small tunnels at least, flat panels can be checked 
with a simple shaker motor, and by means of a vibrometer or a similar device the 
natural frequencies can be determined. Any below the maximum fan rpm should 
be increased by stiffening the part. A special effort should be made to keep vibration 
out of the test section and balance supports. 
All types of materials are used for tunnel construction: wood, plywood, thin 
metal, heavy metal (for pressure tunnels), cast concrete, gunnite, and plastics. Even 
though there is "general agreement" 
that low-speed wind tunnels require no cooling, 
heavy running in the summertime will usually make the tunnel operators wish they 
had some. It is highly advisable in fact that even 25-hp tunnels be cooled. Many 
tunnels have an opening where cooler outside air can be blown into the tunnel 
during model changes. Some large metal tunnels spray water over the outside to 
cool the tunnel. 
Fan blades for low-speed tunnels are frequently made of wood, although modified 
aircraft propellers are sometimes used with trailing-edge flaps to provide a uniform 
pressure rise across the fan disk. Wood blades have excellent fatigue life. The wood 
for fan blades must be straight grained and knot free. Damage to wood blades can 
be repaired by scarfing in a piece of wood. To avoid abrasion, the leading edge at 
the tip can have a fiberglass insert. Often the last 2 or 3 in. of the tip are of balsa, 
as this will shatter when an unwanted object wedges between the tip and tunnel 
and can be easily replaced. There is no clear consensus on the matter of spare 
blades. Tunnels that use short-span, large-chord blades have used fiberglass and, 
more recently, composite materials such as carbon-fiber-reinforced 
epoxies. These 
blades may have spars and be filled with foam. 
For small research and instruction tunnels plywood is possibly the best material. 
Particle board is another material used; however, it is not as stiff as plywood and 
can develop a sag when unsupported. A smooth surface finish is difficult to obtain 
on particle board; also, it chips easily and is difficult to patch. With wood, holes 
that inevitably get cut in the tunnel can be easily patched and epoxy fillers can be 
used to maintain a smooth interior surface. The plywood is normally placed inside 
a wood frame. The tunnel is often made in sections that bolt together. To prevent 
leaks, surgical tubing can be used as a gasket. The end of one section has a groove 
routed to receive the tubing. This is just a large 0 
ring. The fan area can be metal, 
as it is easy to roll up round sections. The contraction can be laminated wood or 
could be built up with a fiberglass and foam sandwich. When student labor is used, 
the design must consider the skills available. A door in the floor in the plane of the 
fan will be necessary so that blades may be taken out of their hubs and replaced. 
The detailed design, including selection of material, erection, and so on, of large 
tunnels is usually done by engineering firms that are familiar with all the building 
codes and have civil, mechanical, and electrical engineering expertise. 


130 
wIND TUNNEL DESIGN 
3.14 TEST-SECTION INSERTS 
Many tunnels have an auxiliary two-dimensional test section that fits inside the 
normal test section in order to provide testing facilities for shorter span models 
at considerable savings in model cost. These jets are usually either endplate or 
. 
- 
contraction types. 
The endplate jet insert consists of two flat plates sealed at the tunnel floor and 
ceiling with a space between them for mounting and testing a constant-chord two- 
dimensional airfoil model (Figure 3.25). In some installations the model supports 
come up inside the endplates, and the rear pitch strut is used to hold and move the 
wake survey rake. Since the drag of the model changes with many factors, and 
since drag changes can make more air pass around instead of through the test 
section, special provision must be made to control the test dynamic pressure. One 
FIGURE 
3
.
2
5
 Two-dimensional insert for the Glenn L. Martin wind tunnel at the University 
of Maryland. 


3 15 SAFETY 
131 
procedure is to use the customary double piezometer to hold constant the quantity 
of air that enters the original test section and ascertain that a constant fraction of 
that air passes through the new test section by reading pitot-static tubes placed 
outside it. Variations can be made by remotely movable trailing-edge flaps on 
the endplates. 
A second approach is to contract the whole tunnel test section by an additional 
contraction section. This has the advantages of greatly increasing the contraction 
ratio, making the installation of turbulence screens easy, and providing sure and 
positive two-dimensional conditions. On the other hand, a much smaller quantity 
of air now passes through the tunnel for a particular test speed, since the test-section 
area is reduced, and in many cases the performance of the tunnel fan is greatly 
impaired. Still 
another 
source 
of trouble is the problem of diffusing the 
overcontracted 
passage. Somewhere some extremely rapid diffusion is going to have to take place, 
and the task is exceedingly difficult to do with even passable efficiency. In one 
installation a two-dimensional insert converted a 9-ft-diameter tunnel to a 2;- X 
9-ft test section; the problem of the separated diffuser arose, but vortex generators 
on all four walls very nearly solved it. 
Several other items are of interest when inserts are under consideration. One of 
these is the question of whether to mount the insert horizontal so that the model is 
vertical or vice versa. The horizontal insert offers the opportunity of using liquid 
seals around the model mounting endplates, but, on the other hand, the model is 
somewhat more difficult 
to get to for adjustments. 
In some instances a severe pressure 
differential will occur with this type of insert, and great difficulty is experienced in 
keeping any but the heaviest liquids in the seals. We now know that using mercury, 
as was common prior to 1970, was not a good idea due to its adverse health effects. 
Additional breather slots will usually alleviate this condition. Force measuring is 
also made more difficult by the large and indeterminable 
tares of the model mounting 
endplates, so much so that it is sometimes preferable to obtain the lift by pressure 
distribution on the model or on the floor and ceiling and drag by a momentum rake 
or to leave a small gap between model and walls. This, of course, then introduces 
some doubt about the "two dimensionality" of the flow so that additional flow 
investigations must be included in the test plans. 
In conclusion, it does not appear possible to recommend one type of two- 
dimensional jet insert as clearly superior. As a final note, aerodynamics aside for 
a moment, the endplate type of insert is far easier to install and remove. 
3
.
1
5
 SAFETY 
Though it may seem strange to the uninitiated to bring the question of safety into 
this discussion of wind tunnels, the long roster of injured indicates it is not to be 
overlooked. Accidents in tunnel use include fires, falls, injuries from sharp-edged 
models, and personnel being locked in a tunnel when it is started. 
Starting with the last, anybody who enters a part of a wind tunnel not readily 
visible to the tunnel operators without firm understanding regarding the restart- 


132 
WIND TUNNEL DESIGN 
ing time is an idiot. But since it is not the practice to injure idiots, many tunnels 
preface a start with a blast on a horn, with a 5-sec wait for incumbents to punch 
stop switches installed in test sections, return passages, and near the fan blades. 
Another approach is to install an automobile ignition switch at the test-section 
entrance. The switch is in the tunnel start circuit. Still another approach is to use 
light beams (similar to burgb alarms) in various parts of the tunnel circuit that 
prevent the tunnel from starting when cut. When it is necessary for someone to be. 
in the tunnel while it is running, very clear signals and understanding must again 
be in place. 
Falls are unfortunately Erequent in wind tunnels. Their rounded surfaces, often 
coated with oil or other low-friction materials, including in some instances ice, and 
the precipitous slope of entrance cones have resulted in bruises and even broken 
arms and legs. The authors speak feelingly at this point. In view of the danger 
associated with the entrance cone and settling chamber, pitot-static tubes, thermocou- 
ples, and the like should be wall mounted, not floor mounted. 
Fires in wind tunnels seem to be almost the rule rather than the exception. A 
broken propeller can spark a dust screen into Fie; a trouble Light can make plenty 
of trouble; or building forms can in some way become ignited. Since the tunnel is 
closed, special care should be taken in selecting fire extinguishers. And special care 
should be taken also to see that fire extinguishers emitting poisonous vapors are 
not easily tripped. It may well be that the world's record for the hundred-yard dash 
rightfully belongs to be tunnel engineer who inadvertently activated the carbon 
dioxide system in one of the largest east coast tunnels. 
Sharp edges on metal models are a potent hazard. The authors do not know a 
tunnel engineer or technician who has not suffered from this source. It is only good 
sense to protect the tunnel crew from these sharp edges using tape, wood, or 
plastic slats. 
Safety may seem like a puerile subject, but it loses that appearance afterward. 
REFERENCES AND NOTES 
1. See Table 1.1. 
2. For more on this topic see Chapter 8. 
3. NWTC Project Office, National Wind Tunnel Complex, NASA CR-198491. 
4. See Chapter 8. 
5. Bradshaw, P., and Pankhurst, R. C., 'The Design of Low-Speed W
i
n
d
 Tunnels," Prog. 
Aeronaut. Sci., 5, 1-
59, 1964. 
6. Preston, J. H., "The Minimum Reynolds Number for a Turbulent Boundary Layer and 
the Selection of a Transition Device:' 
J. Fluid Mech., 3, 373, 1958. 
7. See Chapter 10. 
8. See Chapter 8. 
9. The hydraulic diameter of a duct is defined as the diameter of a circle having the same 
area as the cross section of the actual duct regardless of the shape. 


REFERENCES AND NOTES 
133 
10. Ewald, E R., Holzdeppe, D., Cronauer, D., and Waudby-Smith, P., "Standardized Wind 
Tunnel Design and Construction for Aerodynamic Research and Development," ICAS 
Paper 94-3.1.4, presented at the Nineteenth Congress of the International Council of the 
Aeronautical Sciences, Anaheim, CA, Sept. 18-23, 1994. 
11. Mehta, R. D., 'The Aerodynamic Design of Blower Tunnels with Wide Angle Diffusers," 
Prog. Aerospace Sci., 18, 59-120, 1977. 
12. Wattendorf, E L., "Factors Influencing the Energy Ratio of Return Flow Wind Tunnels," 
paper presented at the Fifth International Congress for Applied Mechanics, Cambridge, 
Sept. 12-16, 1938, p. 52. 
13. Wallis, R. A,, Axial Flow Fans and Ducts, Krieger, Malabar, FL, 1993. 
14. Eckert, W
.
 T., Mort, K. W., and Jope, J., "Aerodynamic Design Guidelines and Computer 
Program for Estimation of Subsonic Wind Tunnel Performance," 
NASA TN 
D-8243, 
Oct. 1976. 
15. Shames, I. H., Mechanics of Fluids, 3rd ed., McGraw-Hill, New York, 1992, Chapter 9. 
16. Anderson, J. D., Jr., Fundamentals of Aerodynamics, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1991, 
Section 10.3. 
17. See Figure 3.1 and the related discussion for the section designations. 
18. See Chapter 9. 
19. Robertson, J. M., and Fraser, H. R., "Separation Prediction for Conical Diffusers," Trans. 
ASME, Series 082, 201,201-209, 1960. 
20. Kmber, G., "Guide Vanes for Deflecting Fluid Currents with Small Loss of Energy," 
NACA TM 
722, 1932. 
21. Collar, A. R., "Some Experiments with Cascades of Airfoils," 
ARC R&M 1768, 1937. 
22. Patterson, G. N., "Note on the Design of Corners in Duct Systems," ARC R&M 
1773, 1937. 
23. McPhail, D. C., "Experiment9 on Turning Vanes at an Expansion," ARC R&M 1876, 
1939. 
24. Salter, C., "Experiments on Thin Turning Vanes," ARC R&M 2469, Oct. 1946. 
25. Winters, K. G., "Comparative Tests of Thin Turning Vanes in the RAE 4 X 3 Foot Wind 
Tunnel," ARC R&M 2589, 1947. 
26. Sahlin, A., and Johansson, A. V., "Design of Guide Vanes for Minimizing the Pressure 
Loss in Sharp Bends," Phys. Fluids A, 3, 1934-1940, 1991. 
27. Lindgren, B., Osterlund, J., and Johansson, A. V., "Measurement and Calculation of 
Guide Vane Performance 
in Expanding Bends for Wind Tunnels," Paper No. 7, presented 
at the CEAS Forum on Wind Tunnels and Wind Tunnel Test Techniques, Cambridge, 
United Kingdom, April 14-16, 1997. 
28. Idel'chik, I. E., Handbook of Hydraulic Resistance, The Israel Program for Scientific 
Translations, Tel Aviv, 1966, AEC-TR-6630. 
29. Mehta, R. D., and Bradshaw, P., "Design Rules for Small Low Speed Wind Tunnels," 
Aeronaut. J., Nov. 1979, pp. 4 4 3 4 9 .  
30. Prandtl, L., "Attaining A Steady Stream in Wind Tunnels," NACA TM 726, Oct. 
1933. At the time this was published, Prandtl had been involved in designing and 
building wind tunnels for his research in aerodynamics for more than 30 years. This 
memorandum contains descriptive material on some important wind tunnels of that era 
and earlier. 


134 
WIND 
TUNNEL DESIGN 
3 
1. Scheiman, J., and Brooks, J. D., "Comparison 
of Experimental and Theoretical Turbulence 
Reduction from Screens, Honeycomb, and Honeycomb-Screen Combinations," J. Air- 
craf, 18(8), 638-643, 1981. 
32. Loehrke, R. I., and Nagib, H. M., "Experiments on Management of Free-Stream Turbu- 
lence," AGARD-R-598, Sept. 1972. 
33. Roberts, H. E., "Considerations in the Design of a Low-Cost Wind Tunnel," paper 
presented at the Fourteenth Annual Meeting of the Institute of Aeronautical Sciences, 
El Segundo, CA, Jan. 1946. 
34. The notation has been changed to be consistent with that in this book. 
35. Batchelor, G. K., The Theory of Homogeneous Turbulence, Cambridge University Press, 
1967, Cambridge, pp. 58-75. 
36. Schubauer, 
G. B., Spangenburg, W. G., andKlebanoff, P. S., "Aerodynamic 
Characteristics 
of Damping Screens," NACA TN 2001, 1950. 
37. Laws, E. M., and Livesey, J. L., "Flow Through Screens," Ann. Rev. Fluid Me&, 10, 
247-266, 1978. 
38. Morel, T., "Comprehensive Design of Axisymmetric Wind Tunnel Contractions." 
J. Fluids Eng., ASME, 97,225-233, June 1975. 
39. Tsien, H. S., "On the Design of the Contraction Cone for a W~nd 
Tunnel," J. Aemmut. 
Sci., 10, 68-70, 1943. 
40. Thwaites, B., "On the Design of Contractions for Wind Tunnels," ARC R&M 2278, 
1946. 
41. Chmielewski, G. E., "Boundary Layer Considerations in the Design of Aerodynamic 
Contractions," 
J. Aircraf, 8, 435-438, 1974. 
42. Stratford, G. S., "The Prediction of Separation of the Turbulent Boundary Layer," 
J. Fluid Mech, 51, 1-16, 1959. 
43. Borger, G. G., "The Optimization 
of Wind Tunnel Contractions for the Subsonic Range," 
NASA 'ITF 16899, Mar. 1976. 
44. Mikhail, M. N., and Rainbird, W. J., "Optimum Design of Wind Tunnel Contractions," 
AIAA Paper 78-819, presented at the AIAA Tenth Aerodynamic Testing Conference, 
1978. 
45. Darrius, G., "Some Factors Influencing the Design of Wind Tunnels," Brown-Boveri 
Rev., 30, 168-176, July-Aug. 1943. 
46. Harper, J. J., "Tests on Elbows of a Special Design," J. Aeronaut. Sci., 13, 1946. 
47. Collar, A. R., "The Design of Wind Tunnel Fans," ARC R&M 1889, Aug. 1940. 
48. Patterson, G. N., "Ducted Fans: Design for High Efficiency," Australian Council for 
Aeronautics, ACA Vol. 7, July 1944. 
49. Lewis, K. 
I., 
Vortex Element Methods for Fluid Dynamic Analysis of Engineering Systems, 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1991, Chapters 4 and 5. 
50. Wallis, R. A,, Axial Flow Fans and Ducts, Krieger, Malabar, FL, 
1993, Section 8.3, 
p. 188. The term twist or rututivn of theflow was used in previous editions of this book 
and was denoted by e. The new terminology is being adopted here since Wallis's book 
has been kept current and is most useful as a reference for the current topic. 
51. The flow coefficient A is related to the "local advance ratio" j -- ulnd = u d l r  
as used 
in previous editions of this book by j 
= nX. 
52. Eppler, R., Airfoil Design and Data, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1990. 


REFERENCES AND NOTES 
135 
53. Shindo, S., Rae, W. H., Aoki, Y., and Hill, E. G., "Improvement of How Quality at the 
University of Washington Low Speed Wind Tunnel," AIAA Paper 78-815, presented 
at the AIAA Tenth Aerodynamic Testing Conference, San Diego, CA, April 1978, 
pp. 336-343. 
54. Steinle, W. C., "The Experimental Determination of Aerodynamic Total Pressure Losses 
for Heat Exchanger Surfaces Considered for the 7 X 10 Foot Transonic Wind Tunnel," 
David Taylor Model Basin DTMB Aero Report 1951f, 1951. 
55. Tifford, A. N., "Wind Tunnel Cooling," J. Aeronaut. Sci., 10, 98-100, Mar. 1943. 
56. Rarnjee, V., and Hussain, A. K. M. E, "Influence of the Axisymmetric Contraction Ratio 
on Free Stream Turbulence," J. Fluids Eng., 98, 505-515, Sept. 1976. 


4 Pressure, Flow, and Shear Stress 
Measurements 
After a tunnel is constructed, the next step is to determine its flow characteristics 
and, of course, to change any that are not satisfactory for the purposes intended. 
First, however, it is necessary to discuss the quantities to be measured and the 
instruments that experience 
has shown are 
capable of useful results. We shall consider 
instruments needed for testing as well as for calibration. 
The low-speed "steady" airstream is usually considered to be defined when we 
know its distribution of temperature, pressure, dynamic pressure, and "turbulence." 
There are several assumptions embedded in this statement. We admit that the air- 
stream is expected to be turbulent and therefore not strictly steady or time invariant. 
The time variability of the airstream is to be characterized by its level of turbulence. 
Its pressure' and dynamic pressure are then the mean values for these quantities 
averaged over a time interval chosen according to the required precision of the 
mean. The stream temperature is similarly considered. Using the equation of state, 
we can then compute the density, and using the definitions of total pressure and 
total temperature, we can compute these quantities and flow speed as well. For 
atmospheric air, there is another variable that produces measurable effects. It is the 
water vapor content, which is usually indicated by relative humidity. The effect is 
reflected by a change in the effective gas constant in the equation of state. 
We may also compute the Reynolds number for a particular model based on its 
chosen characteristic length. Much of our interest is centered on determining pres- 
sure, which can be measured most simply by use of liquid manometers but is more 
commonly measured by electronic devices so that the data stream can be manipulated 
by computing machinery. For our subsonic testing, the precision with which measure- 
ments of stream temperatures are made is usually less demanding than that of typical 
pressure measurements. 
The role of acoustics in aerodynamics has increased steadily over several decades 
and has now become very important in a number of applications. 
The most prominent 
noise problem has been the noise associated with aircraft operation in the vicinity 
of airports. Dramatic reduction in noise produced by aircraft jet propulsion systems 
was achieved between 1960 and 1980. Advances in this area are continuing. 
Other aerodynamic noise problems are receiving increasing attention. The "wind 
noise" 
perceived by drivers and passengers 
of automobiles is increasingly 
considered 
a measure of quality. Automobile and truck environmental noise is an important 
- 
problem that is partly associated with the external aerodynamics of the vehicles. 
Helicopters have long had a characteristic signature associated with "blade slap." 
136 


4.1 PRESSURE 
137 
The noise generated by helicopters has become a limiting factor in their acceptance 
for passenger transport in some areas, and it is a liability in military operations as 
it provides a means of detection by opponents. Acoustic radiation from wind turbine 
rotors has in some instances been sufficiently objectionable that local citizens have 
strenuously opposed the installation of additional units. A result is that subsonic 
aerodynamic facilities are now frequently called on to carry out acoustic measure- 
ments in addition to the more traditional measurements that focused on performance 
and control issues of vehicles and limits of operation or survivability of many other 
devices. Wind noise impinging on passengers of luxury yachts is of significant 
concern to naval architects. And finally, 
a closely related area is underwater acoustics, 
or hydroacoustics, which has been an area of intense activity for naval research in 
both offensive and defensive weaponry for decades. 
Measurement of noise has become a common activity associated with low-speed 
wind tunnels. Microphones are simply pressure transducers with sufficiently high 
bandwidth frequency response. 
4.1 PRESSURE 
Concepts 
We have previously discussed pressure and used it as a variable in our derivations 
of equations of motion of fluids. We have not however done this from basic physical 
principles as a physicist might wish. Although we have an inclination to include 
such a fundamental review, insufficient time and space preclude that endeavor. We 
instead refer the reader to Benedict2 and sources cited therein for additional back- 
ground and detail. 
The basic notion of pressure that is implemented in measurement technology is 
force per unit area. Other concepts such as those embodied in various gas laws and 
kinetic theory are important h 
wind tunnel work but are necessary in relating pressure 
measurements to other ideas and results rather than directly in the measurement of 
pressure. 
Manometers 
One of the oldest devices for measuring pressures, and one of the easiest to build, 
is a manometer; a term normally applied to a device used to measure differential 
pressure. Common applications are measurements of the difference between a refer- 
ence pressure such as atmospheric and a process pressure such as a port on a wing 
model and measurements of the difference between two pressures in a process, such 
as the pressures from the total and static ports of a pitot-static tube. A simple 
U-tube manometer (shown in Figure 4.1) can be made from two pieces of straight 
glass tubing made parallel and connected by tubing at the bottom or by bending 
glass tubing into a U shape. The tubing is filled with a liquid, and the difference 
in liquid heights in the two tubes is measured, usually by an attached scale. The 


138 
PRESSURE, 
FLOW, 
AND 
SHEAR 
STRESS 
MEASUREMENTS 
A 
-- 
FIGURE 
4.1 
A U-tube-manometer. 
plane defined by the centerlines of the two tubes may be inclined at varying angles 
to the horizontal, which provides varying sensitivity. Setting the tubes vertical is 
the most common case. The difference in pressures is related to the height difference 
and the parameters describing the manometer by the hydrostatic pressure equilib- 
rium relation: 
where Ah is the difference in extents of liquid columns in the two tubes and P is 
the angle between the horizontal and the plane of the parallel manometer tubes. 
The product Ah sin P is the vertical difference in the heights of the two columns. 
Using smaller values of P provides an increased sensitivity. 
Here gl is the weight per unit mass, also referred to as acceleration o
f
 gravity. 
The value needed here is the "local" value, which varies with location on Earth and 
with altitude. The largest variation at the surface is due to variation in latitude. 
The following equation was adopted by the International Association of Geodesy3 
in 1980: 
where + 
is latitude. The adopted "standard" value4 of g is 9.80665 Nkg, or 32.17405 
Ibflslug. The variation from the equator to the north or south pole is about 0.5%. 
Also, p
,
 is the density of liquid in the manometer (equivalently specific gravity 
times density of water) and p, is the density of air in most wind tunnel applications 
but could be any fluid other than the manometer fluid that fills all the other spaces. 
(Note that a straightforward weighing of a volume of manometer fluid in the 
atmosphere to obtain the density will need to be corrected for buoyancy; otherwise 
the measurement will produce the difference in density of the manometer fluid and 
the density of the atmosphere. This difference in density is the quantity needed in 
the manometer equation.) 
The manometer is the most fundamental instrument readily available for pressure 
measurement. Manometers are used frequently for calibrating and checking other 
devices, as it is difficult to obtain a more accurate or precise result in the range of 
differential pressures commonly of interest in subsonic aerodynamic testing. 


4.1 PRESSURE 
139 
The factors limiting the accuracy of the manometer can be considered to be in 
three categories. First is the accuracy with which the measurement of the heights 
can be accomplished. Second is the accuracy with which the liquid density is known 
and the uniformity of the liquid density. And third is the presence of forces other 
than the weight of the liquid. With regard to the first category, Brombacher' has 
given an account of some of the methods that have been devised to make precise 
height measurements. Minimizing the effects of the second category requires care 
in the monitoring materials used. The principal force other than weight that affects 
manometer readings is surface tension, which can directly lead to a pressure jump 
across the liquid-gas interfaces in the manometer as well as produce a nonplanar 
surface to make the precise determination of liquid column length more difficult. 
Benedict2 and Adam6 may be consulted for more detail. 
The use of manometers has been so extensive that a number of units for pressure 
have been spawned, as noted by Soloukhin, Curtis, and Emrich,' from whom we 
have modeled Table 4.1. 
In the past, wind tunnels have used a wide array of manometers. These have 
ranged from the simple U-tube, similar to Figure 4.1, using a ruler or strip of graph 
paper to measure fluid heights to large banks of 50-200 tube manometers with 
constant-level reservoirs to maintain the reference fluid height to manometers that 
TABLE 
4.1. Units Used for Indicating Pressure with Some 
Conversions 
Name of Unit 
Valuea 
1 atm 
1 atm 
1 bar 
1 kgf/cm2 
1 l b / i ~ ~ . ~  
0 acoustic dbb 
1 atm 
1 in mercury 
1 in water 
1 mm mercury (Tom) 
1 lb/@ 
1 mm water 
m e  
SystSme Internationale (SI) unit of pressure is the pascal (symbol is 
Pa) and is equal to one newton per square meter. 
'Sound pressure level, in decibels (dB), is 20 times the logarithm to the 
base 10 of the ratio of the sound pressure level to the reference pressure 
value. The reference pressure should be explicitly stated in every document 
in which decibel units are used. In the absence of an explicit statement 
otherwise, sound pressure is the rms value. 
'Reference value commonly used for tnnsducers. 
Qeference value commonly used for human 
hearing-related data. This is 
a nominal value for the threshold of human detection. 


140 
PRESSURE, mow, AND SHEAR STRESS MEASUREMENTS 
can be precisely read using some of the devices reviewed by Brombacher? The 
U-tube and precision manometers could typically provide one or two pressures, and 
the large multitube manometers were used to determine pressure distributions over 
model surfaces. The simple, precision, and small multitube manometers usually 
were read and recorded by an individual. The large multitube manometers were 
photographed, and the films were read later by various techniques. The test-section 
total and static pressures were put on two of the manometer tubes. Then the pressure 
coefficients were merely the Ah of the desired pressure divided by the Ah of the 
dynamic pressure. To process data from large test programs, the photographs of the 
manometers were used with optical schemes arranged to scale the images so that 
the pressure coefficients could be ready directly using a microfilm machine. This 
could be considered a form of "optical data processing." 
A number of fluids have been found useful in manometers. Characteristics that 
are of interest are visibility of the meniscus, density, stability to environmental 
changes, and possible material interactions with tubing over a long contact time. 
With the demise of large manometer systems, the more exotic fluids have become 
much less common. Today the most commonly used fluids are silicon oil or water 
with a small amount of dye. Both of these have well-known dependence of density 
with temperature and do not change density appreciably with other environmental 
variables such as relative humidity. Some information on the variation of density 
of water with temperature at atmospheric pressure has been given in Chapter 1. The 
variation of density for water and mercury with temperature in degrees Fahrenheit 
is given by the equations 
The variation of density for a particular batch of Dow Coming 1 centistoke DC- 
200 silicon oil as a function of temperature in degrees Celsius was found to be 
given by Equation (4.4). The calibration was obtained using a water bath, a precision 
hydrometer accurate to a specific gravity of 0.001, and a precision thermometer 
accurate to 0.l0C: 
We illustrate here two useful manometers that can be built in almost any labora- 
tory. The first is a simple unit with a few tubes and adjustable slant angle (shown 
in Figure 4.2).8 
The second is a unit capable of very precise measurements with Ah 
readings of 0.0001 in. being possible if an appropriate micrometer or height gage 
is used in the construction. To achieve repeatability of such fme measurements, it 
is necessary that the thermal environment be quite stable. For example, if the room 
temperature is around 7577, a thermal shield must be provided between the person 
observing the meniscus through the optics and the main part of the unit. Otherwise, 


4.1 PRESSURE 
141 
FIGURE 4.2 
A multitube variable inclination manometer. 
a steady drift will be observed due to the radiant heat from the person to the 
manometer unit and the corresponding expansion of the material. It is s h o d  
in 
Figure 4.3 and is based on a design by Smith and Murphy.l0 Note that it is not 
claimed that an accuracy of 0.0001 in. of manometer fluid is readily achieved. 
Finally we provide a note on the time response of a liquid manometer. According 
to Soloukhin et al., the response is that of a damped harmonic oscillator with natural 
frequency given by w, = .\/2glL - 
16vZla4 and a time constant given approximately 
by a214v, where L is the length of the liquid column, a is its radius, and v is the 
kinematic viscosity of the liquid. These results do not include any effect of tubing 
that is necessary to connect a manometer to a pressure source of interest. The effect 
of tubing will be discussed later. More complete information on the time response 
of manometers is given by Holley and Bannister" and the subject is treated by 
Benedict2 as well. 
Pressure Transducers 
The termpressure transducer is usually applied to a device that provides an electrical 
response to a pressure or change in pressure. There are many types of devices, a 
number of which are mentioned by Benedict2 and Soloukhin et al? In low-speed 
wind tunnel applications the transducers in common use may be considered in two 
classes. The first is the set of transducers used to monitor tunnel flow conditions. 
These units must be very accurate and very stable over the range of operating 
conditions of a particular tunnel. They can be put in thermally controlled enclosures 


142 
PRESSURE, FLOW, AND SHEAR STRESS MEASUREMENTS 
FIGURE 4.3 
A high-precision micromanometer 
to minimize drift due to temperature changes and their size is not critical. They are 
frequently units that are considered to be secondary standards and are commonly 
obtained with traceability to national standards laboratories. 
The second class of transducers are used for measuring model pressures and 
perhaps wall or other surface pressures as needed for various tests. The cost per 
transducer for these units is more critical since a large number are frequently needed 
and their size is critical since they are often to be installed inside a model or in 
some other restricted space. 
The most commonly used pressure transducers are of the diaphragm type, which 
simply means that the basic sensing mechanism is a thin sheet of material that 
deforms as the pressure across it changes. The methods of sensing the diaphragm 
deformation 
include strain gages directly attached to the diaphragm, 
circuits to sense 
the change in capacitance due to the geometric change, and circuits to sense the 
change in inductance due to the geometric change. The strain gage units are most 
numerous as they can be made smaller and with current solid-state 
electronic methods 
can be made for a few dollars. These units are remarkable for their economy, 
although they must be calibrated frequently against more stable standard units. There 
are many strain gage units with stainless steel diaphragms and even some with 
quartz diaphragms. Transducers using the capacitive sensing method tend to be in 


4.1 PRESSURE 
143 
the higher priced ranges and to have larger dynamic range capability as well as 
being more rugged than the strain-gage-based units. These are more likely to be 
found 
in the main tunnel condition 
sensing applications 
and for secondary 
calibration. 
A majority of the pressure transducers used in subsonic wind tunnels are of the 
differential type, with a selected reference pressure applied to the reference side. 
Absolute pressure versions 
are almost always available. They differ from the differen- 
tial units by having one side of the diaphragm permanently sealed to a fixed pressure 
chamber that is close to vacuum. This is necessary in order to avoid serious tempera- 
ture sensitivity and leads to the absolute units having diaphragms that can withstand 
at least 1 atm. It turns out that this means they are not sufficiently sensitive for 
many applications in low-speed wind tunnels. 
Consider the likely pressure range for an external aerodynamic test of some 
object in an atmospheric wind tunnel using test speeds of 100 m/s (-200 knots). 
The dynamic pressure will be about 0.055 atm and the likely range of pressures 
may be about 3 times the dynamic pressure. This means that a transducer with a 
full scale of around 0.2 atm can be used, which will be at least five times more 
sensitive than an absolute unit of the minimum available capacity. The conclusion 
becomes more dramatic if a test at 50 mls (-100 knots) is considered since the 
required pressure measurement range will now be only -0.05 atm. The transducers 
come in a wide range of pressure values; however, 2.5 psid (-15 kPa) and 5.0 psid 
(30 kPa) are very commonly used (psid is pounds per square inch differential). The 
signal conditioning equipment must be of high quality in order to have the necessary 
signal-to-noise ratios. 
The chosen reference pressure for a given test is manifolded to all the transducers 
and usually is led out of the tunnel with the electrical leads. In the case of mechanical 
scanning valves, Scanivalves, this tube is used to periodically check the transducer 
calibration 
and recalibrate 
ifnecessary, usually once a shift. This is done by removing 
the tube from the reference and applying a known pressure to the transducer. In 
pressure units the transducer output is compared to the applied pressure. The current 
generation of electronic scanners have the ability to switch all transducers to a 
calibration pressure source in situ so that periodic calibrations can be done automati- 
cally while the tunnel continues to operate if that is otherwise desirable. This has 
been provided because the silicon-based semiconductor strain gage units are at the 
same time cheaper per unit and more susceptible to drift than the typical stainless 
steel diaphragm transducers used in the Scanivalve systems. The in situ calibration 
processes have the major advantage of being an end-to-end calibration incorporating 
all of the signal conditioning, the digitizers, 
an even the curve fitting software almost 
precisely as it is used in the actual data gathering for the test. This was not generally 
the case for the Scanivalve systems, for which the process is described next. The 
electronic scanning modules coming into service in the mid-1990s frequently are 
accompanied by read-only memory modules that have calibration data including 
temperature dependence. This will reduce the frequency of required calibration. 
Scanivalve transducers are usually calibrated against a secondary standard. When 
the transducer is calibrated outside the model, the bridge voltage used and the 
- 
- 
calibrated amplifier filter setting and gain are recorded. The same values are used 


144 
PRESSURE, now, 
AND SHEAR 
STRESS MEASUREMENTS 
during the test.-As an alternative, the bridge voltage can be recorded and the bridge 
output measured. The amplifier gain is then entered into the data reduction process. 
The bridge output is adjusted to zero for zero pressure or the voltage for zero 
pressure is recorded. Then a series of pressures are applied and the pressure and 
output voltage are recorded. These data are fed into a curve-fitting routine to 
determine the calibration curve. The transducers tend to be linear, but often a third- 
degree curve fit is used. 
Often when a Scanivalve transducer 
is independently calibrated and then mounted 
in the model or Scanivalve, there are slight but measurable shifts of the calibration 
curve, apparently caused by clamping the transducer. When mounted, the transducer 
will repeat its calibration over a period of time. Thus, it appears that the pressure 
transducer should be calibrated mounted in the Scanivalve or the model. Calibration 
must be checked if the transducer clamp is loosened and then retightened. This 
could also occur for the newer electronic pressure scanners and should be kept in 
mind if the most precise results are required. 
At the end of the discussion of manometers 
we gave an indication of the capability 
of the liquid manometer to respond to changing pressures. A comparative measure 
of a device to respond to a varying signal is its natural frequency. In the case of 
liquid manometers, the typical natural frequency is less than 1 Hz. In the pressure 
ranges most frequently used in low-speed wind tunnels the diaphragm-type 
transduc- 
ers considered in this section will have natural frequencies in the range of a few 
hundred hertz. Some small units may have considerably higher natural frequencies. 
We repeat the cautionary note that the connecting pressure tubing will have a major 
dynamic effect on time-varying pressure measurements and must be considered 
carefully whenever a time-varying pressure signal is to be measured. 
Piezoelectric Transducers 
In addition to the diaphragm-type transducers discussed in the previous section, 
there is a type of transducer that uses a piezoelectric element that produces an 
electric field in response to applied pressures. These devices are discussed by 
Soloukhin, 
Curtis, and Emrich7 
and Blakelz 
and the references 
therein. These pressure 
gages are able to measure higher frequency pressure fluctuations than the typical 
diaphragm-type transducers. They require associated electronics located near the 
gage to optimize 
their response. The transducers are mostly used for the measurement 
of time-varying pressures, but time-averaged pressures can also be obtained. They 
are made to have very small sensitive areas and in forms designed to be mounted 
flush in a model surface. This is consistent with their high-frequency response 
capabilities since the effect of connecting tubing on a pressure signal will make 
it difficult in any case to obtain measurements at frequencies more than a few 
hundred hertz. 
These pressure gages also tend to be differential transducers, and the reference 
side can be connected to either a known pressure or a source of approximately 
time-averaged pressure, whose fluctuations are required. The units are sensitive to 
temperature and usually require attention to temperature compensation. 


4.1 PRESSURE 
145 
The natural frequencies of available piezoelectric pressure transducers extend 
upward to several thousand hertz, overlapping the domain of microphones. 
Microphones 
Microphones are widely used in the entertainment industry, so low-cost units are 
ubiquitous. Unfortunately, the units that are desirable for human communication 
processes do not have uniform response characteristics 
needed for physical measure- 
ment applications. The most common unit used for physical measurement has 
been the condenser microphone. The basic principles of these units are described 
by Blake.'' 
Pressure-Sensitive Paint (PSP) 
Almost all of the preceding pressure-measuring devices require that the pressure at 
a point of interest be communicated to the sensing element from a pressure "tap" 
or "port" through a small tube to the sensor. There are two major problems with 
this method. The most important one is that it makes the models quite expensive 
to build. The second is that the time response of the pressure measurement is limited 
by the presence of the tubing as a transfer mechanism. There have been a number 
of important experiments using surface-mounted transducers, but these are by far 
the most expensive models and test programs. In any case, there can never be a 
large enough number of pressure taps to provide high accuracy for forces obtained 
by integration of measured surface pressure. 
Pressure-sensitive 
paint offers the promise of very high spatial density of measure- 
ments with a moderate impact on model cost. There is, at present, a high capital 
cost for the cameras needed for high-quality results. This new method is being used 
extensively in transonic testing but has only recently been demonstrated to be capable 
of useful results for test speeds as low as 100 knots. We will provide an introduction 
to the basic aspects of PSP principles. Our presentation follows Crites and Benne.I3 
Bask Concepts Molecules of certain compounds, when exposed to radiation of 
certain wavelengths, will absorb photons and transition to a higher energy state, 
referred to as the "excited" 
condition. They will then return to ground state primarily 
by one of two paths. One path involves the emission of a photon at a wavelength 
less than the wavelength of the exciting radiation. The other is through interaction 
with an oxygen molecule and no photon emission. The likelihood of the second 
transition path increases with increasing density of oxygen molecules. Since the 
number density of oxygen molecules in air is a function of pressure, the balance 
between the two competing processes will shift as a function of pressure. The 
emitted radiation, termed luminescence, will be a function of the partial pressure 
of oxygen and therefore the pressure of the air in contact with the material. It is 
the luminescence that is to be measured and used as the indicator of the pressure 
of the air in contact with the material. The compounds used in this application have 
been referred to in the literature as luminiphors, lumiphors, and dye. This is early 


1
4
6
 
PRESSURE, 
FLOW, 
AND 
SHEAR 
STRESS 
MEASUREMENTS 
FIGURE 
4.4 Oxygen-quenched photoluminescence process. 
in the evolution 
of the aerodynamic 
applications 
of these materials so 
the terminology 
is not yet settled. We will use the term "lumiphor" for the sensor molecules. The 
phenomenon as described leads to the result that PSP is an 
absolute pressure sensor. 
It is to be expected, therefore, that obtaining resolution of the same order as is 
available from dierentid measurement techniques may be difficult. 
A schematic representation of the oxygen-quenched photoluminescent process 
is given by Figure 4.4. To incorporate this process into an aerodynamic pressure 
measurement system, suitable lumiphor molecules are dispersed into an oxygen- 
permeable binder that has properties allowing it to be applied to the aerodynamic 
model as a paint. The model is mounted in the wind tunnel and illuminated with a 
radiation source of the appropriate 
frequency for the chosen lumiphor. The illumina- 
tion source is filtered so that it is not emitting radiation in the luminescence wave- 
length band. One or more high-resolution charge-coupled device 
(CCD) 
video cam- 
eras collect the luminescent radiation through filters that remove all other 
wavelengths. An image is recorded with the wind off to obtain the distribution of 
intensity of luminescent radiation due to spatially varying illumination intensity, 
varying surface orientation, and other effects under uniform pressure conditions. 
The wind tunnel is turned on and a wind-on image is recorded. The recorded 
intensities with wind on and wind off are used along with calibration data on the 
PSP to compute the pressure distribution. 
Lurniphor, Binder, and Primer The processes indicated in Figure 4.4 occur with 
certain probabilities and corresponding time constants that are characteristic of the 


4.1 
PRESSURE 
147 
specific lumiphor compounds and excitation sources. The ratio of the expected 
lifetime of an excited molecule taking into account all available transition processes 
to the expected time before it will emit a photon is called the "quantum efficiency" 
of the lumiphor molecule. This is equal to the ratio of the rate coefficient for decay 
by radiative emission to the sum of the rate coefficients 
for all deactivation 
processes, 
only some of which are indicated in Figure 4.4. The rate coefficient for decay by 
oxygen quenching is proportional to the partial pressure of oxygen, which leads in 
turn to a variation of quantum efficiency with pressure. While these coefficients are 
important properties of a lumiphor candidate, they are not used directly in the 
PSP process. 
It turns out that the lumiphors lose their pressure sensitivity if the lumiphor 
molecules are too closely packed. This leads to a need for a "binder" material in 
which the lumiphor molecules are dispersed. The binder must be transparent to both 
excitation and luminescent radiation. It must be very permeable to oxygen. And it 
must be "paintlike," which means it can be spread in a very thin and smooth layer 
on a surface. Silicone polymers are the most common binder materials currently in 
use for PSP applications. 
Finally a "primer" has been found to be essential to the success of PSP applica- 
tions. The primer serves two major purposes. The fist is to enhance adhesion of 
the binder-lumiphor mixture to the model surface. The second is as a diffuse 
reflector of radiation, which materially enhances the signal-to-noise ratio obtained 
by providing reflected excitation radiation in addition to the direct radiation from 
the sources as well as reflecting some of the luminescent radiation to the cameras 
that would otherwise not be collected. 
The luminescence intensity i
,
 of the emitted radiation that is detectable by the 
cameras can be expressed as a product of three factors, the incident radiation ii; the 
quantum efficiency of the lumiphor, +; and the "paint efficiency" qp: 
The quantum efficiency is a function of pressure, with the form 
where kF 
is the rate coefficient 
for the luminescent 
emission from an excited molecule, 
kc is the rate coefficient for internal transition processes, and k, is the coefficient 
for the oxygen extinction process, including the effect of binder permeability. But 
the incident radiation is not uniform and the paint efficiency varies over the surface, 
and neither are known. If the emitted radiation at zero pressure is denoted by ieo, 
then 


148 
PRESSURE, now, 
AND SHEAR STRESS MEASUREMENTS 
If a reference image is recorded with wind off, in which case p = p,, and the 
reference image data are divided by the wind-on image data, we obtain 
where 
A = 
1 
and B = 
UP, 
1 + UP, 
1 + ap, 
Here A and B can be obtained from calibration of paint samples in a pressure 
chamber or by in situ calibration using pressure data from a few conventional 
pressure taps distributed on the surface. Inverting (4.8), we obtain 
This is known as the Stem-Volmer relation. According to Crites and Benne," it is 
preferable in practice to use a least-squares 
fitted polynomial, 
typically of third order. 
The coeffikents~ 
and B are 
functions of temperature. This dependence 
must be obtained from the calibration process, and the temperature on the model 
during testing must be monitored by some means. Current work on these paints 
includes an effort to obtain simultanwus optical measurement of temperature along 
with the pressure measurements. Presently, however, an independent temperature 
measurement is required. 
There are two time responses of importance. One is the response of the paint to 
a change in pressure. This has been investigated by Carroll et al.14 for a few 
formulations and by Baron et al.15 for others. It is presently considered that the 
primary factor that leads to response times as long as the order of hundreds of 
milliseconds is permeability of the binder. This leads to an objective of putting the 
lumiphor molecules as close to the surface as possible in order to obtain fast response 
times. The second time response is the response to a change in the exitation source. 
This can vary considerably from one paint formulation to another. 
There are many facets to the performance of lumiphors, binders, and primers. It 
is evident that there are a plethora of formulations that can be useful and that the 
exploration and refinement of these materials will proceed for a considerable time 
as efforts continue to discover the most useful combinations 
for various applications. 
PSP 
Calibration In order to obtain accurate pressure measurements using PSP, on 
the order of what can be obtained using differential transducers, a precise calibration 
procedure must be performed. Two methods of calibration are commonly used. One 
is in situ, with the model situated in the tunnel and a limited number of conventional 
taps installed to provide the "known" pressures. The second is a custom-designed 
calibration chamber, in which pressure and temperature can be precisely controlled. 


4.1 PRESSURE 
149 
In situ calibration is an effective and convenient method of determining the 
Stem-Volmer constants, but the model must be purpose built in order to do so. It 
must be equipped with a few conventional pressure taps and, ideally, a number of 
thermocouples. The Stem-Volmer constants 
A and B 
in (4.10) 
are derived by compar- 
ing the luminescence intensities from the reference and wind-on images to the 
measured pressures on the surface. The quantities i, and p are known at each tap 
location during the test, and i,, and p, are known from the wind-off measurements. 
So, A and B can be calculated on-line during a wind tunnel test. 
The use of a custom calibration chamber allows more extensive and repetitive 
calibration data to be obtained. There must be a light source for excitation and a 
detection device, for example, a photomultiplier or CCD camera. Paint samples can 
be mounted directly to a thermoelectric cooler and sealed in a pressure chamber, 
so that complete temperature and pressure control can be achieved. By examining an 
extensive matrix of pressures and temperatures and the accompanying luminescence 
intensity, the Stem-Volmer constants may be derived as above. 
The-two methods of calibration are complementary. Each has some advantages 
and disadvantages. In situ calibration reintroduces the main problem encountered 
with traditional pressure measurement. The models have to be built with a number of 
strategically placed pressure taps, and to 
ascertain temperature effects, thermocouples 
need to be installed on the model surface. There is one principal advantage, however. 
The paint employed in the calibration is the exact paint used in the test. If an external 
calibration chamber is used, the paint on a test sample may differ slightly from the 
paint used on the model, be it in composition, age, impurities, and so forth. Precau- 
tions must be taken to ensure paint consistency when not employing in situ calibra- 
tion. It is best to do a pretest calibration in an environmental chamber and to provide 
a number of reference taps on the model so that in situ comparisons are available 
to check and monitor the paint performance as the test proceeds. 
Data Systems for PSP Pressure-sensitive paint is a distributed sensor and trans- 
ducer system. The excitation source is the equivalent of the power supply voltage 
for a strain gage transducer. Assuming a reasonable distribution of the PSP over a 
model surface, there can be the equivalent of several million pressure transducers. 
A point at a time could be sampled by exciting a spot with a focused laser beam 
of the appropriate frequency and measuring the intensity of the luminescent radiation 
with a photomultiplier tube with appropriate lenses and filters. Obtaining the pressure 
at a point requires two measurements, first the emission intensity at the known 
reference pressure, i
,
@
,
 and then the emission intensity at the test condition, i,. 
Assuming the values of A and B in the Stem-Volmer relation (4.10) have been 
obtained from a calibration system, the pressure can be computed. British Aerospace16 
has developed a system along these lines using a scanning laser. In such a system, 
it may be reasonable to expect the laser to provide a very nearly constant source 
intensity over a period between the reference and data measurement time frame. 
The variability in the pressure measurement will be determined by the signal- 
to-noise ratio for the intensity measurements from the photomultiplier. If the 
model moves under the load change that will occur between the wind-off and the 


150 
PRESSURE, FLOW, AND SHEAR STRESS MEASUREMENTS 
wind-on conditions, then there will be a change in the location of the point of focus 
that should be used to obtain the wind-on data. If this is ignored, then the wind-on 
data will be taken for a different portion of the paint system, which in general 
will have a different paint efficiency and so will introduce error into the pressure 
calculation. If the model motion under load is monitored by some means, then a 
correction of the focus can-be made. If the model shape deforms as well as shifts 
in a rigid-body fashion under load, then the problem is compounded. It is still 
possible to infer model deformation and to introduce a deformation correction if 
some set of points on the model are established with sufficient accuracy. If the 
shape deformation or movement involves significant rotation of the local surface 
normal relative to the direction of the excitation source or the axis of the collecting 
optics, 
then a method of correction for this effect is not available 
even if the particular 
paint spot can be located accurately. This is due to the fact that the effect of surface 
normal variation on the paint efficiency is not known. 
The PSP system described by Crites and BenneI3 uses many source lamps for 
illumination and a CCD camera as the data-gathering device. This system in effect 
is operating as many parallel pressure transducers as there are pixel elements in the 
CCD camera. This would be 218 for a 512 X 512 array and 4 times that many for 
a 1024 X 1024 array. Each effective transducer may have a distinct excitation 
strength, a distinct paint sensitivity, and a distinct pixel detector sensitivity. Each 
of the effective transducers will be subject to the errors due to model motion and 
distortion described above for the single laser spot system. The variation in the 
excitation source strength will be more troublesome since it will be more variable 
than is the case for the steerable laser beam. 
It seems intuitive that both the excitation source and the optical axis of the 
measuring camera or photomultiplier are best aligned not too far from the normals 
to the surface elements on which measurements are being made. Therefore, if 
measurements are to be made over a substantial portion of a typical vehicle model, 
multiple cameras or multiple setups will be necessary. Then the different views will 
have some overlap and methods of registration from view to view will be required. 
This is reminiscent of the requirement for registration of various strips of aerial or 
satellite resource data. In order to utilize the pressure data to carry out integrations 
for total model forces and moments, methods are required to identify the orientation 
of the surface normal for each effective transducer, that is, for each pixel. Note that 
this is not required to create flow-visualization-type images. Such images carry 
considerably more information due to the quantitative pressure information. 
The resulting data processing requirements are substantially greater than most 
historically associated with low-speed wind tunnel testing. There may be cases in 
which acoustic experiments or turbulence measurements produce such large data 
sets, although both cases will generate large amounts of data due to time histories 
rather than high spatial density of the measurements. In addition to sizable processing 
requirements for the data reduction, it is necessary to use data visualization methods 
that have been under development in the computational fluid dynamics arena in 
order to provide human users a means of "seeing" the results in a useful way. It is 
perhaps noteworthy that measurements with a spatial density of -60,000 points per 


4.1 
PRESSURE 
151 
square inch have been made. The limit in density would appear to be much higher, 
although this has not been addressed at this time. The available measurement density 
exceeds the plausible grid densities that can be applied for vehicle level Navier- 
Stokes solvers used in computational fluid dynamics, which are limited by the 
available computer speed and memory sizes. In fact, the practical measurement 
densities will be limited by the same resources due to limitations on handling and 
storing large data sets. 
I t  
appears to the authors that PSP represents 
a paradigm 
shift in that it offers a clear 
possibility of measurement results that are more than competitive with projections of 
density and detail of computational methods for pressure distributions on complex 
surface geometries. The material 
given here is only an outline. Contemporary sources 
in the technical meeting and journal literature can be expected to contain a growing 
amount of detail on PSP systems and methods. 
Evolution of Pressure Measurement 
Wind tunnels have been in use for aerodynamic investigations since 1871, when 
Wenham conducted experiments under the aegis of the fledgling Aeronautical 
Soci- 
ety of Great Britain." 
Our present interest is in the reported use of a "water gauge" 
for measuring the speed of flow in Wenham's wind tunnel. This would be a pitot 
tube connected to a manometer with water as the liquid. In fact, this was the 
means of measuring pressure for many decades. Other fluids were used in addition 
to water, as mentioned earlier, with lighter fluids chosen to obtain slightly greater 
sensitivity for low pressures and heavier liquids such as mercury (quicksilver) being 
used to obtain higher pressure capability within reasonable tube lengths. 
Finely constructed mechanical instruments using Bourdon tubes to drive dial 
gauges have been widely used for some purposes but are relatively expensive per 
pressure port. 
By the 1950s electronic transducers became widely used with a variety of mecha- 
nisms as the basic sensing elements. The fundamental problem that had to be 
overcome by the transducers was the need for many channels at an acceptable cost. 
A 200-tube manometer could be constructed by a competent wind tunnel staff 
requiring a relatively small cash outlay. Purchasing 200 pressure transducers was 
beyond the budget of most wind tunnel laboratories. A device that provided an 
acceptable alternative was the mechanical scanner, the Scanivalve, which housed a 
single transducer and sequentially switched up to 48 diierent incoming pressure 
lines to be read by the transducer. 
The use of these multistep, multiport valves that could usually be located 
inside the 
model had many advantages 
over banks of multitube manometers. When manometers 
were used to record a large number of pressures, a large amount of tunnel time was 
required to connect, phase out, and leak check the manometer. The large bundle of 
tubing from the model to the manometers outside the tunnel could modify the 
support tares and interference and thus affect the balance data. Using Scanivalves 
and pressure transducers allowed the pressure ports to be connected to the Scani- 
valves, phased out, and leak checked prior to the model entry into the tunnel, saving 


152 
PRESSURE, mow, AND SHEAR STRESS MEASUREMENTS 
large amounts of tunnel time. The small-diameter wires for stepping both the valves 
and the transducers were much easier to handle than the large bundles of plastic 
tubing, thus reducing the tare and interference problem. 
Manometer data were recorded by photographing the manometer banks at each 
test condition. The manometers using photographs were faster in acquiring the data 
by orders of magnitude than the mechanical scanivalves. But the time required to 
develop film and read the tubes was also orders of magnitude longer than required 
by the digital data systems that were connected to the transducers in the Scanivalves 
by the 1960s. 
Since the early 1980s pressure transducers have been manufactured using solid- 
state electronics. This new method along with a vastly expanded market for pressure 
transducers that has come from the computer 
feedback 
control of automobile 
engines 
has lowered the per-transducer cost to the point that electronic scanners with a 
separate solid-state transducer 
for each port are now the standard means of measuring 
large 
numbers of pressures 
in wind tunnel tests. These electronically 
scanned pressure 
modules, which came into wide use in the 1980s, can be practically as fast as 
photographing a manometer in acquisition of the data, and the processing is done 
immediately by current computer systems so that reduced data in large quantities 
are commonly available in a few seconds. Thus pressure transducers to measure 
pressures have replaced the large multitube manometers. 
Major disadvantages, and in some cases risks, with the use of Scanivalves and 
other electronic data systems are a lack of data visibility and the possibility of either 
the transducer(s) slipping calibration or the valve leaking and being undetected. 
Strangely enough, these mishaps only occur on those units that measure critical 
pressures. These disadvantages are being addressed to a greater and greater degree 
as computer systems become capable of providing immediate visual feedback to 
the tunnel engineer for monitoring the performance of the systems. Up-to-date 
software systems take full care to provide system health monitoring so that malfunc- 
tions are made evident immediately. 
There are still a few cases where a manometer is useful. One is in instruction 
where 
the properly 
set-up manometer will show the student 
or the uninitiated engineer 
the shape of a pressure distribution, such as the chordwise distribution of pressure 
on a wing or the momentum loss in the wake, with a more obvious physical 
connection between the pressure variation and the results shown by the manometer 
than is possible with more indirect devices. A second is during a test when it 
becomes useful to get a quick look at a few pressures at a few model conditions 
to guide further test direction. The most important is the use of a manometer as a 
calibration standard for the transducers. 
All multitube systems-
the manometer, the Scanivalve, and the electronic scan- 
ner-
must be phased; that is, the engineer must know which pressure port on the 
model is connected to which manometer tube, Scanivalve port, or scanner port. This 
task requires meticulous bookkeeping and is very time consuming. After all the 
model ports are connected and phased, they must be checked for both plugs and 
leaks. A plug will show as a very slow response to a change in pressure. A leak 
will show as a change in pressure after a pressure is applied to the model pressure 


4.2 TEMPERATURE 
153 
port and held. If either of these occur and cannot be repaired, that model pressure 
port must be either eliminated from the data base or effectively marked as defective. 
This process has been improved greatly by using the computer system directly and 
interactively to check and record pressure port response and create a corresponding 
cross-reference 
table. This process 
eliminates the requirement to trace a large number 
of small tubes from ports to transducers and keep track of the corresponding identi- 
fying little tags that inevitably are oriented in the most awkward orientations. 
4.2 TEMPERATURE 
We refer the reader to Benedict2 for information on details of temperature-measuring 
devices and theory. We assume that a choice of device such as a thermocouple, 
resistance thermometer, or glass thermometer will be guided by the specific installa- 
tion requirements in a facility. Here we will mention the basic issues regarding the 
measurement of temperature in a low-speed flowing stream of air. 
Similar to the case of pressure, the temperature of a flowing stream is called 
"static temperature" 
and is considered a measure of the average random translational 
kinetic energy of the gas molecules. The temperature will be sensed by an adiabatic 
probe in thermal equilibrium and at rest with respect to the gas. If observations are 
made from a frame in which the gas has a nonzero average velocity, then the 
thermal equivalent of the directed kinetic energy of the gas is termed the "dynamic 
temperature." Note that the dynamic temperature is dependent on the reference 
frame chosen. The dynamic temperature is conveniently expressed in terms of the 
Mach number and the ratio of specific heats: 
The dynamic temperature is not large for subsonic flows but is quite measurable. 
For T near standard sea level atmospheric conditions it is -1°F for a Mach number 
of 0.1 and -10°F for a Mach number of 0.3. 
The "total temperature" 
is the sum of the temperature and the dynamic tempera- 
ture. The total temperature would be sensed by an idealized probe that "stagnates" 
an idealized gas. The relation between the total temperature and the temperature in 
the flowing gas is obtained from the First Law of Thermodynamics and can be 
expressed as 
In a real gas the temperature at a stagnation point is not generally equal to the total 
temperature (see Benedict). However, for air at low Mach number and for pressures 
not too far different from atmospheric, the difference between "stagnation tempera- 
ture" and total temperature is very small and can be neglected. 


154 
PRESSURE, 
now, 
AND SHEAR STRESS MEASUREMENTS 
The temperamre on a boundary that is essentially parallel to the flow velocity 
is related to the stream temperature through a "recovery factor" that is a function 
of the Prandtl number. For the cases we are considering the recovery factor is very 
nearly 1. In our case, then, the temperature 
is essentially 
constant through a boundary 
layer on the tunnel wall. Thus, an easy method of obtaining stream temperature is 
through the use of a flush, wall-mounted temperature probe. The probe should be 
located in the test section in a region where its chance of damage is minimal. 
The test-section static temperature 
is required to determine the test-section veloc- 
ity through the use of Bernoulli's incompressible equation after computing the 
density from the equation of state. The true velocity and viscosity are needed for 
the calculation of the Reynolds number, the velocity ratio in flutter model testing, 
to match the advance ratio in propeller power testing and helicopter rotor testing, 
and so forth. If the temperature probe is located in the settling chamber, then the 
appropriate correction 
should be applied to 
infer the test-section thermodynamic 
tem- 
perature. 
4
.
3
 FLOW 
INSTRUMENTATION 
A pitot tube is used to measure total pressure. The shape of the tube affects its 
sensitivity to flows inclined to the tube axis. Pitots with hemispherical noses begin 
to show errors in total pressure at very low angles of flow inclination. Pitot tubes 
with a sharp square nose begin to show errors near 8" flow inclination. This can 
be improved by chamfering the nose. 
A Kiel tubela can provide accurate stagnation pressure for flow angles beyond 
3
0
"
.
 
Other tip shapes provide various sensitivities, as indicated in Figure 4.5. 
+ 
-L 
-50 
-40 
-30 
-20 
-10 
0 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
Flow Angle from Probe Axis, degrees 
FIGURE 4 5  Variation of measured stagnation pressure with yaw for selected probe geome- 
tries: C
,
 = Ip(a) - 
p(0)]/(1/2pVZ). 


4.3 n o w  
INSTRUMENTATION 
155 
C 
B 
-
6
 
BD q
1
 
Eight holes equally 
spaced about periphery 
Velocity 
- 
'
f
l
 
I I 
Static 
Connection 
Total - Head Connection 
FIGURE 4.6 Standard pitot-static tube. 
It is a relatively easy task to measure a pitot's sensitivity to flow angle by use 
of a flow of known angularity. The pitot is pitched or yawed depending on which 
is more convenient to determine its sensitivity to flow angularity. An excellent 
discussion of probe methods for measuring fluid velocity is given by Ernrich.19 
Pitot-Static 'hbes 
The most common device for determining the total pressure or total head and the 
static pressure of a stream is the pitot-static tube, an instrument that yields both the 
total head and the static pressure. A "standard" pitot-static tube is shown in Figure 
4.6. The orifice at A senses total head p + lpv2, 
and the orifices at B sense the 
static pressure. We are, of course, limiting this discussion to subsonic flows. If the 
pressures from the two orifices are connected across a manometer or pressure 
transducer, the pressure differential will be approximately lpv2, 
from which the 
velocity may be calculated provided the density is available. The density can be 
calculated from the equation of state based on a temperature measurement and the 
static pressure measurement. 
The pitot-static tube is easy to construct, but it has some inherent errors. If due 
allowance is made for these errors, a determination of the dynamic pressure within 
about 0.1 
% is possible. 
As previously indicated, a total-head tube with a hemispherical tip will read the 
total head accurately as long as the yaw is less than 3". A squared-off pitot tube 
will go to higher angles without error, but both square- and round-tip pitot tubes 
suffer errors if they are used at too low Reynolds numbers or too close to a wall. 
At very low Reynolds numbers, the flow regime is referred to as "creeping flow." 
The difference between the pressure and stagnation pressure is not the dynamic 
pressure, q = fpv2, 
which gives c
,
(
,
,
,
,
,
 
= 1 for high-Reynolds-number flow. In this 


156 
PRESSURE, FLOW, AND SHEAR STRESS MEASUREMENTS 
FIGURE 4.7 Performance of pitot tubes at low Reynolds number. 
regime the stagnation pressure on a blunt-nosed body is given approximately in 
terms of the Reynolds number based on the body diameter by Barkep as 
Corrections for pitot tubes under these conditions are shown in Figures 4.7 and 4.8, 
as given by Spaulding and Memiam.=' 
The pressure sensed at the "static" holes differs from the stream static pressure 
due to two effects of the geometry. The first effect is generic for a semi-infinite 
axisymmetric body with flow approaching the "nose" of the body along the axis of 
symmetry. The nose of the probe has a region on the upstream surface where the 
flow stagnates and the pressure is above the stream pressure in the approaching 
FIGURE 4.8 Velocity correction for a circular pitot tube near a wall. 


4.3 now 
INSTRUMENTATION 
157 
Distance from Tip Base or Vertical Stem Line, diameters 
= 4 -  
d 
8 
effect of stem proximity on: 
' 
$ 3 -  
standard "round junction" 
a 
2 -  
Prandtl "square junction" 
i
i
 1 -  
W 
FIGURE 
4.9 Effect of static orifice distance from tip or from stem: see Example 4.1. 
2 0 -  
2 
V1 
2-1 
a 
.s 
-2 
m 
ii 
flow. At the stagnation point, the pressure is the total pressure of the stream. The 
flow accelerates from the stagnation point around the curved surface and the local 
surface pressure rapidly falls through and below the stream or static pressure in the 
approaching flow. A minimum pressure is reached somewhere 
on the curved surface, 
and the pressure starts to "recover" toward the stream static pressure as one moves 
downstream along the surface parallel to the stream direction. If the probe were 
infinitely long and aligned with the flow, then the pressure on the tube surface 
would asymptotically approach the stream pressure with distance from the nose. 
This effect means that pressure taps on the probe's parallel surface a finite distance 
from the nose would produce a measurement that is lower than the local stream 
pressure. The amount of the difference in indicated in Figure 4.9. 
The second effect is associated with the presence of the "stem," a cylinder whose 
axis is perpendicular to the approaching stream. A high-pressure region exists ahead 
of the stem, and that region includes the surface of the probe itself. In fact, the 
Prandtl design has a stagnation point near the intersection of the stem and the probe 
body. This effect creates pressures on part of the probe surface that are higher than 
the static pressure in the approaching stream. 
The two effects may cancel each other if the static hole locations are properly 
chosen. The "standard" pitot-static tube does not employ this principle because the 
static hole location is so critical that small deviations in construction or damage to 
the tip can produce a relatively large error in the static reading. The Prandtl design 
(Figure 4.10) is intended to take advantage of this cancellation. 
If a new pitot-static tube is to be built, either it may be designed as per Figure 
4.6 and its static pressure readings corrected as per Figure 4.9 or the Prandtl design 
may be used. The Prandtl design (Figure 4.10) should require no correction but 
should be checked for accuracy. Existing pitot-static tubes should be examined for 
tip and stem errors so that their constants may be found. 
If a long static tube is available, the static pressure can be determined along a 
longitudinal line in the test section. Then the pitot-static tube can be placed on this 
line and the static pressure orifices in a pitot-static tube can be calibrated. 
effect of tip proximity 
- 
- 
0 
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 
12 
14 
16 
18 
20 


158 
PRESSURE, FLOW, AND SHEAR STRESS MEASUREMENTS 
- 
8 holes equally 
D 
Soaced - 0.1 
D Diam. 
FIGURE 4.10 
Prandtl's design for a pitot-static tube. 
Example 4.1 A pitot-static tube whose static orifices are 3.20 from the base of 
the tip and 8.00 from the centerline of the stem reads 12.05 in. of water on a 
manometer for a particular setting of the tunnel. If the test section is at standard 
pressure as indicated by a barometer and at a temperature of 113°F as measured 
from a resistance thermometer, find (1) the dynamic pressure and (2) the true 
air speed. 
First the pitot-static tube error must be found. 
(a) lip Error. From Figure 4.9 it is seen that static orifices located 3.20 from 
the base of the tip will read 0.5% q too low. 
@) Stem Error. From Figure 4.9 it is seen that static orifices located 8.OD from 
the stem will read 1.13% q too high. 
(c) Total Error. The static pressure therefore will be 1.13 - 
0.5 = 0.63% q too 
high, and hence the indicated dynamic pressure will be too low. 
The data should be corrected as follows: 
1. Accordingly the dynamic pressure will be 1.0063 X 12.05 = 12.13 in, of 
water. Applying the conversion for units, this is 12.13 X 5.204 = 
63.12 lb/ft2. 
2. The density is 


4.3 now 
INSTRUMENTATION 
159 
Degrees of yaw 
FIGURE 4
.
1
1
 Performance of the standard pitot-static tube in yaw. 
The true air speed is hence 
= 242.09 ftkec = 165.06 mph = 143.34 knots 
The accuracy of a standard pitot-static tube when inclined to an airstream is 
shown in Figure 4.11. If a pitot-static tube is placed near a model, the model's static 
pressure field will influence the pressure sensed by the static ports, and the reading 
will not be the free-stream velocity. This is why tunnel dynamic pressure calibrations 
are made without a model in the test section. The same problem exists on an aircraft, 
where great care has to be taken in the location of a static pressure source so as to 
find a location where the static pressure varies as little as possible with lift or 
aircraft attitude. 
Pressure Probes for Velocity Measurement 
Yawheads A yawhead is a sphere that has two or more static ports on the forward 
face of the sphere (Figure 4.12). If the ports are at exactly 45" to the centerline of 


1
6
0
 
PRESSURE, FUIW, 
AND SHEAR STRESS MEASUREMENTS 
FIGURE 4.12 
Yawhead. 
the support and the flow is parallel to the support, then (Pa - 
P&lq = APlq = 0. 
If there is flow angularity, then APlq # 0, and the value of APlq will be a function 
of the flow angle. In practice, a yawhead must be calibrated. The probe is placed 
in a flow that has no angularity, and the probe is pitched or yawed about its center 
through an angle range both positive and negative. This is done for the yawhead 
in the "upright," or normally used, position, and then the yawhead is rotated 180" 
to an "inverted" position. This will result in two curves of APlq (upright and 
inverted) versus the angle for the yawhead. If the static ports are symmetrical to 
the support axis, the two curves will lie on top of each other. If there is an asymmetry 
in the static port locations or possibly in the conditions of the static ports themselves, 
the curve will be displaced by twice the error. The true curve lies halfway between 
the two measured curves. If the flow used to calibrate the yawhead is not parallel 
to the yawhead support axis at the zero angle, the true curve will not pass through 
the zero angle. It is normally desired to have the yawhead calibration independent 
of dynamic pressure and static pressure so the coefficient defined by (4.13) may 
be used: 
It is instructive to investigate the variation of C, as if the pressure distribution 
on the spherical yawhead were accurately given by potential flow theory for a sphere 
in a uniform stream. Let the angle between the incoming stream direction and a 
line through the center of the sphere be 0. Then the pressure coefficient at the point 
where the line pierces the sphere isZZ 
If p, and q, are otherwise known, then the angle is given in terms of the flow 
measurements by 
Now let the line just envisioned pierce the sphere at the center of a pressure port, 


4.3 FLOW INSTRUMENTATION 
161 
and the line coincident with the center of the probe stem make an angle 
with the 
line passing through the pressure port. The angle + 
between the probe axis and the 
flow direction is related to the other two by 
In most cases of application, this is not the situation. It is frequently required to 
make measurements in parts of a model flow field where the static and dynamic 
pressures are not known. Therefore it is necessary to obtain the angle and possibly 
the static and dynamic pressures from the probe data alone. Equation (4.14) applied 
to a particular port (say port a) gives 
It can be seen that using the similar relations for the other two ports yields 
(sin 0b)2 
- 
(sin 0J2 
c, = (112)[(sin Ob)' + (sin 0,)'] - 
(sin 0,)' 
And using (4.16) we obtain 
For the case that +
,
 = 0 and +. 
= -+b, (4.19) reduces to 
A calibration result would be expected to resemble (4.20). The result indicates that 
a singularity may be expected in the vicinity of 245" even for the case of ideal 
flow. For real flow, the singularity may occur at smaller values of the angle. Inverting 
(4.20) gives (4.21), which would be expected to resemble the relation required to 
obtain the yaw angle from the measurements of the three pressures: 
Using the yaw angle + 
obtained from (4.21) along with (4.16), the angles from the 
flow vector to each port, O., Ob, Oc, can be computed. Then the dynamic pressure 
and the static pressure can be obtained from two of the three equations represented 
by (4.17). One form of the results is as follows: 
q- = 
~(PC 
- 
PJ 
9[(sin 0.)2 - 
(sin 0,)2] 


162 
PRESSURE, FLOW, 
AND SHEAR STRESS MEASUREMENTS 
P- = 
P b  - 
4 ( ~ c  
- 
PO) 
}[, 
- 
%si; eb)'] 
sin 0,)' - 
(sin OC)'] 
(4.23) 
The last three equations are idealized and are not suggested for direct use. The 
process for a particular yaw probe consists of a calibration process in which the 
probe is placed into a stream of known dynamic and static pressures, the angle of 
yaw is varied over the range of interest, and the three port pressures p,, p,, p, are 
recorded for the set of yaw angles. The four functions c
,
,
 
cpb, 
cpcr 
C* are formed 
from the port pressures, the dynamic pressure, and the static pressures. The probe 
can then be used to obtain the flow angle, dynamic pressure, and static pressure in 
an unknown flow by placing the probe into the flow of interest and recording the 
three port pressures. The yaw coefficient is computed directly according to (4.13). 
The yaw angle in the flow is then obtained by inverting the function C+(+) 
obtained 
during calibration. The dynamic and static pressures are obtained from (4.24) and 
(4.25): 
where the coefficient functions are from the calibration. The process must still be 
examined for effects of Reynolds number and Mach number. 
Quite often a yawhead has five static ports rather than the three just described. 
With such an arrangement, the two flow angles required to define the three-dimen- 
sional flow vector may be obtained although the calibration is now over the two 
angles and a surface must be generated rather than a single curve. Pitot-static tubes 
that use a hemispherical nose can be made to have two yawheads built into the 
nose. In this case, one instrument at any place in the test section will measure total 
pressure, static pressure, dynamic pressure, upflow, and cross-flow. This is quite 
useful for determining flow conditions in a test section. 
Claw A claw will also measure flow angularity and is simple to build. In its 
simplest form a claw consists of two parallel pieces of tubing that are bent 45" 
away 
from their common axis and then bent back 90" toward their common axis (Figure 
4.13). The two heads of the probe are cut off square about two diameters from the 
centerline. Often a third tube is added to measure total pressure, and the two claws 
can be made to simultaneously measure both cross-flow and upflow. The calibration 
technique for a claw is the same as that for a yawhead. Claws are more delicate 
than yawheads because the two tubes used to measure AP can be easily bent, thus 
changing the calibration. 


4.3 now INSTRLJMENTATION 
163 
FIGURE 4.13 Claw probe. 
Cone Probes Cone probes with five or seven holes are widely used for flow vector 
measurements. They have the advantage of simplicity of construction and can be 
calibrated more readily to higher angles. GuptaZ3 
gives detailed treatment and exam- 
ples of calibration results. GallingtontZ 
and Gerner et aLz5 
give results that allow 
calibration for compressible flow. 
Probes for Measurements in Reverse Flow 
A number of developments 
have been 
carried out on probes to allow measurements to be made in flow with angles from 
almost any direction. CogottiZ6 
describes and has used a 14-hole probe extensively. 
This probe is essentially two 7-hole cone probes in a back-to-back configuration. 
Yamaguchi et al." and RediniotisZ8 
have developed spherical probes with 13 holes 
arranged as multiple 5-hole yaw probes. GuptaZ3 
gave procedures for a spherical 
probe with 11 holes arranged in the pattern of the faces of a dodecahedron with the 
probe stem emerging from the location of the 12th face center. 
Other Pressure Devices Sometimes a simpler version of a yawhead is used. One 
device consists of five tubes arranged in a cross configuration with one tube in the 
center and two pairs of tubes attached to it at right angles. The center tube is cut 
off with its end approximately perpendicular to the flow. The other tubes are cut 
off at a 45" angle. A second device is similar but consists of two parallel tubes 
cut off at an angle. Both of these devices are calibrated in a manner similar to a 
yawhead or claw. 
Devices Responding to Aerodynamic Forces 
The devices described here are small airfoils, wedges, and vanes. They provide a 
response based on aerodynamic forces over surface areas larger than a typical 
pressure port. 


164 
PRESSURE, 
FLOW, 
AND 
SHEAR 
STRESS 
MEASUREMENTS 
FIGURE 4.14 Vane-type flow angularity probe. Uses a five-component balance and can 
resolve about 0.006". Owing to its high natural frequency, 
probe can make continuous-motion 
surveys. (Photograph courtesy of Sverdmp Technology Inc.) 
Airfoils and Vanes Flow angles can be measured using small wings attached to 
sting balances. The flow angle calibration is obtained by the rotation of the drag 
polar. Small vanes of various configurations can also be used (Figure 4.14 from 
Luchuk, Anderson, and H~man*~). 
Often these are attached 
to 
low-friction 
potentiom- 
eters to read the angle or to balances. 
To measure velocities in highly deflected wakes, use has been made of an 
instrumentation rake that contains pitot tubes and static tubes and a devi'ce 
to measure 
flow angularity. This rake is then pitched to null the flow angle probes, thus aligning 
the rake with the flow. A potentiometer or digital shaft encoder can be used to 
record the angle and the velocity is obtained from the total and static pressures. 
These types of nulling devices are becoming less and less attractive as productivity 
is becoming a much more important element in wind tunnel activities. They are also 
becoming less needed since the computing power to handle increasingly complicated 
calibration functions is readily available. 
Thermal Anemometers 
Hot wires and hot films are used to obtain fast-response velocity measurements in 
turbulent flows as well as mean velocities and, with multiprobes, flow angularity. 
The probe or sensor is a fine wire (diameter of a few micrometers) or a coated 
quartz fiber attached between two supporting needles on the probe (Figure 4.15). 
Current passed through the wire or film raises its temperature above the adiabatic 
recovery temperature of the gas. The hot wire responds to changes in total tempera- 
ture and mass flux (To 
and pU). 
In subsonic applications where the density is high 
and the fluid temperature is low and constant, the problem of heat transfer through 
the support needle (end losses) and radiation effects can be ignored, and the wire's 


~ 
~~ 
~~ 
4.3 now 
INSTRUMENTATION 
165 
FIGURE 4.15 Three-element hot-film probe. 
response basically is a function of velocity alone. Under these conditions and using 
appropriate calibration and measurement of the voltage across the bridge, both mean 
and turbulent velocities are obtained. 
Electronic hot-wire circuits include a feedback system to maintain the wire at a 
constant wire resistance. This is a constant-temperature anemometer. Feedback can 
also be used to maintain a constant-current anemometer. Constant-temperature ane- 
mometers are easiest to use in subsonic or incompressible flow, while the constant- 
current anemometers are preferred in compressible flow. Frequency response to 50 
kHz is easily ~btained.~ 
In incompressible flows, the hot wire costs less and is easier to use than a laser 
anemometer. The hot wire does intrude into the flow and the laser does not. The 
hot wires are extremely fragile and often break, usually just after calibration and 
before use. If the flow field is dirty, the risk of the wire breaking is high. 
If turbulence measurements are not required, a single or dual split film can be 
used. These units are more rugged and can be used to measure both mean velocities 
and flow angles. Units are available commercially with up to six elements so that 
flow direction can be determined with no ambiguity. Some research workers have 
constructed probes with as many as 18 elements to allow direct measurement of 
Reynolds stresses in turbulent flows. 
Single or Dual Split Film A single split film will be parallel to the axis of a small 
glass rod. A dual split film will have a second pair of split films at 90" to the first, 
aligned along the rod circumference. These devices, similar to hot wires, can be 
used to measure both velocity and flow angles. The 
split film is suitable for measuring 
mean velocities but does not have as high a bandwidth of frequency response as 


166 
PRESSURE, FLOW, 
AND SHEAR STRESS MEASUREMENTS 
hot wires for turbulence measurements. Thin-film sensors and the associated elec- 
tronics are commercially available. 
Laser Velocimeters 
A laser velocimeter uses a traeer method, which depends on detection of an optical 
effect from a particle that is carried with the flow. The most common laser Doppler 
velocimeter (LDV) uses optics to split the laser beam into two pardel beams that 
are focused to cross at the point where measurements are to be made (a dual-beam 
system). Owing to wave interference, a fringe pattern in an ellipsoid-shaped volume 
at the beam intersection is formed. A second lens assembly (the receiver) with a 
small aperture is focused on this fringe region to collect light from seed particles 
crossing the fringes. This light is fed to a photodetector that is used as the input to 
the sophisticated electronic signal processor that measures modulated frequency. 
In a dual-beam system the frequency from the scattered light from the two 
beams are superposed on the photodetector's surface. The mixing process in the 
photodetector then gives the difference in the frequency from the two beams. All 
other frequencies are too high to detect (this is called an optical heterodyne). If P 
is the angle between one of the beams and the bisector of the two beams and X is 
the wavelength of the laser light, then it can be shown that when the particle velocity 
is much less than the speed of light the modulator frequency is 
2 4  
sin p 
f~ 
= , 
where u, 
is the velocity parallel to the plane of the two beams and perpendicular 
to the bisector of the beams. Thus the relationship between the flow velocity and 
fD is linear and a function of half the beam angle and the wavelength of the laser 
light. Perhaps it is easier to think of the system working in the following manner: 
When a particle moving with the flow passes through each fringe, it is illuminated, 
which causes a series of pulses from the photomultiplier. As the distance between 
the fringes is known, the time to cross the fringes is measured, and this yields the 
particle velocity. It should be noted that the fringe spacing in micrometers is equal 
to the calibration constant in meters per second per megahertz. When a large number 
of samples are taken, the signal processor and computer calculates both the average 
velocity and instantaneous velocity, which can be used to obtain the turbulence or 
velocity variation. 
To calibrate the LDV, the wavelength of the laser is required. This is known to 
an accuracy better than 0.01%; thus only the beam crossing angle is required. As 
an alternate calibration method the velocity of the edge of a rotating disk at constant 
speed can be measured by the LDV for a direct calibration. This also can check 
the extent to which the fringes are parallel by varying the point along the optical 
axis where the wheel intercepts the measuring volume. 
Two- and three-component LDV systems are formed by using laser systems that 
produce two or three different wavelengths, 
each of which can be treated as described 
above. The fringe patterns created by the different wavelengths must be formed 


4.3 now 
INSTRUMENTATION 
167 
within a common volume and must have their planes oriented so that the desired 
velocity components can be sensed. A second component is relatively easy to add 
to a one-component system because the transmitting and collecting optics can have 
a common axis with the first component and in fact can use the same transmitting 
and collecting lens. Adding a third component is more complex since the optical 
axis for the beams to form the interference pattern for the third component cannot 
be coincident or parallel to the axis used for the first two components. It would be 
ideal if the optical axis for the third component could be perpendicular to the axis 
used for the first two. In practice, it is usually at a much smaller angle. The 
manufacturers of LDV systems are the best sources of information for the avail- 
able features. 
There are two basic modes that can be used for a LDV, the forward-scatter mode 
and the back-scatter mode. In the forward-scatter mode the receiving optics and 
photodetector 
would be on the opposite 
side of the test section from the transmitting 
optics. In the back-scatter mode both the transmitter and receiver are on the same 
side of the tunnel. The advantagesldisadvantages 
of both modes are listed below. 
Forward-Scatter Mode 
Advantages 
1. Low-power lasers can be used, such as helium neon, output 0.5-30 mV. These 
units have a high level of reliability. 
2. The laser does not need cooling. 
3. The signal-to-noise ratio is large. 
4. Higher air speeds can be measured, but more laser output at higher speeds 
may be required. 
Disadvantages 
1. Windows on both sides of the test section are needed that are relatively flat 
optically to avoid beam misalignment. 
2. When making traverses through the test section, the receiver must track the 
measuring volume. This may require both the transmitter and receiver to be 
on a steady base. In many tunnels the test section is elevated above the ground 
and the floors at the test-section level often vibrate with the tunnel. 
3. Often the model will block the transmitted beam. This occurs, for example, 
when measuring downwash in the tail region. 
In general, forward-scatter systems are good for small tunnels and measuring 
flow in the jet without a model. 
Back-Scatter Mode 
Advantages 
1. The transmitter and receiver can be placed on the mount that is used to traverse 
the flow and there is no problem tracking the measurement volume. The entire 
LDV system can be packaged much more compactly. 


168 
PRESSURE, 
FLOW, AND SHEAR STRESS MEASUREMENTS 
2. Only one whdow 
is needed that is relatively flat optically 
to avoid beam scatter. 
3. There are fewer problems with the model blocking signals, although in certain 
cases problems will occur. 
Disadvantages 
- 
- 
1. A much higher power laser is needed (continuous-wave argon), up to 20 W 
output. The higher power requires water cooling with associated plumbing 
problems. 
2. The higher power increases the danger from the beams and their reflections. 
Usually it is necessary to have the laser operation site inspected and approved 
by laser or environmental 
safety personnel. An output of over 0.5 W is defined 
as high power. 
3. The signal-to-noise ratio is much lower, which may increase the time required 
to make measurements. The signal-to-noise ratio is a function of laser power. 
The output of the photodetector is a frequency, and this must be converted to a 
voltage or some number proportional to velocity. There are many ways that this 
can be done, but there is no apparent universally accepted optimum method. There 
is a strong tendency to use a dedicated computer of adequate size and speed for 
LDV data reduction. It is common to package the computer and software with an 
LDV system since the LDV system typically costs many times the cost of an 
appropriate computer. 
A particle generator is usually needed for adding particles of a specific size 
(usually 0.1-10 pm) and density into the flow. Particle parameters must be controlled 
to get acceptable data rates and to ensure that particles travel at instantaneous local 
velocity. At low speeds natural dust may provide needed particles. Particle seeders 
are commercially available. 
Problems in turbulent flow may occur when (1) intensity is large with respect 
to mean flow and (2) mean flow velocity changes rapidly with either time or 
location. 
Particles may not be able to maintain instantaneous velocity of flow (worse at low 
air density). 
A typical seeding method is atomization, the process of generating liquid droplets 
with compressed air. Usually light oils are used. The resulting aerosols will contain 
some large droplets (10-15 wm). These probably do not follow the flow field, but 
they do tend to deposit themselves on the walls and windows, thus adding a cleaning 
chore for the tunnel crew. 
Small-size solid particles can also be used. There are problems with keeping the 
original particle size and feeding the powder into the air at a constant rate. There 
are obvious questions regarding human exposure to such particles that must be 
investigated by any potential user. As with oil, there is a cleanup problem. 
Laser velocimeters are used to measure momentum losses in wakes to obtain 
drag, measure circulation to obtain lift, map flow fields, trace vortex paths, measure 
turbulence, and so on. If the LDV 
is to be used as a flow-visualization-type 
diagnostic 
tool, the precision usually obtained in locating both the measured flow volume and 


4.3 FLOW INSTRUMENTATION 
169 
the velocity can be relaxed. This is possible because the relative magnitudes of 
changes are required rather than absolute values. The LDV itself, if not permanently 
mounted at the tunnel, must be capable of being installed and operational in a short 
time. The LDV traversing system must move the measurement volume quickly even 
at the expense of some degradation in the accuracy of the location. The measurement 
accuracy of velocities can often advantageously be relaxed in a trade-off for rapid 
acquisition of a larger number of samples. 
The data system and computer should give the results, usually in plotted form 
for traverses, during or immediately after the run. In essence, when used in this 
manner, the LDV is competing with other flow visualization techniques such as 
china clay and tufts, and to be useful, it must operate within their typical required 
time frames. This continues to be difficult to achieve for systems in larger tunnels. 
As a result LDV systems are used as very special purpose measurement systems to 
obtain data that are nearly impossible to obtain by other means and in which the 
value of the data is sufficient to justify the high cost of both the LDV system and 
the relatively long tunnel occupancy times that are necessary. 
Particle Image Velocimeters 
Particle image velocimeters are another example of a tracer method. The basic idea 
is very straightforward. Take two pictures of a large number of particles with a 
known time interval between exposures and measure the distance traveled by each 
particle during that time interval. Many variations on practical implementations are 
being explored. At the present time there are excellent results being obtained for 
relatively low volumes and relatively low speeds. Very good results are obtained 
in water flow facilities. Moderately good results are obtained in small wind tunnels 
at low speed. But it is still difficult to apply PIV methods in large wind tunnels at 
speeds of the order of 100 mtsec. 
Rakes 
Total Head Rake Airfoil profile drag has often been measured by the use of a 
drag wake rake. In this technique the momentum loss in the wake is determined by 
measurements with a bank of total head tubes. (See Section 4.5 for further discussion 
of the method.) The rake also should have two or more static tubes offset from the 
total head tubes to obtain the local static pressure. The rake size must be adequate 
to encompass more than the width of the wake. Often, the tube spacing is greater 
at both ends of the rake than in the center by a factor of 2. The spacing of the tubes 
must be known with precision so that the momentum profile can be accurately 
determined. Generally, the total tubes are made of 0.0625-in. thin-wall tubing (Figure 
4.16). The static tubes must be offset from the plane of the total tubes to avoid 
interference effects on the static pressure. Their purpose is to determine the static 
pressure in the wake. Because the static pressure can be affected by both the total 
head tubes and the base of the rake, they must be carefully calibrated so that the 
error in static pressure is known. Since the static tubes must have a hemispherical 


170 
PRESSURE, FLOW, 
AND SHEAR STRESS MEASUREMENTS 
FIGURE 4.16 Total head rake. Note single static pressure tube. (Courtesy Aerolab Develop- 
ment Co., Laurel, Maryland.) 
nose shape, Krause3' has shown that it is possible to adjust this shape to reduce the 
error to zero. 
As an alternative to a wake rake, a mechanical traversing mechanism can be 
used. Using various encoders, the location of a probe can be determined with a high 
degree of accuracy. 
The sensor can be a pitot and, preferably, a static tube, a multihole 
probe, a hot wire, or a thin film or even a fiber-optic laser velocimeter head. 
When measuring the momentum loss in the wake by any method, care must be 
taken to ensure that the whole width of the wake is measured. 
4.4 
BOUNDARY LAYERS AND SURFACE SHEAR STRESS 
Boundary Layer Mouse 
Measurements in the boundary layer are 
often made to detect the transition between 
laminar and turbulent flow or to find the local skin-friction coefficient. Obtaining 
knowledge of the velocity profile in the boundary layer is important in attempts to 
determine these quantiti&-~ithin 
an attached boundsuy layer the static pressure is 
essentially constant while the total pressure varies. There are several ways in which 
the velocity profile can be obtained. 
The oldest method is by use of a boundary layer mouse3' (Figure 4.17). This 
device is a series of total head tubes, often with oval or flat inlets. To obtain the 
velocity profile with adequate resolution at the surface requires the total head tubes 
to be spaced closer together than their diameters. Thus, the total head tubes are 
placed on an inclined plane to obtain the required close vertical spacing. The 
boundary layer mouse often has a static orifice to measure the static pressure or 
the static pressure can be measured by a surface port. During use the mouse is 
attached to the model. The boundary layer mouse measures the velocity profile over 
a finite span of the model, rather than a single spanwise station. 
The velocity profile can also be measured by using a traversing mechanism 
whose position off the surface can be quite accurately determined by a digital optical 
encoder. The traverse mechanism can carry a single total head probe, a hot wire, 


4.4 BOUNDARY LAYERS AND SURFACE SHEAR STRESS 
171 
head tubes 
tube height 
FIGURE 4.17 Boundary layer mouse. 
or a split film. Very good agreement has been shown between pitot probes, hot 
wires, and thin films when supported" 
by a traverse mechanism. 
In general, it is better to support the boundary layer mouse or the traverse 
mechanism from the model rather than the tunnel walls. This avoids two problems. 
First, when the walls are used for support, the probes must be moved when the 
model is pitched and then reset to obtain a very close and accurately known proximity 
to the surface. The second problem with a wall support is that most models tend 
to move slightly and often oscillate when under loads owing to balance deflections 
or simply structural flexibility. 
If the probes are being used to detect transition between laminar and turbulent 
flow, extreme care must be taken to ensure that the probe itself is not causing 
transition prematurely. 
Many methods are in use to determine the location of the transition region. They 
include the following: 
1. Plot the velocity gradient in the boundary layer and determine whether the 
flow is laminar or turbulent by the slope of the gradient, as illustrated in 
Figures 4.18 and 4.19. 


172 
PRESSURE, FLOW, 
AND SHEAR STRESS MEASUREMENTS 
Per cent Free Stream Speed 
FIGURE 
4.18 Velocity distribution in laminar and turbulent boundary layers. 
Local velocii in boundary layer 
Local velocity outside boundary layer 
FIGURE 
4.19 Boundaty layer velocity profiles at six chordwise stations along an airfoil. 


4.4 BOUNDARY LAYERS AND SURFACE SHEAR STRESS 
173 
Distance fmm leading edge, per cent chord 
FIGURE 4.20 
Velocity in boundary layer at a constant small height above surface. 
2. Determine the beginning of transition as the point where the velocity as a 
function of streamwise distance at a fixed small height above the body surface 
is a minimum, as illustrated in Figure 4.20. 
3. Read the static pressure at a small height above the surface, determine the 
transition by a slight dip in the plot of static pressure versus percent chord. 
4. Read the velocity at a small height above the surface with a hot-wire anemome- 
ter and note the transition as a region of unsteadiness in the output. 
5. Read the velocity at a small height above the surface with a hot-wire anemome- 
ter or thin-film gage and note the start of transition as the point of mini- 
mum velocity. 
6. Carefully emit smoke from flush orifices and note the transition by the dispersal 
of the smoke stream (may be difficult at high velocities). 
7. Paint the model with special chemicals that evaporate slowly. The evaporation 
will proceed most rapidly where the flow is turbulent. 
8. Listen to the boundary layer with an ordinary doctor's stethoscope connected 
to a flat total head tube, moving the total head tube progressively along the 
surface from the beginning of the boundary layer in the downstream direction. 
As long as the flow is laminar, a soft sh-sh-sh-sh can be heard. When it is 
turbulent, a distinct roar is heard. This same input fed into a transducer becomes 
quite graphic on an oscilloscope or amplified and fed to an audio speaker. 
Preston Tube 
This device is used to experimentally measure the wall coefficient of skin friction 
by measuring both a static pressure and total pressure at the same chordwise location. 
The total pressure is measured by a pitot tube that touches the surface. This can be 
done because for unseparated turbulent flow there is a region near the wall on the 
order of 10% of the boundary layer thickness in which the flow depends on the 


174 
PRESSURE, FLOW, 
AND SHEAR STRESS MEASUREMENTS 
local wall skin friction T,, the density p, the kinematic viscosity v, and a length. 
Preston34 
took one-half of the pitot-tube diameter as the length. Dimensional analysis 
leads to the equation 
where Po is the pitot pressure and P, is the wall static pressure at the same point 
in flow. 
The value off must be found from a calibration experiment. In a pipe flow using 
four pitots with inside-to-outside-diameter ratios of 0.006 (the outside diameters 
varied), the value off was found. The wall skin friction 70 is found from T
,
 = 
(PI 
- 
P2)D14L. 
Here PI 
and P2 
are wall static pressures separated by length L in a 
pipe of inside diameter D. 
Preston found that y* = 
f(x*), or 
where y* is a dimensionless shear stress for incompressible, isothermal flow and 
x* is a dimensionless pressure difference for incompressible isothermal flow. 
In 1964 Pate13' published the results of tests with 14 different circular pitot 
probes using three different pipe diameters. The limits on pressure gradients for the 
calibration are also given. Pate1 obtained empirical equations for 
over three ranges of y*: 
1. 3.5 < 
y* < 
5.3, 
2. 1.5 < 
y* < 
3.5, and 
3. y* < 1.5. 
These ranges correspond to fully turbulent flow, transition flow, and the viscous 
sublayer, respectively. 
For transition flow (2). or 1.5 < 
y* < 
5.3, 
In the viscous sublayer (3), or y* < 
1.5, 


4.4 BOUNDARY LAYERS AND SURFACE SHEAR STRESS 
175 
using the classical law of the wall in the viscous sublayers and by defining an 
effective center of the pitot as 
Pate1 
obtained a value of K, = 1.3 for a round pitot tube. The velocity calculated 
from Preston tube data Up 
is the true velocity in the undisturbed boundary layer at yeff. 
The work of Preston and Pate1 
is for round pitot tubes. There are other calibrations 
for oval or flat Preston tubes in the literature. For example see Quarmby and D a ~ , 9 ~ 3 ~  
Ma~Millan,~~.~~ 
and Allen.40 
Liquid Crystals for Shear Measurement 
The use of liquid crystal coatings to obtain indications of transition locations has 
been studied for several decades. These coatings have continued to be studied and 
developed due to their promise for reducing the negative aspects of the two most 
widely used methods: sublimation and oil flow visualization. Both methods have 
the characteristic that each time the material is spread onto the surface one obtains 
a single result for which transition is to be observed. This means that for a typical 
determination of which transition is to be mapped as a function of angle of attack, 
the tunnel must be stopped and material redistributed on the surface between each 
change of angle of attack. Liquid crystals, on the other hand, offer the possibility 
of a single application to the surface providing data continuously as the angle of 
attack is changed. 
Holmes and 0bara4' gave a state-of-the-art review of the use of liquid crystals 
in transition detection. They report on their use both in wind tunnels and for flight 
test applications. Re& and Muratore4' and Reda et al." have recently reported 
significant new capabilities in the use of liquid crystals, not only for the detection 
of transition but also for the quantitative measurement of the magnitude and direction 
of surface shear stress. Two patents*," have been granted on the technology. 
When a liquid crystal coating is illuminated from roughly the normal to the 
surface by white light and observed from an oblique angle, it has a color change 
response to shear that is dependent on both the direction and magnitude of the shear. 
It turns out that the color change is a maximum when the shear vector is directly 
away from the observer. Reda and co-worked6 have been able to provide a calibra- 
tion procedure that provides quantitative shear measurements over an entire surface 
that are similar in accuracy to available point measurement techniques when the 
method is applied to a planar surface. The method provides excellent transition 
detection on curved surfaces. 
Liquid crystals are sensitive to temperature as well as shear. They must be 
formulated 
for specific temperature and shear ranges, just as a force transducer must 
be chosen with the appropriate sensitivity for a particular application. The references 
should be consulted for details. 


176 
PRESSURE, 
FLOW, 
AND SHEAR STRESS MEASUREMENTS 
FIGURE 4.21 Notation for momentum analysis. 
4.5 
FLOW FIELD AND SURFACE ANALYSES 
Obtaining the total force on a device in a wind tunnel usually involves the use of 
a balance. However, this is not always required and the methods described here 
provide more detail about the aerodynamic characteristics 
of a device than is obtained 
from balance measurements. 
Control Volume Methods: Two Dimensions 
The drag may be obtained by comparing the momentum in the air ahead of the 
model with the momentum behind the model (assuming the walls are parallel and 
that shear stress on the walls is neglected), and the lift may be found by integration 
of the pressure on the tunnel ceiling and floor. This approach is most often employed 
in airfoil section research in a two-dimensional tunnel. 
The basic theory of wake survey measurement is discussed in the following. 
Consider the flow past an airfoil (Figure 4.21). It may be seen that the part of the 
air that passes over the model suffers a loss of momentum, and this loss is shown 
by and equals the profile drag of the airfoil, or 
mass 
D = -  
X change in velocity 
sec 
where D is drag, Vo 
is the initial air speed (at A), V is the final air, speed in the 
wake (at B), and da 
is the small area of the wake perpendicular to the airstream. Hence 


4.5 FLOW FIELD AND SURFACE ANALYSES 
1
7
7
 
and 
V da 
vos 
v;s 
Also, V
o
 = 
and V = m. 
Therefore 
. 
For a unit section of the airfoil, S = c X 1, and the area da is equal to dy X 1, 
where y is measured perpendicular to the plane of the wing. Finally, 
From Bernoulli's equation 
where H and Ho 
are the total head in the wake and free stream, respectively, and p 
and po are the static head in the wake and free stream, respectively. Hence we have 
The ordinary pitot-static tube reads H - P directly, but practical difficulties 
usually prevent the construction of a bank of them. The customary method of 
obtaining values for Equation (4.35) is to use a wake survey rake. This is simply 
a bank of total head tubes spaced about a tube diameter apart with the total head 
orifice about one chord ahead of the rake body. The tubes are individually connected 
in order to the available pressure measurement system (PSP, multiple manometer, 
or scanivalve). If a manometer is used, only the ratio q/qo 
is needed; the readings 
are independent of the specific gravity of the fluid in the manometer and its angle, 
although the precision of measurement will be better for larger slant angles. 
A traversing pitot tube can be used rather than a wake rake and is often used in 
conjunction with a data system. The data system measures the pitot-static position 
as well as the pressures. It is best to have the probe displacement and the total head 


178 
PRESSURE. now, 
AND SHEAR STRESS MEASUREMENTS 
* 
Reservoir height\ 
FIGURE 
4.22 
Wake as shown on a multitube manometer. 
displayed on-line to ensure that the whole wake is traversed. A schematic of the 
appearance of a wake on a multitube manometer is shown in Figure 4.22. 
In practice many more readings are usually obtained through shimming up the 
rake in small increments. A small amount of "splash" outside the wake proper may 
also appear, probably caused by the total pressure gradient present in the tunnel. 
The constant readings of the outside tubes indicate that they are out of the wake 
and hence may be used to determine go. Note that go should be used from the wake 
rake reading, not from the tunnel q at the model location, because the longitudinal 
velocity gradient in the tunnel invalidates q calibrations made upstream. The other 
tubes read the values of q corresponding to their position on the rake. 
It will be seen that the proper values of q can be obtained only if the rake is 
situated far enough behind the wing so that the wake has returned to tunnel static 
pressure, since a difference in static pressure across the wake will void the values 
for q. A solution to this problem is to locate the rake at least 0.7 chord behind the 
trailing edge of the wing. At this position the rake will be approximately at tunnel 
static pressure. A second solution is to equip the rake with static orifices, the usual 
practice being to employ three, one at each end and one in the middle, which are 
averaged. Since the measurement of free-stream static pressure close to a body is 
difficult at best, extreme caution must be exercised in locating the static holes. A 
satisfactory procedure is to locate them out of the plane of the rake body and 
calibrate them with a standard pitot-static tube, adjusting the tip length of each static 
tube until true 
static is read. If the tunnel is not at atmospheric static pressure normally, 
reference tubes on the multiple manometer or scanivalve should be connected to 
tunnel static pressure. 
It has been said that the wake survey method cannot be used to measure the drag 
of stalled airfoils or of airfoils with flaps down. However, the problem is not with 
the theoretical basis but with the fact that stalled and very high lift conditions 
commonly produce a recirculating region and a wake that does not return to sufi- 
ciently parallel flow within the tunnel test section for the wake survey assumptions 
to be valid. If practical reasons prohibit the location of the rake far enough down- 
stream so that the wake has not yet reached tunnel static pressure, additional correc- 


4.5 Flow FIELD 
AND SURFACE ANALYSES 
179 
tions are necessary, as described by Jones.47 
It tests are made at large Mach numbers, 
still further changes are required. 
It has been found that a round total head tube will not read the true pressure at 
its centerline if it is located in a region where the pressure is varying from one side 
of the tube to the other. An allowance may be made for this:' 
or the total head 
tubes may each be flattened at the tip. The latter procedure is recommended, although 
the usual correction for the lateral-pressure variation is quite 
The momentum method of measuring drag under the usual assumptions is basi- 
cally a measurement of the variation of velocity through the wake. These measure- 
ments can also be made with a laser, hot-wire, or thin-film probe. If the wake is 
not in equilibrium and allowance needs to be made for static pressure variation, 
then the velocity-only measurements are not sufficient. 
It has been generally accepted that spanwise integration for profile drag is not 
necessary since the flow is two dimensional, other than a region near the wall. Several 
tunnels, however, have noted a spanwise variation of the profile drag coefficient 
when measured with wake rakes behind the airfoil. These spanwise variations are 
repeatable but can change with model configuration. Bmne 
and co-workers,5" 
Mueller 
and Jansen:' 
and AlthausS2 
all show variations in profile drag across nominally two- 
dimensional sections. The spanwise variation of profile drag appears to decrease with 
increasing Reynolds number, but the variation is significant at all Reynolds numbers. 
This problem is an area where further investigation appears warranted. Because 
the profile drag varies with span, how does one measure it? Obviously a measurement 
at a single spanwise station is suspect, and thus some average value should be 
determined. Should this be a mean or a weighted average? Furthermore, Mueller 
and Jansen5' have shown that at low Reynolds numbers based on chord (below 
100,000) there are large-scale vortices in the wake similar to a cylinder. Do these 
vortices persist at higher Reynolds numbers and thus make the use of wake surveys 
questionable due to rotational losses? It is well known that the wake survey is not 
valid in a stalled airfoil or where separation is present. Bmne et aLS0 
state that there 
was a good agreement of both streamwise velocities and turbulent intensity at a given 
chord location and different spanwise locations, which implies two-dimensional flow. 
& 
Nonetheless, the profile drag varied with span. Based on the cited references, it is 
reasonable to raise the question of whether true two-dimensional flow exists, and 
if it does not, then does the approximation to two-dimensional flow typically vary 
as a function of Reynolds number? 
Control Volume Methods: Three Dimensions 
Three-dimensional applications of the control volume approach are also conceptually 
straightforward applications of the momentum equation. However, a much larger 
quantity of data is required in order to obtain usefully accurate integrations. And it 
is almost always the case that the measurement surfaces are close enough to the 
object so that uniformity of static pressure cannot be assumed. Three-dimensional 
wakes include considerable streamwise vorticity that must be accurately measured. 
The problem, while conceptually simple, is practically very difficult. Hackets3 pro- 


180 
PRESSURE, FLOW, 
AND SHEAR STRESS MEASUREMENTS 
vides an examplefor the drag component. References in that paper provide additional 
sources on the methods required. 
Lift and Drag by Pressure Distributions 
Another method exists whereby the lift and drag may be measured: the integration 
of static pressures over the model surface. For this method the model is equipped 
with many flush orifices, each of which is connected to a pressure-measuring device. 
For lift determinations on a wing the pressures are plotted perpendicular to the 
chord, yielding the normal force coefficient CN. 
When plotted parallel to the chord, 
they give the chord force coefficient Cc. The approximate CL 
may be found from 
A typical static-pressure distribution over a wing is shown in Figure 4.23~. 
The 
same pressure distribution plotted normal to the chord for the determination of 
normal force is shown in Figure 4.23b, and parallel to the chord for chord force 
determination in Figure 4.23~. 
Several of the pressure readings are labeled so that 
their relative positions may be followed in the various plots. 
The growth of the pressure distribution with angle of attack is shown for a typical 
airfoil in Figure 4.24. In this figure may also be found a partial answer to the oft- 
repeated question: Which lifts more, the upper or the lower surface? At zero lift, 
both surfaces have both positive and negative lift. With increasing angle of attack 
the upper surface increases in proportion until it finally is lifting about 70% of 
the total. 
Many interesting and useful observations may be made from pressure distri- 
butions: 
1. the location of the minimum pressure point and its strength, 
2. the load that the skin is to withstand and its distribution, 
3. the location of the point of maximum velocity and its value (follows from 
item I), 
4. the location of the maximum pressure point and its strength, 
5. the probable type of boundary layer flow and its extent, 
6. the center of pressure location, and 
7. the critical Mach number (follows from item 3). 
An illustrative experiment for aerospace engineering 
students is to measure 
the lift 
curve and drag polar by recording pressures on manometers and using photographs. 
Students can see the change in width of the wake for all angles of attack as it 
increases and the change in pressures distribution on the wing (similar to Figure 
4-24) as the manometers show them in real time. 


4.5 ELOW FIELD AND SURFACE ANALYSES 
181 
FIGURE 4.23 Example pressure distribution. 
Two-dimensional tunnels often use ceiling and floor pressures to obtain lift and 
moment data. Pressure distributions are usually plotted as follows: 
Normal force N = - Ap dS 
S 
where Ap = pp, 
- 
p,, p, is the pressure on the upper surface, p, the pressure on the 
lower surface, and S the wing area. 
For a unit depth of span, 


182 
PRESSURE, FLOW, 
AND SHEAR STRESS MEASUREMENTS 
< 
-2 t 
FIGURE 4.24 
Growth of static pressure distribution with angle of attack for a 
typical airfoil. 
where c is the wing chord. By definition, N = (p/2)SV2CN, 
and hence 
It follows that the pressures may be plotted in units of dynamic pressure against 
their respective locations on the chord. Furthermore, the area under such a curve 
divided by the chord is the normal force coefficient, and the moment of area about 
the leading edge divided by the area is the center of pressure. 
When a trailing-edge flap is lowered, it is customary to show the flap pressures 
normal to the flap chord in its down position (see Figure 4.25). To find the total 
C, due to the main wing and flap, we have 
where SF is the flap angle. 


4.5 =OW FlELD AND SURFACE ANALYSES 
183 
FIGURE 4.25 Presentation of pressure distri- 
bution on airfoil with deflected flap. 
It is reiterated that, though good agreement between CN 
and CL 
can be obtained, 
the drag measured by the pressure distribution, 
CD,,,,, 
= Cc 
cos a + CN 
sin a 
(4.39) 
does not include skin friction. 
The point is sometimes raised that a fallacy is involved in plotting the pressures 
that act normal to the curved surface of the wing as though they were normal to 
the chord. Actually there is no error. A simple analogy is observable in the pressure 
that is acting radially in a pipe but whose force trying to split the pipe is the pressure 
times the section area made by a plane that contains a diameter. 
The mathematical explanation is as follows. Consider a small element of surface 
ds that is subjected to a static pressure p acting normal to it. The total force on the 
element is p ds, directed along p, and the component of this force normal to the 
wing chord line is p ds cos a. 
(See Figure 4.26.) But ds cos a = 
dc, where dc is 
a short length of the chord, so that the total force normal to the wing chord line 
is N = J Ap dc. 
It will be noted in Figure 4.24 that a maximum stagnation pressure of Aplq = 
+1.0 is usually developed near the leading edge of a wing. This may be accepted 
as the rule for section tests, but swept-back panels will show less than Aplq = + 
1.0 
at all stations except at the plane of symmetry. 
FIGURE 4.26 Pressure projection on an inclined 
surface. 


184 
PRESSURE, 
FLOW, AND 
SHEAR 
STRESS 
MEASUREMENTS 
The pitching mbment can also be obtained from the chordwise pressures by use of 
where x is the distance from &e leading edge to the AP. 
(See Chapters 9 and 10 on data reduction of pressure data with blockage correc- 
tions for dynamic pressure and wall corrections for a
.
)
 
Since a laser can measure velocity, it is possible to measure the two-dimensional 
lift coefficient with a laser by using the relation between lift and circulation. This 
can be done on a three-dimensional wing as well by measuring the velocity around 
a closed path that encircles the wing (a line integral). The circulation r is given as 
The Kutta-Joukowski theorem states that 
Thus the lift per unit span or the two-dimensional lift can be determined and easily 
converted to a two-dimensional lift coefficient. This method gives no information 
about the chordwise distribution of pressure. 
This method can, however, be used to determine the distribution to the spanwise 
lift distribution of a wing caused by the tunnel walls in a three-dimensional test. 
The tunnel measured c, can be compared to the calculated values by a vortex lattice 
or other methods. Such information might be desired in the following circumstances. 
As stated in Chapter 6, the maximum model span should be about 0.8 times the 
tunnel width. Over the life, many aircraft are stretched and their gross weight 
increases, as does the wing loading. At some point it may be necessary to increase 
the wing area. This can be accomplished by extending the wing tips. If the original 
model's wing span was close to maximum, the span will now be too large. The 
tunnel walls induce an upwash at the wing that distorts the model span load and 
can distort the wing's stall near the tip. The method outlined can be used to check 
this distortion. If the tip stall pattern is greatly distorted, it may be necessary to 
build a new model. 
Positioning Systems 
The execution of aerodynamic 
experiments 
often requires the design and construction 
of equipment to accurately position either instrumentation or the test article. Engi- 
neers who work in aerodynamic laboratories must become knowledgeable about 
many aspects of mechanical design and electromechanical motion 
control. We cannot 


REFERENCES AND NOTES 
185 
provide details of such information here, but it is an area of great importance to 
successful aerodynamic experiments. The sets of measurements of surface stress, 
fluid velocity, fluid pressure, and the like are finite in number and may be distributed 
in various ways on the surfaces or within the fluid volume of the test area. In some 
cases interpretations are made in terms of the collection of point data, but often 
integrations over surfaces or volumes or both are performed as indicated in the 
preceding sections in order to 
extract desired information from the data. The accuracy 
of the outcomes of the'integrations obviously depends directly on the accuracy of 
the position data. 
REFERENCES AND NOTES 
1. The terms pressure and static pressure are used interchangeably. 
They imply the pressure 
in a reference frame in which the mean molecular velocity is zero. Temperature and 
static temperature are similarly used. Additional detail in the definition is required if 
one considers the variation in dynamic pressure for parcels of fluid small enough to be 
participating in "turbulent" fluctuations but large compared to molecular dimensions. 
2. Benedict, R. P., Fundamentals of Temperature, Pressure, and Flow Measurements, 3rd 
ed., John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1984. 
3. Bray, A., Barbato, G., and Levi, R., Theory and Practice of Force Measurement, Aca- 
demic, London, 1990. 
4. Jones, F. E., Flow Measurement, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 1995. 
5. Brombacher, W. G., "Survey of Micromanometers," NBS Monogram 114, 1970. 
6. Adam, N. K., The Physics and Chemistry of Sulfates, Dover, New York, 1984, p. 185. 
7. Soloukhin, R. I
.
,
 Curtis, C. W., and Emrich, R. J., "Measurement of Pressure," in Methods 
ofExperimenta1 Physics, Vol. 18, Part B, Academic Press, New York, 1981, Chapter 5. 
8. The unit shown in Figure 4.2 was consbucted by William Sekscienski, Project Engineer 
at the Glenn L. Martin wind tunnel. 
9. The unit shown in Figure 4.3 was designed by Dr. Allen Winkelmann of the Aerospace 
Engineering Department at the University of Maryland. 
10. Smith, A. M. 0
.
.
 
and Murphy, J. S., "Micromanometer for Measuring Boundary Layer 
Profiles," Rev. Sci. Instrum., 26(8), 775-781, 1955. 
11. Holley, W. L., and Bannister, J. R., J. Ind. Aerodyn., 1, 139-165, 1975. 
12. Blake, W. K., "Differential Pressure 
Measurement," 
in Goldstein, 
R. J., Ed., FluidMechan- 
ics Measurements, Hemisphere, Washington, D.C., 1983, Chapter 3. 
13. Crites, R. C., and Benne, M. E., "Emerging Technology for Pressure Measurement: 
Pressure 
Sensitive Paint," 
AIAA Paper 95-0106, presented at the Thirty-Third Aerospace 
Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, Reno, NV, Jan. 9-12, 1995. 
14. Carroll, B. F., Abbitt, J. D., Lukas, E. W., and Moms, M. J., "Step Response of Pressure 
Sensitive Paint," AIAA J., 34(3), 521-526, 1996. 
15. Baron, A. E., Danielson, D. S., Gourterman, A. M., Wan, J. R., Callis, J. B., and 
McLachlan, B., ''Submillisecond Response Times of Oxygen-Quenched Luminescent 
Coatings," Rev. Sci. Instrum, 64(12), 3394-3402, 1993. 
16. Davies, A. G., Bedwell, D., Dunleavy, M., and Brownjohn, N., "Recent Developments 
in Pressure Sensitive Paint Measurements Using the BAe System," Paper 28, in Proceed- 


186 
PRESSURE, 
FLOW, AND 
SHEAR 
STRESS 
MEASUREMENTS 
ings of Wind Tunnels and W~nd 
Tunnel Test Techniques, Royal Aeronautical Establish- 
ment, Apr. 1997. 
17. Randers-Pehrson, N. H., "Pioneer Wind Tunnels," Smithsoninn Miscellaneous Collec- 
tions, 93(4), 1935. 
18. Kiel, G., "A Total-Head Meter with Small Sensitivity to Yaw," NACA TM 
775, 1935. 
19. Emrich, R. J., "Probe Methodi for Velocity Measurement," in Methods of Experimental 
Physics, Vol. 18, Part A, Fluid Dynamics, Academic, New York, 1981. 
20. Barker, A., Proc. Roy. Soc. Lond., 101, 435, 1922. 
21. Spaulding, E. R., and Merriam, K. G., "Comparative Tests of Pitot-Static Tubes," NACA 
TN 546, 1935. 
22. Milne-Thomson, L. M., Theoretical Hydrodynamics, Dover, Mineola, 1996, Section 
16.30, p. 489. 
23. Gupta, M., "Comparative Study of the Spherical and Conical Head Pressure Probes for 
Use in Three Dimensional Flows," M.S. thesis, Department of Aerospace Engineering, 
University of Maryland, 1989. 
24. Gallington, R. W., "Measurements of Very Large Flow Angles with Non-Nulling Seven 
Hole Probes," 
Aeronautics Digest, USAFA-TR-80-17, SpringJSummer 1980. 
25. Gemer, A. A., Mauren, C. L., and Gallington, R. W., "Non-Nulling Seven-Hole Probes 
for High Angle Flow Measurement," Expe7: Fluids, 2, 95-103, 1984. 
26. Cogotti, A., "Flow-Field Surveys Behind Three Squareback Car Models Using a New 
Fourteen Hole Probe," SAE Paper 870243, 1987. 
27. Yamaguchi, I., Takagi, M., Kurishima, K., and Mori, T., "Measurement of Wake Flow 
Fields, Including Reverse Flow, of Scale Vehicle Models Using a New 13-Hole Pitot 
Tube," SAE Paper 960676, in Vehicle Aerodynamics, SAE Paper SP-1145. 
28. Kinser, E., and Rediniotis, O., "Development 
of a Nearly Omnidirectional Three Compo- 
nent Velocity Measurement Pressure Probe," AIAA Paper 96-0037, presented at the 
ALL4 Aerospace Sciences Meeting, Reno, NV, 
Jan. 1996. 
29. Luchuk, W., Anderson, C. F., & Homan, M. L., "1981 Calibration of the AEDC-PWT 
Aerodynamic W~nd 
Tunnel (
4
T
)
 
at Mach Numbers from 0.1 to 1.3," Arnold Engineering 
Development Center, TR 
82-10, 1982. 
30. Bruun, H. H., Hot Wire Anemometry, Principles and Signal Analysis, Oxford University 
Press, Oxford, 1995. 
3 
1. Krause, L. N., "Effects of Pressure Rake Design Parameters on Static Pressure Measure- 
ments for Rakes Used in Subsonic Free Jets," NACA TN 2520, 1951. 
32. Silverstein, A., "Determination of Boundary-Layer Transition on Three Symmetrical 
Airfoils in the NACA Full Scale Wind Tunnel," NACA TR 637, 1939. 
33. Bnme, G. W., Sikavi, D. A., Tran, E. T., and Doerzbacher, R. P., "Boundary Layer 
Instrumentation for High Li 
Airfoil Models," AIAA Paper 82-0592, presented at the 
Twelfth Aerodynamic Testing Conference, Williamsburg, VA, March 1982, pp. 158-165. 
34. Preston, J. H., "The Determination of Turbulent Skin Friction by Means of Pitot Tubes," 
J. Roy. A e m u t .  Soc., 58, 109-121, 1954. 
35. Patel, V
.
 
C., "Calibration of the Preston Tube and Limitations on Its Use in Pressure 
Gradients," J. Fluid Mech., 23, 288-330, 1969. 
36. Quarmby, A., and Das, H. K., "Measurement of Skin Friction Using a Rectangular 
Mouthed Preston Tube," 
J. Roy. Aeronaut. Soc., 73, 288-330, 1969. 


REFERENCES AND NOTES 
187 
37. Quarmby, A,, and Das, H. K., "Displacement Effects on Pitot Tubes with Rectangular 
Mouths," Aeronaut. Quart., 20, 129-139, May 1969. 
38. MacMillan, F. A,, "Experiments on Pitot Tubes in Shear How," 
ARC R&M 3028, 1957. 
39. MacMillan, J. M., "Evaluation of Compressible Flow Preston Tube Calibrations," NASA 
TN D-7190, 1973. 
40. Allen, J. M., "Reevaluation of Compressible Flow Preston Tube Calibrations," NASA 
TM X-3488, 1977. 
41. Holmes, B. J., and Obara, C. J., "Advances in Flow Visualization Using Liquid Crystal 
Coatings," Society of Automotive Engineers, SAE Paper 871017, General Aviation 
Aircraft Meeting and Exposition, Wichita, KS, Apr. 1987. 
42. Reda, D. C., and Muratore, J. I., Jr., "Measurement of Surface Shear Stress Vectors 
Using Liquid Crystal Coatings," 
AIAA J.. 32(8), 15761582. 1994. 
43. Reda, D. C., Wilder, M. C., Farina, D. J., Zilliac, G., McCabe, R. K., Lehman, J. R., 
Hu, K. C., Whitney, D. J., and Deardorff, D. G., "Areal Measurements of Surface 
Shear Stress Vector Distributions Using Liquid Crystal Coatings," AIAA Paper 96-0420, 
presented at the Thirty-Fourth Aerospace Sciences Meeting, Reno, NV, Jan. 1996. 
44. Reda, D. C., "Methods for Determining Shear Direction Using Liquid Crystal Coatings," 
U.S. Patent No. 5,394,752, March 7, 1995. 
45. Reda, D. C., "Method for Measuring Surface Shear Stress Magnitude and Direction 
Using Liquid Crystal Coatings," U.S. Patent No. 5,438,879, Aug. 8, 1995. 
46. Red% 
D. C., Wilder, M. C., and Crowder, J. P., "Simultaneous Full Surface Visualizations 
of Transition and Separation Using Liquid Crystal Coatings," AIAA Paper 96-2182, 
presented at the Nineteenth AIAA Advanced Measurement and Ground Testing Technol- 
ogy Conference, New Orleans, LA, June 1996. 
47. Jones, B. M., "Measurement of Profile Drag by the Pitot-Traverse Method," ARC 
R&M 1688, 1936. 
48. Bicknell, J., "Determination of the Profile Drag of an Airplane Wmg in Flight at High 
Reynolds Numbers," NACA TR 667, 1939. 
49. Silverstein, A., "A Simple Method for Determining Wing Profile Drag in Flight," 
J. Aemnaut. Sci., 
7, 295-301, May 1940. 
50. Bmne, G. W., Sikavi, D. A., Tran, E. T., and Doerzbacher, R. P., "Boundary Layer 
Instrumentation for High-Lift Airfoil Models," AIAA Paper 82-0592, presented at the 
Twelfth Aerodynamic Testing Conference, Williamsburg, VA, 1982, p. 161. 
51. Mueller, T. J., and Jansen, B. S., Jr., "Aerodynamic Measurements at Low Reynolds 
Number," AIAA Paper 82-0598, presented at the Twelfth Aerodynamic Testing Confer- 
ence, Williamsburg, VA, 1982. 
52. Althaus, D., "Drag Measurement on Airfoils," Organization Scientifique et Technique 
du Vol ?
I
 
Voile Congress, Paderborn, West Germany, 1981. 
53. Hackett, J. H., "Effects of Moving Ground on Automobile Drag Measurement5 from 
Balance and from Wake Measurements," 
SAE Paper 850280, SAE International 
Congress, 
Detroit, 1985. 


3 
Flow Visualization 
It is difficult to exaggerate the value of flow visualization. A reasonable mental 
image of a flow about a body is almost always necessary for a person to have a 
useful understanding of an aerodynamic or hydrodynamic problem. This is true 
whether the approach is strictly theoretical, mainly experimental, mainly computa- 
tional, or some combination as is always the most effective. The ability to see flow 
patterns on and around a device under investigation often gives insight into a solution 
to an aerodynamic problem. This sometimes happens when the pattern of flow 
exhibited by the experiment or produced by a computation is in some significant 
way different from the mental image that the aerodynamicist had formulated. Or, 
perhaps, the aerodynamicist realized there were two or more possibilities and the 
experimental evidence resolved the uncertainty. An important reason for the wide 
appreciation of computational fluid dynamics is that the processes required to reach 
any solution, whether or not it is consistent with physical reality, also strongly 
- - 
support very visual presentations 
of very detailedresults. These visual representations 
of detailed data sets are very memorable, as are many types of flow visualizations 
in physical experiments, and both are thereby quite useful for similar reasons. 
In this chapter we will focus first on some relationships between the so-called 
primitive variables that describe a flow and quantities that have been found to be 
useful in visualization of the phenomena. We will then focus on physical flow 
visualization, which we have termed direct visualization as distinct from the newer 
numericaljlow visualization, which is also very important and which we will also 
discuss. Note that numerical flow visualization is frequently based on data obtained 
from experiment as well as from computations. 
The equations of aerodynamics were presented in Chapter 1, and a list of functions 
was given that, if known, would constitute a complete mathematical specification 
of the flow in the domain of the known functions. For convenience we repeat these 
here in dimensional 
form. Equations (5.1)-(5.3) represent what are sometimes termed 
the "primitive variables" for a flow. The variables are velocity, a vector; pressure, 
a scalar; and temperature, a scalar. All are generally functions of a three-component 
position vector and time: 


5.1 PATH-, STREAK-. STREAM-, 
AND TIMELINES 
189 
This is an Eulerian description of the flow. In addition to the primitive variables 
there are many derived variables that are frequently useful. Examples are "total 
pressure," density, vorticity, and helicity density. None of these flow variables are 
immediately evident as one experiences a flow of air, water, or other fluid. In 
Chapter 4 we have already discussed means of measuring certain quantities. Here, 
we are interested in how to "see" these and other useful functions in ways to help 
us "understand" the flow fields (or functions) for the purpose of evaluating the 
performance of vehicles and other devices, including incidentally the wind tunnel 
itself. 
An alternative means of describing a flow is to "tag" each particle according to 
its position at some time and provide the variables for each particle as a function 
of time. This can be represented by Equations (5.4)-(5.6). There is no immediate 
way to know the properties at a particular point in space except at the key time to. 
This is termed a Lagrangian description of the flow': 
Classic flow visualization for low-speed flows is done by putting something that 
is visible into the flow at convenient locations and watching how the something, 
called a tracer, moves. The flow is inferred by the motion of the tracer. Tracer 
methods are the oldest and most commonly applied means of flow visualization. It 
seems likely that every human being has seen naturally occurring smoke or cloud 
formations being convected by movement of air and thereby conveying information 
about the motion of the air. We must, however, take care to relate how these 
"pictures" 
imprinted on our consciousness are related to our mathematical equations, 
which we use to quantify flow phenomena. In addition, it is necessary to investigate 
to what degree various sizes and types of tracer particles actually follow the flow. 
This question is addressed in detail by Somers~ales.~ 
5.1 PATH-, STREAK-, STREAM-, AND TIMELINES 
For the moment, assume that it is possible to put "tracer" 
particles into the flow at 
any desired location and that these particles are then convected perfectly along with 
the flow, or that we simply have the capability to "see" any small element in the 
flow that we choose. We have the following definitions. 
Pathline 
The path of a point or particle convected with the flow is called a pathline. I
f
 we 
could release a tracer particle at any selected point and record its subsequent path, 


190 
FLOW VISUALIZATION 
this would be a pathline. If we knew the functions indicated by (5.4), we could 
construct pathlines by the parametric relations 
Approximations to pathlines can be obtained by releasing neutrally buoyant helium- 
filled soap bubbles into an air flow and taking "long" 
exposure photographs. In water 
flow facilities, the hydrogen bubble technique gives a similar but more robust result. 
Streakline 
Now consider the case of injecting tracer material continuously at a point in the 
flow. There are now many tracer particles being convected by the flow, each of 
which passed through a particular point in space but at different instants of time. 
A parametric representation of streaklines can be obtained in principle in a manner 
similar to (5.7): 
A streakline is obtained by letting T vary with t and holding ro 
constant. The 
plume from a smoke source held in one place and constantly emitting provides an 
approximation to a streakline. 
Streamline 
A streamline through a point at an instant in time is the line whose tangent is the 
velocity at that point and that follows a path through the fluid such that the tangent 
at every point is the local instantaneous velocity. The mathematical construction of 


5.2 DIRECT VISUALIZATION 
191 
a streamline is obtained from the Eulerian relations (5.1) by integrating the coupled 
system (5.9). Note that this produces a time-dependent result if the flow field varies 
with time: 
The streamline, streakline, and pathline through a point are coincident if the flow 
field is steady. This must be kept in mind when unsteady phenomena are under 
investigation. A direct method of producing a visualization of streamlines in an 
unsteady flow is not available. 
Timeline 
A timeline is generated by simultaneously emitting a short burst of tracers along a 
line perpendicular to the local flow. This marks a line of elements that are in a 
straight line at the initial time. The deformation of this line as the tracers are 
convected provides an indication of the velocity profile along the line. A mathemati- 
cal construction of a timeline can be obtained by another modification of the 
Lagrangian expressions (5.7). The result is (5.10). This shows that a timeline is 
obtained by connecting the end points of a family of pathlines whose beginnings 
are along a line specified by choosing p to vary along a straight line: 
Timelines are rarely produced directly in air, although the hydrogen bubble technique 
can be used to do this very dramatically in water. An approximation in air could 
- 
be obtained by observing the leading points of a smoke wire visualization. 
5.2 DImCT VISUALIZATION 
We confine ourselves to techniques that have proved useful in low-speed flow. This 
excludes most optical techniques that depend on variations in index of refraction. 
There are some flows such as those for propellers and rotors in which the mean 
flow is at low Mach number but tip speeds approach sonic values for which shadow- 


192 
FLOW VISUALIZATION 
graph or SchlierenTmethods 
are useful. These techniques may also be useful when 
thermal gradients of significant magnitude are imposed on a low-speed flow. We 
refer the reader to literature on higher speed applications and more specialized 
publications for accounts of these techniques. 
We consider two broad categories of flow visualization. The first is surface flow 
visualization and the second isflow field visualization. Strictly speaking, surface 
flow is also a flow field, but we will use these terms to distinguish between on- 
body and off-body fields. The methods considered for direct-surface flow visualiza- 
tion include tufts, oil flow, ink dot, china clay, and liquid crystals. The methods 
considered for off-body visualization include smoke injected in several ways, helium 
bubbles. and streamers. 
Methods of Recording Direct Visualizations 
There are basically four methods of recording direct visualizations. The first, histori- 
- cally most important but least permanent, method is for the engineer to observe 
with his or her eyes. Because of depth perception, one can see three-dimensional 
patterns and one always sees an evolution of the phenomena, not just the final 
average state. However, there is no direct permanent record in a form that can easily 
be put into a report or paper. It is possible, however, to sketch the patterns as they 
are observed. To do this efficiently, one needs to prepare in advance a basic drawing 
of the model on which streamlines or separated regions will be sketched when the 
tunnel is running. An advantage 
of doing sketches 
is that the mental process increases 
the likelihood of forming cognitive maps that capture the flow patterns. Other 
common methods of recording the results of flow visualizations are by film, either 
still or movie, by video recording using a standard VCR format, and by digital 
recording of digitized video, either still or movie. These methods produce a two- 
dimensional projection of a three-dimensional phenomenon. In principle, two or 
more cameras can be used to obtain multiple two-dimensional projections that 
contain sufficient information 
to reconstruct the three-dimensional image. In practice 
this has rarely been achieved and is not, at the present time, available for routine 
use. The state of the art in the needed technology indicates that such capabilities 
will be available in the near future. A situation in which such a system would be 
of great use would be when using smoke or helium bubbles to trace flow streamlines 
past a model. The photographic methods, while requiring more time for developing 
and printing, yield higher resolution. Video has the advantage of instant replay. The 
available resolution for video equipment is rapidly increasing and is adequate for 
most aerodynamic work today. 
5.3 SURFACE FLOW VISUALIZATION 
Information about the flow on the surface of an object being studied is usually most 
critical. Many times, the flow off the body is of interest primarily in order to 
understand the flow features on the surface. Key aspects of surface flows that may 


5.3 SURFACE FLOW VISUALIZATION 
193 
be investigated using visualization techniques include stagnation point location, 
separation lines, location of boundary layer transition, characteristic unsteadiness, 
extent of separation zones, and types of critical points and their locations. 
The simplest and most frequently used method for surface flow visualization is to 
attach tufts to the surface of interest. The tufts must be of light, flexible material 
that will align itself with the local surface flow as a result of direct aerodynamic 
force. The most commonly used material is light yam with weights and lengths 
chosen according to model size and test speeds. Very small monofilament has also 
been used. There are also polyester and cotton sewing threads, such as Clark's 
O.N.T. 
mercerized cotton No. 60, which can be treated with a fluorescent material. 
The thread is a multiple-strand material and tends to unravel with time. Tufts do 
affect the aerodynamic forces to some extent as we will show, but there are many 
situations in which the method is so easy and economical that it is the first choice. 
Two basic methods of attaching tufts to a surface are by scotch tape or by glue. 
When tape is used, the tufts are usually made on a "tuft board." The tuft material 
is strung back and forth around pins, then the tape is applied to the tufts and the 
tuft material is cut at the edge of the tape. This gives a length of tape with tuft 
attached that is applied to the model (Figure 5.1). The model surface is cleaned 
with naphtha or other solvents to remove oil so that the tape will hold under the 
adverse conditions of high-speed flow. 
FIGURE 5.1 Methods of taping tufts to model (left figure) and a tuft board. The pattern 
shown as A is used for high-speed tests. 


194 
now VISUALIZATION 
FIGURE 5.2 
No. 6 floss (crochet yam), white light source; cu = 27.3". Tufts taped to 
wing as in method B of Figure 5.1. (Photograph courtesy of University of Washington 
Aeronautical Laboratory.) 
When tufts are glued to the model, a nitrocellulose cement such as Duco is used, 
thinned 50% with acetone or methyl ethyl ketone. Often 10% pigmented lacquer is 
added both to obscure the portion of the tuft under the glue and to make the glue 
dots visible by using a contrasting 
color. The glue dots are kept as small as possible. 
Tufts readily show where flow is steady and where it is unsteady. Regions of com- 
plete 
separation and buffeting 
flow are 
readily 
identified. 
The 
resolution of the deterrni- 
nation is 
of the order 
of the spacing of the tufts. The possibility 
of significant 
influence 
of the tufts themselves 
on the flow is very high and must always be kept in mind. This 
can be investigated by removing tufts upstream of indicated flow separation. 
An example using No. 6 floss (crochet yarn) is shown in Figure 5.2. 
An example using No. 60 thread tufts is shown in Figure 5.3 for a transport 
aircraft wing. 
Minitufts 
The glue technique is used for minitufts. These tufts have the least effect on the 
aerodynamic 
data and thus are often left on the model. The tuft material is monofila- 
ment nylon that has been treated with a fluorescent dye. 'Ibo sizes are used: 3 
denier (diameter 0.02 m
r
n
,
 
0.0007 in.) and 15 denier (diameter 0.04 mrn, 0.0017 
in.). The dye used is Leucophor EFR 
liquid in a concentration of 1% 
in water with 
2% 
acetic acid added. The tuft material is wound on an open wire reel and immersed 


- 
- 
- 
- 
5
.
3
 SURFACE K O W  VISUALIZATION 
FJGURE 5
.
3
 No. 60 thread tufts glued to wing, ultraviolet light source; cc = 27.3". (Photo- 
graph courtesy of University o
f
 Washington Aeronautical Laboratory.) 
in the dye for 15 min at 82.Z°C (180°F) with frequent agitation. After drying for at 
least 1 hr the tuft material is wound onto small spools. During this step the material 
should be wiped with tissue pads to remove loose fluorescent powder that can 
transfer to the model surface in irregular patterns. 
When gluing tufts to a model, a square grid is used (typically about 0.75 X 0.75 
in.). The tuft material is taped to the wing undersurface and then wrapped around the 
wing in a chordwise direction. The material is in the chordwise direction on the top 
and moves diagonally across the wing on the bottom surface. As an alternate, the tuft 
material can be taped at both the leading and trailing edges. After the tuft material is 
applied, it is glued using a hypodermic 
syringe with a fine needle (a coarse needle can 
be partially closed with pliers). As the desired size drop of glue forms on the needle, 
touch it to the surface and pull away quickly. After the glue dries the tufts are cut just 
ahead of the glue spot of the next tuft. The model surface should be cleaned before 
the 
tufts 
and glue are applied using Freon or chlorinated 
hydr~carbons.~ 
The monofilament 
nylon minitufts acquire static 
charges. 
These can be neutralized by the use of antistatic 
solutions or the antistatic material used in home dryers. 
The minitufts are viewed and photographed in ultraviolet light as this is the way 
to make the small monofilament most visible. Threads can be similarly treated and 
can be photographed in either ultraviolet or white light. Minitufts provide the same 
type of information as larger tufts. They can provide greater resolution and have 
less influence on the flow. 
An example of surface visualization using fluorescent minitufts is shown in 
Figure 5.4. 


196 
FLOW VISUALIZATION 
FIGURE 5.4 
Fluorescent minitufts, ultraviolet light source; a = 27.3". Wing is outlined 
with a fluorescent felt marker pen. Compare stalled region near tip with Figures 5.3, 5.2, 
5.5, and 5.8. (Photograph courtesy of University of Washington Aeronautical Laboratory.) 
Oil 
Oils and other viscous fluids are used to show the surface flow. The selected material 
is usually spread on the areas of interest with a paint brush. It will then flow under 
the influence of shear stress from the air stream and gravity. Since inclined surfaces 
are almost always of interest, the mixture needs to have viscosity sufficient so that 
it will not flow rapidly under the influence of gravity. The flow speed of the air 
must then be sufficient to impress shear stress large enough to cause the oil to flow 
and reveal the surface patterns within an acceptable time. This is typically of the 
order of 10's of seconds after the tunnel is brought to speed. It is difficult to use 
oil flow on vertical surfaces at air speeds less than 100 mph and 150 mph is much 
better. The most common material for oil flow is petroleum lubricating oils. These 
materials are messy to clean up afterward, both on the model and more so in the 
tunnel. Another material that works as well as oil when treated with a fluorescent 
dye is p~lyglycol.~ 
At high CLs or high surface velocities this material may have 
too low a viscosity, making it difficult to use. This material can be cleaned up with 
soap and hot water. When cleaning the tunnel after extensive oil flow runs, a portable 
set of ultraviolet fluorescent tubes is most useful. If the oil flows too slowly, it is 
thinned with naphtha, and if it is too thin, 60-70W oil is added. The viscosity of 
the mixture is adjusted by trial and error for each application. 
The color of the oil needs to contrast with the color of the model surface. A 
widely used method is to add a fluorescent dye to the oil and illuminate it with 
ultraviolet lights, as is done for the fluorescent minitufts. In this case the model 


5.3 SURFACE FLOW 
VISUALIZATION 
FIGURE 5.5 
Oil applied at n 
= 
Oo, 
tunnel started and brought close to speed, model pitched 
to a = 27.3". (Photograph courtesy of University of Washington Aeronautical Laboratory.) 
color is not too critical so long as it does not reflect strongly under the ultraviolet 
illumination. A light blue works very well with a dye that provides fluorescence in 
the yellow region of the spectrum. This is the most commonly used combination. 
An example result of oil flow visualization using 40W motor oil treated with a 
very small amount of fluorescent dye is shown in Figure 5.5. 
Oil can be made white by mixing titanium dioxide into it. This can be applied 
to a black model and ordinary light used for viewing and photography. This is 
sometimes preferable to the installation of black lights and the subsequent require- 
ments on light management. We show two examples. Figure 5.6 shows a low- 
aspect-ratio wing at high angle of attack. Figure 5.7 shows the upper surface of 
an automobile. 
Photographs can be taken after the tunnel is turned off, but the available time is 
short even on horizontal surfaces as the oil will flow under gravity. 
China Clay 
China clay is a suspension of kaolin in kerosene. The fluid is applied with a paint 
brush, usually with the model set at the desired attitude. The tunnel is started as 
quickly as possible after the model is painted. When the mixture has dried, photo- 
graphs can be taken after the tunnel is shut down because the pattern does not 
change rapidly with time. This is similar to the Fales method with the kaolin 
substituted for lamp black. 
An example of visualization using china clay is shown in Figure 5.8. 


198 
FLOW VISUALIZATION 
FIGURE 5.6 011 
flow on a low-aapect-rabu rectdngular wlng 1C1ar.k Y-13 
airfoil, aspect 
ratio 4, ol = 25.4", 
R,, = 360,000). 
Effects of Wts, Minitufts, China Clay, and Oil 
As previously mentioned tufts can affect the aerodynamic loads on a model. In 
Figure 5.9 a lift curve near stall shows the effects of various tufts on the data. The 
glued minitufts and No. 60 thread tufts consisted of about 900 tufts. The two taped 
tufts consisted of about 300 tufts. The data are an average of fivc runs for each set 
FIGURE 5.7 Oil flow on an automobile, yaw On, 


5.3 SURFACE FLOW 
VISUALIZATION 
199 
FIGURE 5.8 China clay applied at ru = On, tunnel started and brought close to speed, 
model pitched to a = 27.3". (Photograph courtesy of University of Washington Aeronauti- 
cal Laboratory.) 
r 
Base line (clean wing)-, 
t 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
1 
18 
2 0  
2 2  
24 
26 
28 
a (degrees) 
FIGURE 5.9 Effect of various tufts, china clay, and oil flow on lift curve near stall. 


200 
now VI~UALIZA~ON 
of tufts. The minithfts and the glued No. 60 thread have the minimum effect on 
lift. The effect of the tape can be seen by comparing the two sets of No. 60 thread 
tufts. The six-strand floss tufts are similar to the tufts made out of yam. The three 
different tuft types can be seen at a = 27.3' in Figures 5.2-5.4. 
.
.
.
 
Some Procedural Details 
Correlation of Balance Data and Flow Visualization The generally accepted 
practice when using the older, larger, six-strand floss for tufts is not to take balance 
measurements, or at least not to consider them to produce good data, when tufts 
are applied to the model. Figure 5.9 explains why this is the practice. Both the lift 
curve slope and maximum lift are greatly reduced. An advantage of minitufts is 
that their effect on the data is minimal, hence they can be left on the model. Oil 
and china clay also show minimum aerodynamic effects. During this comparison 
test of tufts at the model's minimum drag (a lift coefficient of about 1.0), the model 
drag decreased as tufts from the mini to No. 6 floss were added to the left wing 
with the horizontal tail on and the reverse happened with the tail off. The tufts 
apparently change the wing's span load distribution. However, old practices die 
slowly, so force data are often not taken during surface flow visualization. This, 
then, can lead to an improperly established 
flow field and the possibility 
of misleading 
flow visualization, especially near stall and, oddly enough, near minimum drag. If, 
however, force data are taken before and during the flow visualization run, the error 
may be detected and thereby possibly avoided. 
Sequencing Attitztde and Speed Setting The usual procedure for china clay visual- 
ization is to set the model at the desired angle of attack and bring the tunnel up to 
speed. On a wing with a slotted leading-edge i 
zdge flaps, this can 
rndlor trailing-( 
isualization dul 
*..---I 
n,.,.elew, 
result in erroneous aerodynamic data and flow v 
e to flow separation 
in the slots at low Reynolds numbers during the LUllllGl ab+~kkldtion. 
This is shown 
by the oil flow andchinaclay data points beyond a = 
27.3" 
in Figure 5.9. Similar 
data 
were obtained on the clean wing. Figure 5.10 
shows a china clay flow visualization for 
this test method. Similar results were obtained with oil flow. 
Figures 5.8 and 5.5 were obtained by setting an cw well below stall, starting the 
tunnel, and at 50-60 mph pitching the model to the desired a as the tunnel was 
accelerating to a dynamic pressure of 36 lb/ft2. The force data corresponding to 
these figures agreed with the clean wing data and the flow is similar to Figures 5.4 
and 5.3 for the minitufts and No. 60 thread tufts. 
Symmetry and Hysteresis An example of a very interesting flow phenomenon is 
given in Figures 5.11 and 5.12. Although it is common to assume that symmetric 
boundary conditions produce symmetric flows, there are many counterexamples. 
Any flow that includes large regions of separation may well exhibit asymmetry of 
the mean flow as well as asymmetry of the instantaneous flow even if the solid 
boundaries are sensibly symmetric. This can lead to results such as that illustrated 
here in which the integrated forces and moments exhibit random switching or it 


5.3 SURFACE FLOW 
VISUALIZATION 
201 
FIGURE 5.10 China clay applied at a = 27.3", 
tunnel started and brought close to speed. 
Leading-edge slotted flap is stalled. Compare to Figures 5.4 and 5.8. (Photograph courtesy 
of University of Washington Aeronautical Laboratory.) 
FIGURE 5.11 Oil visualization of flow on an airplane with a 
= 14" that has flow on the 
right wing attached and on the left wing separated. 


now 
VISUALI~ATION 
FIGURE 5.12 Here the left wing is attached and the right wing is separated. The model 
was not moved. The flow state alternated between the two conditions shown at random 
intervals in the range of a few seconds at a chord Reynolds number of about 2 X lo6. 
This 
produces a very strong rolling moment that changes very abruptly and randomly. 
can lead to hysteresis in which the forces and moments will be dependent on the 
time history of the attitude. Flow visualization methods are often important tools 
in identifying the flow structures associated with such events. 
Flow Topology Topological concepts are slowly gaining recognition as important 
to the study of complex flow phenomena such as bluff body flows and flows about 
wings and aircraft at high angles of attack. An early review was given by Tobak 
and Peake.s A later collection resulted from the IUTAM Symposium on Topological 
Fluid Mechanh6 
The concepts are providing ways to understand the structure of 
flow fields and to tie the structure of a flow field to the topology of the surface 
flow on the test article. As oil flow techniques provide very fine detail of the sur- 
face flow, this is a preferred technique for studies of surface flow topology. 
Relative Advantages of Tufts Tufts have a great advantage in terms of productivity. 
Once the tufts are installed, the model can be repositioned and the indications studied 
visually and photographed for as long as desired. The model can then be simply 
moved to a new condition and the process continued. An example of a series of 
tuft photographs for a sequence of conditions for a powered tilt wing half model 
is shown in Figure 5.13. 


FIGURE 5
.
1
3
 Visualization of flow on a powered tilt wing model in a series of conditions 
using tufts. 


204 
FLOW VISUALIZATION 
The oil and china clay methods produce patterns of limited duration in time for 
a single operating condition. Then the tunnel must be stopped and the material 
reapplied for each new condition to be visualized. Tufts are sometimes used for 
broad looks over a wide range of conditions with the more detailed techniques then 
applied for a smaller and selected set of conditions that have been found to be 
most critical. 
-- 
Boundary Layers and Surface Shear Stress 
Often the most important information being sought by flow visualization methods 
is a definition of the locations of transition from laminar to turbulent boundary 
layers and the locations of any separation regions. In the previous section, we have 
shown several results that illustrate separated flows. The location of transition 
between laminar and turbulent flow cannot be determined by tufts and is difficult 
with china clay. However, oil flow, sublimation methods, infrared images, and liquid 
crystals can be used to locate transition. 
Oil Flow Detection of Transiiion The basis for detecting boundary layer transition 
by viewing oil flow patterns is the increase in wall shear stress when a boundary 
layer transitions from laminar to turbulent. The result is that the oil is swept away 
faster in the region where the boundary layer is turbulent. Transition indicated by 
oil flow visualization is shown in Figure 5.14. The shear stress at the leading edge 
of a surface is high even under a laminar boundary layer so a typical pattern is that 
the oil is swept away rapidly at the leading edge with a gradual lessening of the 
scrubbing as the laminar layer thickens and then severe scrubbing downstream of 
transition. The oil pattern given by a laminar separation bubble with turbulent 
reattachment can be seen just downstream of the leading edge of the wing in Figure 
5.6. In some cases a subcritical bump in the oil can cause a wake, which can confuse 
the transition location. This does not occur with sublimation. 
Sublimation In one sublimation technique a mixture of naphthalene and a carrier 
such as fluorine, acetone, or methyl ethyl ketone is sprayed on the model using a 
standard air spray gun. Note that the last two can remove many paints. The operator 
must wear a respirator mask when doing this. The mixture will leave the model 
surface white and therefore works best on a black or dark surface. The turbulent 
boundary layer will scrub the mixture off. A natural transition is shown on a wing 
using naphthalene in Figure 5.15. 
Liquid Crysials Liquid crystals that undergo changes in reflective properties as 
they are exposed to shear stress can be used as detectors of transition. This method 
has recently been developed7 as a quantitative method as well as a method of visual- 
ization. 
Infrared Thermography The basis for this technique is that a surface at a tempera- 
ture different from the tunnel stream will have faster heat transfer from the region 
under a turbulent boundary layer than from the region under a laminar layer. The 


- 
~ 
~~ 
5.3 SURFACE now VISUALIZATION 
205 
FIGURE 5.14 
Oil flow visualization 
showing natural transition at approximately 
40% chord; CL = 0.28, R, 
= 1,260,000 
based on average chord. (Photograph cour- 
tesy of University of Washington Aeronau- 
tical Laboratory.) 
resulting small temperature differences can be observed using commercially avail- 
able infrared cameras. The results will vary with model structure and heat transfer 
characteristics so it is advisable to check results for a particular model type by 
observing artificially tripped layers. It should be kept in mind that it is the relative 
temperature, not the specific value of temperature, that gives the indication of tran- 
sition. 
Ultraviolet Fluorescence Photography 
Ultraviolet fluorescence photography is used when the medium used for visualizing 
the flow has been treated with a dye that radiates in the visual spectrum when 
excited by ultraviolet light8 
The two common caes already illustrated are 
the fluores- 
cent minitufts and fluorescent oil. 
The wavelength of the ultraviolet light is 320400 mm, and it is transmitted by 
optical glass. There are 
three sources that are typically used to produce the ultraviolet 
light. There are special fluorescent tubes (black lights), mercury vapor lamps, and 
electronic photo flash units. In wind tunnel use, the first two light sources are used 
to enable the test engineer to observe the flow, and the flash units are used to take 


206 
FLOW VISUALEATION 
> 
FIGURE 5.15 Naphthalene-fluorine flow 
visualization showing natural transition at ap- 
proximately 40% chord; C, = 0.28, R, 
= 
1,260,000 based on average chord. (Photo- 
graph courtesy of University o
f
 Washington 
Aeronautical Laboratory.) 
- .  
still photographs of the flow when desired. Fluorescent tubes and mercury vapor 
lamps in general do not have a high enough light intensity to allow photographs 
without a very long exposure. Because fluorescent material emits light in the visual 
range, the tunnel test section must be shielded from visible light. Both the mercury 
vapor lamps and the flash units also emit visible light; thus they must be equipped 
with an exciter filter that will transmit ultraviolet light and absorb visible light. Two 
filters that accomplish this are Kodak Wrattan filter No. 18A or Corning Glass 
No. 5840. 
For larger tunnels the flash lamps are usually studio units 
marketed for commercial 
photographers. The flash lamps should be able to handle 2000 Wls per flash as 
rated by photographers; the units come with power supplies that can store energy 
in capacitors and have the necessary trigger circuits. The reflectors for the flash 
units should be 10-14 in. in diameter to be efficient. The Coming glass exciter 
filter comes in 6.5-in. squares, four of which can be glued together and built into 
a frame to cover the reflector. As an alternative, one glass filter can be used with 
the flashbulb without a reflector. This would require approximately one additional 
f stop. For research tunnels where the camera-to-subject distances are small, standard 
flash units and a Wrattan 18A exciter, which can be obtained in a 3.5-in. square, 
can be used. 


5
.
4
 now 
FIELD VISUALIZATION 
207 
Photographic film is sensitive to blue and ultraviolet light. The light reaching 
the camera will contain both the visible fluorescent radiation and reflected ultraviolet 
radiation. To prevent the ultraviolet 
from exposing the film, a barrier filter is attached 
to the camera lens. The barrier filter can be a Kodak Wrattan filter No. 2A, 2B, 
2C, or 2E. These can also be obtained in 3.0-in.-square gelatin sheets. 
It is difficult to specify the filter combinations in advance as they depend on 
many factors that are specific to a given application. For large tunnels, which are 
expensive to operate, it is usually worth the time to make a mock-up of the tunnel 
and use this to determine the filters, exposure, and f 
stop for the film and fluorescent 
material. The mock-up 
should duplicate the distances from the light source or sources 
and from the camera to the model. Also, the mock-up should duplicate the glass or 
plastic windows that will be used in the wind tunnel. Some acrylic plastics and 
safety plate glass are designed to absorb ultraviolet radiation. The brightness of 
fluorescent dyes depends on the amount of ultraviolet radiation, and any loss through 
windows from the source should be minimized to avoid use of large apertures with 
their smaller depth of field. 
In both the tunnel test section and mock-up, a series of exposures at various f 
stops should be made to determine the desired exposure. The negative that appears 
acceptable on proof prints plus the negative of at least one smaller aperture should 
be enlarged and used to determine final exposures. The negative is exposed to a 
small bright light source by the fluorescent dye; thus the size of the final image for 
a tuft will change with exposure. This effect cannot be seen on normal contact size 
proof prints. 
Focusing the camera with a fluorescent 
light source is usually no problem because 
this can be done using either the black-light fluorescent lights or the mercury vapor 
lamp with an exciter filter as a light source. It should also be noted that black lights 
that can be fitted to standard fmtures are several orders of magnitude cheaper than 
the mercury vapor light with its power supply and exciter filter. It is also possible 
to photograph the fluorescent material with some video cameras during the flash 
from the light source. 
5.4 n o w  
FIELD VISUALIZATION 
'Mt 
Wands and 'hft 
Grids 
The least expensive and at the same time a very versatile method is using a tuft 
wand, a long tuft on a pole useful for tracing flow near the test article. If it is 
necessary that a person be in the tunnel, he or she must wear goggles to protect the 
eyes from dust. The person should disturb the flow in the vicinity of the test article 
as little as possible. Figure 5.16 shows a tuft wand in use. 
To make the flow pattern downstream of the test article visible, a tufted wire 
grid is useful, as shown in Figure 5.17. 
Helium-Filled Soap Bubbles 
To trace pathlines, which are also streamlines if the flow is steady, helium-filled 
soap bubbles that have neutral buoyancy can be used. The bubbles are inserted 


208 
FLOW VISUALIZATION 
FIGURE 5.16 
Investigating the flow structure of an automobile with a tuft wand. 
ahead of the model and are photographed with a high-intensity light that passes 
through the tunnel as a plane of light. With proper photographic exposure time the 
bubbles appear as streaks. Maximum tunnel speed for use of helium bubbles is 
about 60 mph. The bubble generators are available commercially. 
Smoke 
Methods of Smoke Formation The most common method of flow field visualiza- 
tion after tufts is smoke, which can be produced in a number of ways, although a 
FIGURE 5.17 
Flow visualization by the grid and tuft method, yawed delta wing. 


5.4 FLOW FIELD VISUALIZATION 
209 
universally accepted "best" way has yet to be devised. Burning damp straw, rotten 
wood, and tobacco to produce smoke is generally unsatisfactory, even though historic 
w ~ r k ~ . ' ~  
was accomplished with smoke from such materials. The same is true of 
pyrotechnic smoke devices (smoke bombs). Chemical methods of producing smoke 
include both titanium tetrachloride and tin tetrachloride, 
which produce smoke when 
brought into contact with moist air. These compounds produce the very best dense 
smoke filaments but the products are corrosive and can be used only in an open 
circuit facility that can be well vented to an appropriate location. A mixture of 
anhydrous ammonia and sulfur dioxide produces dense white smoke, odors, and, if 
the air is damp, sulfuric acid. A significant advantage of the system is the fact that 
the smoke can be started and stopped in a fraction of a second, which is not true 
of the alternatives. This allows the problems associated with it to be minimized if 
photographic records rather than real-time human visual inspection can be para- 
mount. Steam and liquid nitrogen produce a good dense smoke with no aftereffects 
but are very difficult to control and therefore seldom used. 
A method reported by Shindo and Brask" that works at velocities of over 
100 mph is a vaporized petroleum product called Type 1962 Fog Juice, which 
is used in theatrical productions. The smoke generator consists of about 75 in. 
of 0.060-in.-outside-diameter (wall = 0.010 in.) stainless steel tubing. For a 
probe the tubing is placed inside a 0.375-in.-diameter steel tube and held by a 
collet about 8.0 in. from the end of the tubing, which is bent 90" about 3 in. 
from the end. Ceramic beads are used to insulate the stainless steel tubing from 
the outer tube. To vaporize the fluid, 10-15 A is applied to the stainless steel 
tubing from the collet to a point about 60.0 in. away inside a non-heat-conducting 
handle. This allows the stainless steel tube to expand. The power unit consists 
of a variac whose output is connected to the 230-V windings of a 1.5-kVA 
115:230 transformer. The variac is used to control the temperature on the stainless 
steel tubing by applying 0-
50 V
.
 The tubing has about 3 Cl resistance, so the 
current is limited to a maximum of 15 A. 
The fuel reservoir is airtight and has a pressure regulator used to set plant air 
pressure at about 30 lb/in.2 
to feed the fuel to the probe and a needle valve to control 
the fuel flow. Plastic tubing connects the reservoir to the probe. It takes some 
experience to obtain the desired volume of smoke, which is affected by the air 
pressure, fuel flow, and voltage. The following values are approximate. With the 
power switch off, set the variac at 70%, apply 30 lb/in.2 
to the reservoir, and crack 
open the needle valve. When a small stream of fluid comes out the end, turn on 
the power. When turning off, cut the power, and when a stream of fluid leaves the 
tube, shut the needle valve off. This is done to reduce carbon formation in the 
stainless steel tubing. If hot fluid is emitted, the temperature is too low; either 
increase the voltage or reduce the fuel flow. If the smoke pulsates, it is generally 
a sign that the air pressure is too low. 
The most widely used method for producing smoke at the larger wind tunnels 
today is a wand system similar to that described above with polyethylene glycol as 
the "fuel." A useful alternative to air pressure to drive the fuel through the wand 
is a peristaltic pump. These are sold by suppliers to chemistry and life science 


now VISUALIZATION 
- -
-
 
FIGURE 5.18 Smoke generator and delivery wand used at the Glenn L. Martin Wind 
Tunnel. (Designed and fabricated by Robert Wozniak.) (Photograph courtesy of Glenn L. 
Martin Wind Tunnel.) 
laboratories and have very fine volume flow control. An example of such a system 
is shown in Figure 5.18. 
E N. M. Brown developed a system of smoke generation in which kerosene is 
vaporized and the vapor then cooled to the temperature of the airstream before being 
emitted into the stream.I2 
The systems are designed to be used with special-purpose 


5.4 FLOW FIELD VISUALIZATION 
211 
flow visualization wind tunnels rather than in larger general-purpose wind tunnels. 
They have been used in many studies.I3 
Using 
Smoke Smoke filaments can be used to find key locations such as stagnation 
points. Smoke can easily show the extent of separated regions and the size of a 
separation bubble. Smoke can also be used to show and track strong features such 
as tip or leading-edge vortices from lifting surfaces that may impinge on downstream 
parts of a vehicle with deleterious effects. 
Strong stable light sources are required. If a periodic phenomenon is being 
investigated, then a stroboscope will be needed that can be synchronized to the 
period of the phenomenon being studied. Common subjects requiring such an ar- 
rangement are propellers and rotors. 
Regions of separated flow can be detected in two opposite ways. Smoke filaments 
can be introduced upstream of the model and located in a series of positions so that 
the boundary of essentially undisturbed flow can be detected. Any volume into 
which smoke does not go readily is likely a wake region. The smoke wand can then 
be introduced directly into the apparent wake region. The smoke will fill the wake 
"bubble," thereby defining its extent. 
Smoke Wire Another method of producing small discrete filaments of smoke at 
low velocities is described by Batill and Mueller.14 
This is the smoke wire technique, 
and it appears to be limited to flows where the Reynolds number, based on wire 
diameter, does not exceed 20 or at velocities from 6 to 18 ftlsec. The limit is based 
on preventing the wake from the wire from disturbing the flow behind the wire, 
and the limit has been determined by experiment. This method uses a small-diameter 
wire that is coated with an oil. The best results were obtained using Life-Like model 
train smoke, which consists of a commercial-grade mineral oil with small amounts 
of oil of anise and blue dye added. The liquid-coated wire has 40-80 V AC or 
4C-
60 V DC impressed across it. As the wire is heated, fine smoke streaklines 
form 
at droplets on the wire (approximately 8 lineslcm for a 0.003-in.-diameter wire). 
As the wire is heated, it expands and thus sags. This can cause problems with the 
accurate placement of the streaklines. To avoid this, the wire was prestressed to 
about 1.5 X 1
0
5
 lblin.', which is near the yield point of type 302 stainless steel 
wire; thus the wire must be handled carefully. 
As the oil-treated wire produces smoke for periods of up to 2 sec, a timing circuit 
was used for the lights and cameras used to photograph the smoke. Since the smoke 
wire is limited to low-Reynolds-number tests, it is probably best suited to use in 
small tunnels as it is difficult to run large tunnels at the required low velocities. An 
example of a smoke wire visualization is shown in Figure 5.19. 
Shadowgraph 
The shadowgraph method depends on the variation in refractive index of air due 
to density variation. It is well known and widely used for applications in high-speed 
flows in which substantial density variations are present. The technique has relatively 


212 
FLOW VISUALIZATION 
FIGURE 5.19 Streamlines past an airfoil visualized by smoke wire technique. 
recently been applied to obtaining the paths of tip vortices of helicopter rotors and 
tracking their interaction with the fuselage in hovering and low-speed forward 
motion. 
5.5 DATA-DRIVEN VISUALIZATION 
In this category we place all the techniques in which information is processed by 
either analog or digital methods and produce flow images of some sort. The data 
may be a set of measurements 
such as the voltages from a set of pressure transducers 
attached to multihole probes along with the geometric data that give locations 
corresponding to each set of voltage data. Many other types of measurements are 
used in similar ways. Another example would be the luminosity data from a CCD 
camera recording the image of a model coated with pressure- or temperature-sensitive 
paint. The data may also come from a set of computations based on some flow 
model such as potential flow, Euler codes, or Navier-Stokes solvers. 
The demarcation between the class of methods addressed here and those that 
have been termed "direct visualization" is rapidly bluning as every image shown 
earlier in this book already exists in digitized form and can be manipulated as a set 
of numerical data. The evolution is being driven by the continuing advance in our 
capability to acquire, manipulate, and present in various forms larger and larger 
data sets in smaller and smaller times. 


5.5 DATA-DRIVEN VISUALIZATION 
213 
We make no effort here to capture the many facets of this rapidly advancing 
collection of applications. However, anyone involved in aerodynamics in the next 
few years will have to deal with a variety of new developments. An indication of 
the high level of activity in this area is the series of international symposia on flow 
visualization that began in 1977 in Tokyo, the seventh15 
of which was held in 1995 
and the eighth of which was held in 1997. The proceedings of the seventh contained 
more than 1000 pages. 
For an account of a substantial cross section of methods, YangL6 
may be consulted. 
The few paragraphs that follow provide a brief introduction to a small sample 
of methods. 
Data Presentation Methods 
As data-gathering methods have become more capable, it has become common to 
obtain thousands or even millions of numerical values associated with various flow 
variables at various locations in space and time. The search for the most effective 
ways for an aerodynamicist to use such large volumes of data is ongoing. And it 
is a problem that is essentially the same for data sets obtained either experimentally 
or from computations. It is likely that this area will continue to change rather 
dramatically for some time to come. We give a few historically significant methods 
in the following, although they have been superseded by the advance of technology. 
Color LXsplay of Wake Flows-Analog Method The first system by Crowder, 
Hill, and Pond" 
used a total pressure probe at the end of a swinging arm extending 
through the ceiling or wall of the tunnel. The probe was driven externally to the 
tunnel along a segment of an arc. At the end of each swing along the arc the length 
of the probe was changed (polar coordinate motion). Thus the probe surveyed an 
area of the tunnel. The pitot was connected to a pressure transducer. The output of 
the transducer, through suitable electronics, was fed to a light-emitting diode (LED) 
at the rear of the pitot. For three adjustable ranges of pressure the LED produced 
three colors. A camera was mounted downstream of the model. With the tunnel 
blacked out the camera, by remote control, took a time exposure of the probe 
sweeping out the area in the flow. With an adjustment of the test-section ambient 
light the model could be superimposed on the flow field photograph. 
Other than the electronics to supply the proper current to the LED, this system 
required no additional data processing and the results were available when the film 
was developed, or after the run if instant film was used. The multicolored picture 
then showed the variation in total pressure from which wakes, vortices, and the like 
could easily be determined. The method trades off resolution in pressure for an 
increase in spatial resolution of the moving LED. The value of mapping the geometry 
of wake features was realized as this technique was applied. 
Color Displuys of Flow Fields-Digital Methods Winkelmann and TsaoI8 
obtained 
very detailed flow field surveys using several measurement techniques including 
pressure probes, hot-wire probes, and a laser velocimeter. The probe locations and 


214 
now V I S U A L ~ ~ A ~ O N  
the output of the fransducers were recorded on magnetic tape with spatial data 
densities as high as 4000 measurements per inch of movement of the probe. The 
data were then processed through a program that applied color codes to the data. 
This program created three standard files for the white-light primary colors: red, 
green, and blue. These files were then used to drive a color video monitor to produce 
the color-coded flow field survey. Derived 
quantities such as vorticity were computed 
from the data sets and the resulting maps were produced in color-coded displays. 
The permanent record of the results were 35-mm photographs of the display. 
Winkelmann's images based on data from single-element hot wire, pitot tube, 
and pitch probe are shown in Figure 5.20. These are from the flow field just 
FIGURE 5.20 Images from surveys behind a rectangular wing; aspect ratio 4, Clark Y-14 
airfoil, chord 15.2 cm, a = 25.4". R,, = 360,000. 


5.5 DATA-DRIVEN VISUALIZATION 
215 
downstream of the wing, for which a surface oil flow is shown in Figure 5.6. The 
processing for this work took considerable effort and time in 1983. Today, similar 
amounts of data are routinely processed on the fly for both experimental and 
computational data sets. However, the amount of data gathered, all of which was 
obtained by point sampling techniques, was large and would still lead to long 
experimental runs. The time required to collect the data for each image in Winkel- 
mann's work was about 90 min. This would have to be multiplied by each flow 
condition for which such an image is required. Much more time-effective methods 
are necessary for these types of data to be commonplace in development efforts. 
The particle 
image 
velocimetry 
methods hold promise but are 
still limited to relatively 
small spatial regions and relatively low speeds. 
Flow Transducers and Flow Imaging 
In order to produce an "image" of a flow in a usual sense and to serve the usual 
purposes of flow visualization, it is necessary to have data for a large number of 
geometric locations. This is obtained by the optical processes of direct visualization 
methods and was obtained by extensive surveying with standard flow sensors to 
produce the images in the preceding section. In the former, the time required to 
make a record is the exposure time for the film or digital camera, which is typically 
of the order of milliseconds to tens of milliseconds and may be much shorter in 
some instances. In the latter it is several tens of minutes or thousands of seconds. 
The ratio of times required to obtain a frame by these two types of methods can 
be lo6 
or more. In the first case, we get a "picture" very quickly but cannot easily 
extract as much detailed numerical information as we would like and not nearly as 
much as we get for each point at which we do a typical measurement with a device 
such as a hot wire or multihole pressure probe. In the second case, we can get very 
detailed numerical information for each measurement location that is related to a 
well-defined calibration process, but it takes too long and the measurements at the 
various locations are spread over a considerable time so the "image" can only be 
of an averaged type with respect to time. 
Spatial and Temporal Characterization of hnsducers An ideal flow transducer 
would provide a signal simply proportional to the instantaneous value of the flow 
quantity of interest at a geometric point in space while imposing no influence 
whatever on the flow and not responding to any parameter or variable other than 
the flow quantity of interest. And for producing data-driven flow visualization, we 
would like to be able to operate as many of these ideal transducers in parallel as 
necessary to obtain sufficient resolution throughout the spatial domain of interest. 
It is obvious that we do not have available to us such capability. Even if we 
had ideal transducers, we would almost always be considering time-averaged, and 
possibly spatially averaged, results since most flows with which we work are turbu- 
lent and we would need to reduce the data to some manageable form from which 
a human could make decisions regarding the product under development. 


216 
FLOW VISUALIZATION 
Real transducers 
do require finite times to respond to stimuli and are influenced 
by interactions over finite spatial dimensions. O
r
,
 
in other words, real transducers 
provide a response that represents an operational average over time and space. 
These characteristics are the basis for choosing one transducer over another for 
specific purposes. 
.~- 
Particle Image Velocimetry 
Particle image velocimeters 
(PIVs) are discussed in Chapter 4. These systems provide 
one of the best available means of investigation of flow fields in a number of classes. 
Their primary forte is low speed and small spatial extent. Their use in larger tunnels 
is currently limited to local flow structures for model parts rather than full-field 
investigations around the test article. 
Holography and Interferometry 
Lasers with coherent light can be used to produce holographs that can be used for 
density measurements and flow visualization. Basically, the laser beam is split into 
collimated object and reference beams. The object beam passes through the flow 
and is combined with the reference beam on a photographic film. When the film 
is developed and illuminated by the reference beam, the information contained in 
the object beam is reconstructed. 
If holographic information is desired, the interference fringe pattern is obtained 
on the film by exposing the film to the object beam twice. The interference pattern 
is reconstructed by illuminating the film with the reference beam. Density measure- 
ments require both calibration and careful optical alignment. 
These systems have been used to Mach numbers as low as 0.20. This is still 
pushing the current limit for development projects, and these methods show no 
indication that they will reach a state of maturity and economic utility that will lead 
to their being widely used in the near future. 
REFERENCES AND NOTES 
1. Lamb, H., Hydrodynamics, 6th ed., Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1932, Arti- 
cle 13. 
2. Somerscales, E. E C., "Tracer Methods," in Emrich, R. J
.
,
 Ed., Methods of Experimental 
Physics, Vol. 18, Part A, Fluid Dynamics, Academic, New York, 1981. 
3. Crowder, .
I
.
 
P., "Add Fluorescent Mini-Tufts to the Aerodynamicists' Bag of Tricks," 
Aeronaut. Astronaut., 18, 54-56, 1980. 
4. Merzkirch, W., Flow Visualization, Academic, New York, 1974. 
5. Tobak, M., & Peake, D. J., "Topology of Three Dimensional Separated Flows," Ann. 
R
e
v
.
 
Fluid Mech., 14, 61-85, 1982. 
6. Moffan, H. K., and Tsinober, A,, Ed. "Topological Fluid Mechanics," in Proceedings of 
the IUTAM Symposium, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1989. 


REFERENCES AND NOTES 
217 
7. Reda, D. C., and Muratore, J. J., Jr., "A New Technique for the Measurement of Surface 
Shear Stress Vectors Using Liquid Crystal Coatings," AIAA Paper 94-0729, presented 
at the Thirty-Second AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, Reno, NV, 
Jan. 
10-13, 1994. 
8. "Ultraviolet & Fluorescent Photography," 
M-27, Eastman Kodak Co., Rochester, NY. 
9. Mach, L., "Uber die Sichtbarmachung von Luftstromlinien," Aeitschriftfur Luftschtffahrt 
and Physik der Atmosphere, 15(6), 129-139, plates 1-111, 1896. 
10. Marey, E. J., "Changements de direction et de vitesse d'un courant d'air qui rencontre 
des corps de formes diverses," Compt. Rend., 132, 1291-1296, 1901. 
11. Shindo, 
S., and Brask, O., "A Smoke Generator for Low Speed Wind Tunnels," 
Technical 
Note 69-1, University of Washington, Dept. of Aeronautics and Astronautics, 1969. 
12. Merkyvirch, W., Flow Visualization, Academic, New York, 1974. 
13. Mueller, T. J., "Smoke Flow Visualization in Wind Tunnels," 
Astronaut. Aeronaut. 21, 
50-62, Jan. 1983. 
14. Batill, S., & Mueller, T., "Visualization of Transition in the Flow Over an Airfoil Using 
the Smoke Wire Technique," 
AZAA 
J., 19, 340-345, 1981. 
15. Crowder, J. P., Ed., "Flow Visualization W, 
Proceedings of the Seventh International 
Symposium on Flow Visualization," Seattle, WA, Sept. 11-14, 1995, Begell House, New 
York, 1995. 
16. Yang, W. J., Computer Assisted Flow Visualization: Second Generation Technology, CRC 
Press, Boca Raton, FL. 1994. 
17. Crowder, J. P., Hill, E. G., and Pond, C. R., "Selected Wind Tunnel Testing Developments 
at Boeing Aeronautical Laboratory," AIAA Paper 82-0458, 1982. 
18. Winkelmann, A. W., and Tsao, C. P., "A Color Video Display Technique for Flow Field 
Surveys," AIAA Paper 83-061 
1, in Proceedings 
o
f
 the AIAA Twelfh 
Aerodynamic Testing 
Conference, AIAA, Washington, DC, 1983. 


6 Calibration of the Test Section 
After a tunnel is constructed, the next step is to determine its flow characteristics 
and, of course, to change any that are not satisfactory for the purposes intended. 
The types of measurements that will be required can be made with methods discussed 
in Chapters 4 and 5. 
The low-speed "steady" airstream is usually considered to be defined when we 
know its distribution of temperature 7
:
 
pressure p, dynamic pressure q, and "turbu- 
lence" q. 
There are several assumptions embedded in this statement. We admit that 
the airstream is expected to be turbulent and therefore not strictly steady or time 
invariant. The time variability of the airstream is to be characterized by its level of 
turbulence, 
which is commonly defined to be the rms of the variation of the longitudi- 
nal component from the mean value of air speed. The pressure' and dynamic pressure 
are the mean values for these quantities averaged over a time interval chosen as 
necessary to achieve the required precision of the mean. The stream temperature is 
similarly considered. Using the equation of state, we can then compute the density, 
and using the definitions of total pressure and total temperature, we can compute 
these quantities and flow speed as well. In the case of wind tunnels to be used 
for wind engineering, the temporal and spatial variations must be considered in 
considerably more detail and will include spectra and integral scales of the turbulent 
flow structures as well as a profile to match appropriate types of planetary boundary 
layers. We will not treat those issues in this chapter. 
We may also compute the Reynolds number for a particular model based on its 
chosen characteristic length. Much of our interest is centered on determining pres- 
sure, which can be measured most simply by use of liquid manometers or more 
commonly by using electronic data systems, including various instrumentation ele- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
ments and computer systems for data manipulation, storage, and presentation. For 
our subsonic testing, the precision with which measurements 
of stream temperatures 
are made are usually less demanding than the typical pressure measurements. 
6.1 TEST-SECTION n o w  
CALIBRATION 
Speed Setting 
Setting the speed of a wind tunnel appears straightforward as we apply our basic 
understanding of fluid dynamics. However, it turns out that this basic question 
absorbs a considerable amount of attention even for experienced aerodynamicists. 
When there is no model in the test section, a measuring device, most commonly a 


6.1 TEST-SECTION FLOW 
CALIBRATION 
219 
Test Section 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
JT 
I 
I 
I 
FIGURE 6.1 Vpical measurement sta- 
-. 
L 
tions for a wind tunnel "q" system. 
pitot-static tube, can be put there to determine the air speed. One cannot, however, 
insert a pitot-static tube or other measuring device in the test section to measure 
dynamic pressure or speed along with an object under test because the test object 
will cause changes in the flow. These changes are referred to as "induced flow." 
Consider Figure 6.1, which gives a schematic indication of the settling chamber, 
contraction, and test section of a typical wind tunnel. 
The tunnel speed is usually determined by measuring either static or total pressure 
in the settling chamber ahead of the contraction cone, as indicated by station L, 
and a static pressure ahead of the test section, as indicated by station S. 
If honeycomb 
or screens are used in the settling chamber, station L will be downstream of these 
devices. Using the subscripts L for the bellmouth or settling chamber and S for the 
region before the test section, Bernoulli's equation between the two stations will be 
where Klqs 
represents an allowance for the small loss in total pressure between the 
bellmouth and station S. Here P is static pressure and q is dynamic pressure. 
Neglecting compressibility (6.2) follows from the continuity equation applied be- 
tween the two stations (A 
is the area): 
Squaring, multiplying by p/2, and solving for q
,
,
 
Rewriting Bernoulli's equation and substituting for qs 
above, 


220 
CALIBRATION OF THE 
TEST SECTION 
If station S does not have the same cross-sectional area as the test section (station 
J), the continuity equation can be used to yield 
Thus 
In this form the constant K, can be considered to include the small additional loss 
in total pressure from station S to the jet. 
The actual calibration of the tunnel is accomplished by running the tunnel at 
various values of P, - 
Ps 
while measuring the dynamic pressure in the test section 
with a calibrated pitot-static tube. This evaluates (1 - 
K, 
- 
KT)&. Because the 
velocity is not uniform throughout the test section, it is necessary to survey the test 
section. As a minimum, the area in the vertical plane of the model trunnion for 
aircraft models or other appropriate plane for other test objects should be surveyed. 
A better approach would be to survey a volume of the test section that is occupied 
by the model. If the pitot-static tube used has a hemispherical nose, it can be 
equipped with two yawheads at 90° to each other, and the distribution of the upflow 
and cross-flow can be obtained simultaneously. 
The survey of the test section can be done with a simple pitot-static tube assuming 
there is a method to position it throughout the test section or a rake of pitot statics 
can be used. If there is no method of remotely positioning the pitot-static tube, the 
survey of the test section becomes a very tedious operation. In any event, this is a 
critical operation and the effects of the manner of holding and supporting any 
selected instrument must be carefully evaluated. 
If a volume of the test section is surveyed and there are large variations in the 
dynamic pressure, it may be desirable to use a weighted average of the measured 
dynamic pressure. When the dynamic pressure calibration is completed, there is a 
relation established between the indicated dynamic pressure (PL 
- PS) 
and the 
dynamic pressure q, in the clean test section. There usually are a series of these 
calibrations for different test-section configurations. If the tunnel has an external 
balance, calibrations are often made with and without the balance struts and their 
fairings. If a ground plane is used often, calibrations are made for various heights 
of the ground plane. 
It is desirable to obtain for each test-section configuration the distribution of the 
total pressure, static pressure, upflow, and cross-flow throughout the region occupied 
by the model. When the tunnel has an air exchanger or heat exchanger, the tempera- 
ture distribution should also be measured. 
The pressure sources for the tunnel speed control should be, ideally, either a ring 
around a tunnel station or at least a portion of a ring on the two side walls or the 
ceiling and floor. The possibility of the model pressure field directly affecting the 
nearer of the pressure sources at station S should always be kept in mind and 


6.1 TEST-SECTION FLOW CALIBRATION 
221 
evaluated if a larger model than normal or an upstream mounting location is to be 
considered. The static source should consist of either a series of static sources or a 
sealed tube flush with the surface with many holes evenly spaced along its length. 
The tubes or multiple static sources of the ring should be manifolded together to 
yield an average static pressure at the station. If total pressure is used in the 
contraction cone, it is desirable to have multiple sources also. 
The two pressure sources in the simplest case can be connected to a U-tube 
manometer that is used for setting the tunnel speed. It is more common to use 
a high-quality differential pressure transducer. Then the electrical output can be 
transmitted to any location convenient for the tunnel operator and to the data system. 
One note of caution: Extreme care must be taken to make sure that there are no 
leaks in the tunnel dynamic pressure system. In large tunnels, the leak checking 
can be a time-consuming process. It is highly desirable and strongly suggested that 
the system should not be disturbed once it has been leak checked. It is often useful 
to record the pressures at each of the two tunnel stations as separate readings relative 
to atmospheric ambient pressure. Additional sources for this use should be provided 
rather than tapping into the tunnel dynamic pressure system. 
It is also desirable to have a simple method of periodically checking the system 
for leaks. One way to do this is to use a calibration wing that can be installed easily. 
The wing can be run through a pitch series at several dynamic pressures. If the 
slope of the lift curve does not change, there is no change in the dynamic pressure 
calibration. This has the further advantage of also checking the tunnel upflow. If 
the drag polar does not rotate, the upflow has not changed. 
Longitudinal Pressure 
Gradient 
The static pressure gradient along the test section must be known in order to make 
necessary buoyancy corrections. It may be obtained by reading the local static 
pressure with a pitot-static tube that is progressively moved from entrance cone to 
exit cone. Care must be taken that the pitot tube is aligned directly into the wind 
and that no extraneous static pressure is created by the bracket holding the pitot 
tube. This last proviso is not possible to satisfy exactly. 
Perhaps a more convenient method is to use a long static tube, as discussed in 
the next paragraph. The reader may reasonably ask why not measure the static 
pressure along the walls of the tunnel. It turns out that small variations in wall 
geometry associated with joints, mounting holes, and the like cause local variations 
in the static pressure that are typically too large to ignore and may change over 
time as various mounting 
installations are put in and taken out of a facility. Measuring 
wall pressures is a good adjunct to calibration and has become a common practice 
to obtain input for boundary corrections, but it is not a good idea to rely on wall 
pressure measurements for the baseline characterization. 
Long Static 'hbe 
As the name implies, this is a long tube that extends through the test section. The 
tube is often suspended on a series of wires that are used to align and tension the 


222 
CALIBRATION OF 
THE 
TEST 
SECTION 
tube. The tube is equipped with a number of static pressure rings. These rings have 
four or more static ports around the circumference that are manifolded together. If 
the flow angularity is small, then aft of the nose the flow will be practically parallel 
to the tube. This then yields a static pressure distribution along the length of the tube. 
.
.
.
-
 
Dynamic Pressure Variation across Jet 
The dynamic pressure is usually measured throughout selected regions of the test 
section by means of a pitot-static tube. The density is calculated from a barometric 
pressure measurement, a test-section static pressure measurement relative to the 
atmosphere, and a test-section temperature determination along with the equation 
of state. The local velocities are then obtained from 
The velocities as calculated from the dynamic pressures or the pressures them- 
selves are plotted, and the points are connected by "contour" lines of equal values. 
The variation of q in the working range of the jet should be less than 0.50% from 
the mean, which corresponds to a 0.25% variation in velocity. Some tunnels have 
been built to tighter specifications, but it is almost inevitable that custom tweaking 
of aspects of the tunnel circuit will be required to do better. 
A plot of the dynamic pressure distribution in a rectangular test section is shown 
in Figure 6.2. Of interest is the asymmetry that is usually found, and the maximum 
variation in this example is well above satisfactory limits. The survey should have 
been carried to the walls. 
The correction of an excessive velocity variation is not as serious a problem as 
the correction of excessive angular variation. There are more method of attack as 
well as less probability that the variation will change with tunnel speed. There are 
several minor adjustments that may be expected to improve a less than satisfacto~y 
speed distribution. There may be local flow separations that must be found and 
corrected or improperly set turning vanes. If the velocity variation is annular, the 
source may be the propeller load distribution. Such local problems in identifiable 
parts of the tunnel should be corrected. Finally screens may be added in the largest 
section of the tunnel with spatial mesh densities varied so that they are more dense 
in the sections that correspond to high-velocity regions in the jet. The improvement 
in velocity distribution by such screens is shown in Figure 6.3. The loss in energy 
ratio they cause is quite small and is far outweighed by the improvement in test- 
ing conditions. 
Flow Angle Variation across Jet 
The variation of flow angle in the jet can be measured by many devices. Regardless 
of the device used, it is desirable to map the upflow and cross-flow in a series of 


6.1 TEST-SECTION FLOW CALIBRATION 
Tunnel wall 
Less than 0.5% from mean. 
1
.
0
 
to 1.5% from mean. 
1 
0
.
5
 
to 1
.
0
%
 from mean. 
1
.
5
 
to 2
.
0
9
6
 
from mean. 
FIGURE 
6.2 Example distribution of test-section dynamic pressure. 
- 
1 
0
 
+1 
+2 
+3 
+4 
Dynamic-pressure variation, per cent 
FIGURE 6.3 Effect of screens on velocity distribution in the test section. 


224 
CALIBRATION OF THE 
TEST SECTION 
transverse planes along the longitudinal axis in the region occupied by the model 
over the range of intended dynamic pressures. Often, when the upflow and cross- 
flow are plotted as flow direction vectors, regions of vortexlike flow can be seen 
in the test section. As indicated in Chapter 3, such flow is often the result of poor 
velocity distribution in the return duct before the third comer or the result of 
improperly set fourth-comer tuming vanes. 
A variation of upflow across the span of a wing results in an effective aerodynamic 
twist. A cross-flow gradient across the test section in the region of the vertical tail 
will change the slope of the yawing moment versus side slip or yaw angle. Thus it 
is desirable to have the upflow and cross-flow constant across the tunnel. This is 
difficult to achieve. It would be desirable to have the variation less than t0.1O0, 
but it is often necessary to accept the best values that can be achieved. The maximum 
variation should be held to +0.20°. 
Test-Section Turbulence Measurement 
Variations between results of tests made in different wind tunnels at the same 
Reynolds number and between tests made in wind tunnels 
and in flight have indicated 
that some correction was needed for the effect of turbulence that exists in wind 
tunnels. It has been argued that this turbulence causes flow patterns in the tunnel 
to be similar to the flow pattern in free air at a higher Reynolds number. Hence the 
tunnel test Reynold number 
could be said to be a higher "effective 
Reynolds number." 
The physics of turbulent flow is far too complex to be captured by this simple 
concept. There are some phenomena for which it "works" 
to some extent and others 
for which it does not. We address first the historical use of this concept, which is 
dependent on the long-known fact that spheres (and circular cylinders) have quite 
well-defined critical Reynolds numbers near which the drag coefficient drops rather 
precipitously as the Reynolds number increases. 
It has been experimentally verified that the Reynolds number at which the drag 
coefficient of a sphere decreases 
rapidly depends strongly on the degree of turbulence 
in the wind tunnel. The Reynolds number at which the reduction occurs decreases 
with increasing tunnel turbulence. There is also a strong effect of surface roughness. 
In this discussion, we are considering only aerodynamically smooth spheres. The 
decrease in drag coefficient with Reynolds number can be understood as the result 
of increasing the Reynolds number, producing earlier boundary layer transition from 
the laminar to turbulent state, which in turns leads to a downstream shift in the 
separation point and corresponding higher base pressure, a smaller wake, and less 
drag. Early flight measurements on spheresZ found that in the free atmosphere the 
critical Reynolds number for a sphere is 3.85 X lo5. 
This value is larger than is 
achieved in wind tunnels, although many low-turbulence tunnels approach this value. 
In the atmosphere the turbulent eddies are so large relative to the sphere that they 
do not affect the thin boundary layer of the sphere. 
Before the now common use of hot-wire anemometry, a turbulence sphere was 
the primary way to measure the relative turbulence of a wind tunnel. It remains a 


6.1 TEST-SECTION FLOW CALIBRATION 
225 
FIGURE 6.4 
Turbulence sphere. 
very useful and easy way to characterize the turbulent environment in a tunnel and 
to check if there is an indicated effect following changes in the tunnel configuration 
or special installations that might affect the flow quality. The configuration of a 
turbulence sphere is shown in Figure 6.4. The critical Reynolds number for the 
sphere can be measured in two ways. One method is to plot the measured CD 
based 
on cross-sectional area versus Reynolds number, as shown in Figure 6.5. From the 
plot the Reynolds number in the tunnel for C, = 0.3000 is read. The second method 
is to take the average of the four pressures on the aft surface of the sphere and 
subtract this value from the stagnation value at the leading edge of the sphere, 
yielding A
P
.
 A plot of APlq versus Reynolds number is prepared for the sphere and 
the Reynolds number determined for APlq = 1.220, as indicated in Figure 6.6. 
The 
pressure method has certain advantages. It needs no drag balance with the associated 
2 x loS 
3 x lo6 
4 x lo5 
Reynolds number of sphere 
FIGURE 6.5 Drag coefficient for a sphere. 


226 
CALIBRATION OF 
THE TEST 
SECTION 
Reynolds number 
FIGURE 
6.6 Variation of pressure coefficient as function of Reynolds number for a "turbu- 
lence sphere." 
balance calibration and no evaluation of support tares for the portion of the support 
sting exposed to the airstream. Also, the sphere support sting can be stiffer as no 
deflection is needed by the drag balance. 
The critical Reynolds number as defined by either force or pressure measurements 
is then used to define a turbulence factor for the tunnel by comparing the tunnel's 
critical Reynolds number to the atmospheric free-air Reynolds number: 
Then the effective test Reynolds number is defined by 
RN, 
= TF 
X RN, 
(6.9) 
The use of a turbulence sphere yields what may be thought of as an average 
value of tunnel turbulence. It does not give any information on the magnitude of 
turbulence in either the axial or lateral direction. The use of a turbulence sphere 
may, however, prove to be a simple method of monitoring any change in tunnel 
turbulence. Its use requires no prior calibrations and the installation and running in 
a tunnel can be designed to be simple and quick. 
The relation between the critical Reynolds number of a sphere and turbulence 
intensity as measured by a hot wire is shown in Figure 6.7. This is from the work 
of Dryden et al? and Dryden and K~ethe.~ 


6.2 WIND TUNNEL BOUNDARY LAYERS 
227 
Turbulence factor 
FIGURE 6.7 Variation of turbulence factor with turbulence intensity from hot-wire mea- 
surements. 
Turbulence spheres can be made from cue, duck, and bowling balls. Several sizes 
are needed to enable the turbulence factor to be measured over a range of tunnel 
air speeds. 
A brief examination of Figure 6.7 might lead to the conclusion that the higher the 
turbulence, the better the tunnel, as the effective Reynolds number of the test would 
be higher. This correction is not exact, and if the tunnel has excessive turbulence, the 
model may have a premature transition from laminar to turbulent flow, which can be 
critical for laminar flow airfoils. However, low-speed models are often equipped with 
trip strips that f
i
x
 the transition point on the model and may reduce the requirement 
for extremely 
low turbulence. 
The need for low test-section turbulence 
is not as severe 
for 
small student tunnels as it would be for larger tunnels that are used for research and 
development tests. The 
effectiveness 
of screens 
and honeycomb elements 
for reducing 
turbulence in wind tunnels has been discussed in Chapter 3. 
6.2 WIND TUNNEL BOUNDARY LAYERS 
The boundary layers involved in tunnel calibration are generally much thicker than 
those encountered on a typical model. The tunnel boundary layers can be measured 


228 
CALIBRATION OF 
THE 
TEST SECTION 
FIGURE 6.8 Boundary layer rake. 
using rakes of pitot tubes (Figure 6.8), which are specially configured 
for the purpose. 
Or traversing devices (Figure 6.9) fitted with pitot tubes, static tubes, or hot wires 
can be used in places where a mechanism can be mounted on the outside of the 
flow surface. Other devices for boundary layer measure] 
be discussed in 
a later chapter. The measurements of boundary layers for 1 
bration purposes 
are generally needed to assess the presence of separation or tenaency to separation. 
All tunnel boundary layers will almost surely be turbulent, 
so there are 
few instances 
in which locations of transition on tunnel surfaces are sought. Methods for this 
purpose are discussed later in relation to model measurements. 
nents will 
Locating Points of Separation 
If a tunnel has significant unsteady flow with low frequency compared to typical 
turbulence, it is likely that there are regions of separated flow. An exploratory 
investigation can be carried out with tuft wands, expecially in larger tunnels. More 
extensive investigations can be done with tufts on the tunnel surfaces and either 
visual or video monitoring for various tunnel operating conditions. Other methods 
of investigation are discussed in relation to model tests later, but they are seldom 
needed for direct investigation of tunnel surface layers. 
The two basic methods of attaching tufts to a surface are by scotch tape or by 
glue. Tape is always used for attaching to tunnel walls. When tape is used, the tufts 
are 
usually made on a tuft board. (See Figure 5.1.) This gives a length of tape with 
tuft attached that is applied to the surface. The surface should be cleaned with 
naphtha or other solvents to remove oil to increase the length of time the tufts will 
remain attached under wind-on conditions. 


- 
- --- 
- 
6.3 ACOUSTICS 
229 
FIGURE 6.9 Typical traversing mechanism used for boundary layer surveys. 
Off-Surface Visualization 
The least expensive method for off-surface visualization is using a tuft wand, as 
previously mentioned. A long tuft on a pole, a tuft wand is useful for tracing flow 
near a model or to explore a tunnel circuit for regions of reversed flow. When it is 
necessary to put a person in the tunnel, he or she must wear goggles to protect the 
eyes from dust. It goes without saying that the person should take care to disturb 
the flow being investigated as little as is possible, although the human body is 
inevitably a large disturbance. 
6.3 ACOUSTICS 
As we have stated earlier, many low-speed wind tunnels will be utilized heavily 
- 
for aeroacoustic 
investigations 
in the coming years. This 
is true for several converging 
reasons. There is a strong and increasing interest in managing aerodynamic noise. 


230 
CALIBRATION OF THE TEST SECTION 
There is an increasing store of knowledge that provides avenues for attacking 
problems directly and for intensifying research efforts with promise of even greater 
understanding. There has emerged a set of experimental methods that allow very 
useful aeroacoustic investigations to be undertaken in general-purpose wind tunnels 
with relatively moderate treatment, at least by comparison to the anechoic facilities 
that have been essential in the past. 
6.4 
WIND TUNNEL 
DATA SYSTEMS 
The quality and features of the data system available for use at a wind tunnel have 
a large impact on the utility and potential productivity of the facility. The data 
system is becoming a more and more embedded element that determines the feasible 
data quality as well as potential efficiency of experiments that can be done at 
a laboratory. 
The path from some physical parameter to a stored digital number will be 
followed. Initially we will look at these functions as they were carried out by hand 
and then follow the same process by an analog-digital system. Consider Example 
4.1. Three measurements were needed to determine the velocity from a pitot-static 
tube: the test-section pressure, the test-section temperature, and the pressure differ- 
ence across the pitot-static tube total and static ports. The hand process for obtaining 
air speed from the pitot-static tube measurements would be to (a) identify the 
manometer tubes that are connected to the pitot-static pressure ports, (b) read the 
heights of the fluid in the tubes with the proper signs, (c) write the signs and heights 
in the correct place on a data sheet, (d) do the calculations using whatever tool is 
preferred, (e) record intermediate results if considered useful for checking, and (f) 
record the final result in a way that allows it to be retrieved and utilized 
in conjunction 
with any other measurements that may be a function of air speed. 
This is exactly the same process that a data system performs. First the desired 
parameter must be located. If five pressure modules of 32 ports are in use, then the 
data system must "know" the module and port position that is connected to the 
pitot-siatic pressures. This identification through appropriate program coding serves 
the same function as finding the manometer tube. The identification process can be 
tedious and error prone when large numbers of pressures are being recorded. The 
capabilities of the computer systems have been used at most laboratories to provide 
a program to assist in "port mapping." 
The next item is to read the value and sign, which is not as simple as visually 
reading the height of the fluid in the manometer tube. In general, transducers produce 
electrical signals; the amplitude depends on the value of the physical parameter. 
The signal can have different forms, such as current variation, voltage variation, 
and resistance variation. The level of the signal is generally quite low and requires 
amplification. Amplifiers act only on input voltages; thus some transducers must 
have their output changed to. a voltage. This is done with a signal conditioner 
appropriate to the particular device. 


6.4 WIND TUNNEL DATA SYSTEMS 
231 
The electrical signal from the transducer consists of two parts: the part of the 
signal that is a direct function of the variable being measured and a part that is not 
a function of the variable being measured, which is considered "noise." The noise 
can have an electrical cause, a mechanical cause, or an aerodynamic cause. It is 
common to apply either analog or digital filters to improve the measurement results 
by removing the noise to varying extents. Extreme care must be taken to ensure 
that the required signal is in fact improved rather than damaged in this process. 
These issues will be considered further in Chapter 12. 
The sign and amplitude or voltage of the analog signal that come out of the 
amplifier and/or filter represents the value of pressure. To use this value in calcula- 
tions, it must be expressed as a number; that is, it must be in digital form. This is 
accomplished by an analog-to-digital converted (ADC), which produces a binary 
number that may take one of several forms, the details of which must be obtained 
from the specifications of the particular device as provided by the manufacturer. 
The binary number and sign are 
transferred to the computer where it may be stored 
directly or a computation may be performed to convert to "engineering units" before 
storage. The number representing pressure is stored in a file in a preselected order 
that corresponds to the sources. The file must contain additional information- 
frequently the test number, run number, angle of attack, and yaw angle plus some 
configuration identifiers. The data system has implemented the same functions that 
are done by hand: identify the manometer tube (address), read the sign and value 
in numeric form (sign plus voltage to ADC), write the value and sign in the 
proper place on the data sheet (store with correct address), convert raw readings to 
engineering units, and compute the speed and record in the proper place to correlate 
with any other measurements that may be dependent. 
An additional important variable has not been mentioned-the time at which 
each measurement is taken. When recording is done by hand, this is only nominal. 
Many experiments require accurate time stamps for each data point so that the 
dynamics of events can be analyzed. This is much more demanding on the perfor- 
mance of data systems but is routinely done at frequencies up to hundreds of 
thousands of samples per second. 
The data system will have multiple data channels, each of which can process 
data in a manner analogous to the above description. The number of channels in 
the system is determined by the estimated number of parameters that will have to 
be measured in a particular facility or, more likely, by the available funds. A system 
may have 20, 100, or more channels. It should be noted that the use of multiplexing 
devices such as a 32-port electronically scanned pressure module that allows 32 
parameters to be measured on one analog-to-digital channel increases the number of 
parameters that can be acquired 
for a given number 
of electrical data system channels. 
Multiplexers were also used in the days when things were done by hand using 
slide rules. They were either rotary switches or a series of switches that were used 
to connect different signals to an expensive device that allowed the signals to be 
read in digital units or often from a highly accurate analog indicator that had to be 
observed and the value recorded by hand on a data sheet. If the evolution of 
multiplexers is followed, it would go like this: very slow manual switches to faster 


232 
CALIBRATION 
OF 
THE 
TEST 
SECTION 
relays to reed relay Switches in a neutral gas to the current electronic multiplexers 
in a silicon chip. The reed switches could handle up to lo3 
switching operations 
per second. The current use of integrated circuits and semiconductor analog switches 
has increased the rate to 106 per second and even more for shorter word lengths. 
Closely tied to the faster multiplexers has been the decrease in time required for 
the ADCs to read and convert the-voltages. With the higher speeds of the converters 
and multiplexer switching it is possible to take an almost simultaneous sampling 
of all channels. This has led to systems that take a large number of samples over 
a very short time. The sets of samples are then summed and averaged, and a standard 
deviation is often determined. 
It is now almost always possible 
for the data system to record data at a much higher 
rate than the typical time constants of the physical phenomena being investigated in 
a low-speed wind tunnel. It is important to explore the time variations of the time 
series and be sure that the chosen time frame over which data are taken is consistent 
with the objectives of the experiment. This will be explored further in Chapter 12. 
Computers now typically used in wind tunnel data systems allow the setting 
of model attitude and acquisition of the data to be automated. There have been 
improvements also in electronic components required for each channel so that bridge 
voltage power supplies and bridge-balancing impedances are quite stable and are 
able to keep the electrical noise to a low level. Amplifiers can cover frequencies 
down to zero. They are more stable (less drift) and have better noise levels and 
improved common mode rejection. Programmable power supplies of secondary 
standard quality can be used to calibrate amplifiers periodically 
during test operations 
to check drift. The calibration is stored and used for all subsequent readings until 
the next calibration. The use of electronic analog filters or digital filters can reduce 
the effect of electrical noise to reasonable levels but keep in mind that these must 
be used carefully. 
The measurement noise that arises from aerodynamic phenomena of the tunnel 
and model are more difficult to manage. The frequency of aerodynamic measurement 
noise is often quite low and simply extends the time over which a particular 
condition 
must be held and data averaged either by analog or digital means. This negates, to 
some degree, the advantages of the high-speed capabilities of digital acquisition 
systems. "Noise" as used in this paragraph is not referring to acoustic signals as 
detected by the human ear although there may be a direct physical relation in 
some instances. 
REFERENCES AND NOTES 
1. The terms pressure and static pressure a
r
e
 used interchangeably. They imply the pressure 
in a reference frame in which the mean molecular velocity is zero. Temperature and static 
temperature are similarly used. Additional detail in the definition is required if one 
considers the variation in dynamic pressure for parcels of fluid small enough to be 
participating in "turbulent" fluctuations but large compared to molecular dimensions. 
2. Millikan, C. B., and Kline, A. L., "The Effect of Turbulence," 
Aircraft Eng., Aug. 1933, 
pp. 169-174. 


REFERENCES AND NOTES 
233 
3. Dryden, H. L., Schubauer, G. B., Mack, W. C., Jr., and Skramstad, H. K., "Measurements 
of Intensity and Scale of Wind Tunnel Turbulence and Their Relation to the Critical 
Reynolds Number of Spheres," NACA Report 581, 1937. 
4. Dryden, H. L., and Kuethe, A. M., "Effect of Turbulence in Wind Tunnel Measurements," 
NACA Report 342, 1929. 


7 Forces and Moments from 
Balance Measurements 
The purpose of load measurements on the model is to make available the forces 
and moments so that they may be corrected for tunnel boundary and scale effects 
and utilized in predicting the performance of the full-scale vehicle or other device. 
The loads may be obtained by at least the following four methods, which are 
listed in the order of frequency of use: (1) measuring the actual forces and moments 
on the complete model or on parts of the model with one or more balances; (2) 
measuring the stress distribution over the model by means of orifices connected to 
pressure-measuring devices or other means such as pressure- or shear-sensitive 
coatings; (3) measuring the effect that the model has on the airstream by wake 
surveys and tunnel wall pressures; and (4) measuring the motion of the model under 
the action of the aerodynamic forces and computing the forces from equations 
of motion. 
In this chapter, we consider the first of these. The second and third will be 
considered in Chapter 7. The fourth will be considered in Chapter 18. 
7.1 FORCES, MOMENTS, AND REFERENCE FRAMES 
A reasonable concensus on definitions of standard reference frames for use in the 
study of vehicle dynamics in several subfields has been reached. We suggest con- 
sulting some standard references for more complete discussions. The American 
Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (AIAA)' has published a standard for 
aerospace applications. Etkin and ReidZ can be consulted for examples of applica- 
tions. The Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE)' has published a standard for 
automotive applications. Milliken and Milliken4 
can be consulted for examples of 
applications. Lewis5 can be consulted for conventions and applications to marine 
vehicles. We include these references because it is common for a wind tunnel 
engineer to need an acquaintance with the terminology of a potential user of a 
facility and whose background may vary. We will be using the conventions from 
aeronautics in most of our discussions because those have tended to be adopted or 
adapted to a great extent for other applications. 
The two most used reference frames are body axis frames and wind axis frames. 
A thii reference frame is referred to as stability axes. Any reference frame is 
determined by its orientation relative to some other frame or a basic physical 
reference and the location of the origin. A reference frame is a set of three orthogonal 
axes, by convention always labeled in a right-hand sequence. 
234 


. 
I Bodv Axes 
FIGURE 7.1 Wind and body reference frames. 
Wind Axes 
For wind tunnel applications, we first consider the wind axes. We illustrate this in 
Figure 7.1. The wind axes have x, pointing into the wind, z, pointing down, and 
y, pointing to the right looking into the wind. If the test section is not horizontal, 
then an appropriate local convention must be adopted. We show vectors indicating 
components of forces that are used in wind axes. Note that drag is in the negative 
x, direction and lift is in the negative z, direction while the side force is in the 
positive y, direction. 
We note that a perfectly aligned wind tunnel would have the wind axes exactly 
parallel to the wind tunnel axis. In reality, there are angularities, and these lead to 
the wind axes for any given model that may be angularly offset from the tunnel axes. 
Body Axes 
The body axes are fixed to the model and move with it. The exact alignment with 
any particular model must be specified a
s
 part of test planning. The xb-zb plane is 
frequently a plane of symmetry or approximately so. The force components on body 
axes are sometimes referred to as axial force, side force, and normal force for the 
xb, 
ybr 
zb 
components, respectively, or sometimes as body drag, body lift, and body 
side force. This multiple terminology can lead to confusion and requires attention 
to avoid errors in communication. We will use the former set to refer to body 
axis components. 
Moments and Reference Frame Origins 
The moment components on the x, y, z axes are referred to as rolling moment, 
pitching moment, and yawing moment, respectively. If context is not sufficient to 


236 
FORCES AND MOMENTS 
FROM BALANCE MEASUREMENTS 
distinguish between what is intended, then body roll, body pitch, and body yaw or 
wind roll, wind pitch, and wind yaw must be used. Note that the origins of the 
reference frames must be carefully specified in every case since the moments are 
directly and critically dependent on this choice and there is no universal standard. 
Model Attitude 
The standard way to specify model attitude is to use an Euler angle sequence going 
from wind axes to body axes of "yaw," +, about the z, axis, "pitch," 0, about an 
intermediate y axis, and "roll," 4, 
about the xb 
axis. Etkin and Reid2 can be consulted 
for details. However, it is the aerodynamic angles, angle of attack cx and sideslip 
p, that are the preferred independent variables for writing aerodynamic functions. 
The rotation sequence to go from wind axes to body axes for the aerodynamic 
angles is to rotate P in a negative sense about the z, axis, then rotate a in a positive 
sense about the yb 
axis. In the wind tunnel case for which the wind axes are aligned 
with what is taken as an E
a
r
t
h
 fixed frame in vehicle dynamics, yaw + is the 
negative of sideslip P provided roll is zero. This is the situation for many cases of 
tests using external balances. There are several opportunities to get signs mixed up 
so we will give a formal procedure. 
Consider two reference frames F, and F2, as sketched in Figure 7.2, where a 
vector A is shown along with expressions for its components on each of the two 
FIGURE 7.2 Transforming vectors from F, to Ft. 


7.1 FORCES, MOMENTS, AND REFERENCE FRAMES 
237 
frames. The relationship between the components on the two frames in terms of 
the Euler angles as indicated in the sketch is as given by Equation (7.1), where we 
have identified frame 1 with the wind axes and frame 2 with the body axes: 
For the most common case arising in wind tunnel work for which roll $ is zero, 
the result is given by 
cos 0 cos J, sin J, cos 0 
E
:
]
 
= [ s i n  
+ 
cos + 
(7.2) 
sin 0 cos + sin 0 sin J, 
cos 0 
The conventions for positive aerodynamic force components are not in the positive 
directions for the axes. The relations are as follows, with Equation (7.4) giving the 
expressions for converting wind axis force components to body axes and~~u&ion 
(7.5) giving the expressions 
for converting body axis force components to wind axes: 
D cos 0 cos J, - 
S 
sin J, cos 0 - 
L sin 0 
k] 
= [ 
D sin J, + S cos J, 
I 
(7.4) 
D sin 0 cos J, - 
S 
sin 0 sin J, + L cos 0 
The moment components are consistent with the positive conventions on the axes 
so they follow directly from Equation (7.2). We use lowercase I, m, and n to denote 
moments with no subscript for the body axes and with subscript w for the wind 


238 
FORCES AND MOMENTS FROM BALANCE MEASUREMENTS 
axis components. Tile results are given by Equation (7.6) for converting wind to 
body axes and Equation (7.7) for converting body to wind axes: 
I,cos 0 cos IJ + m, 
sin $ 
cos 0 - 
n
,
 sin 0 
-1, sin $ + m, 
cos $ 
1 
(7.6) 
Ln] 
11, sin 0 em 
Q 
+ m
.
 sin 0 sin IJ + n, cos 0 1 
1 
cos 0 cos $ - 
m sin IJ + n 
sin 0 
cos IJ 
1 sin $ 
cos 0 + m cos IJJ + n 
sin 0 sin $ I 
(7.7) 
-1 sin 0 + n cos 8 
Conversions between "stability axes" and wind axes are obtained by putting 0 = 
0 
in Equations (7.4)-(7.7) and replacing the body axis components with stability 
axis components. 
Other common expressions equivalent to these in terms of angle of attack and 
side slip are obtained by substituting 0 = a 
andlor IJ = -P directly into the 
above equations. 
Moment Transfers 
Frequent use is made of the relations from engineering statics which give the rules 
for transferring forces and moments from one reference point to another. The rule 
is simple, but again the non-right-hand rule conventions as treated above sometimes 
lead to errors. If a system of forces produces a resultant force F and a resultant 
moment MI relative to point 1, then an equivalent system acting at another point, 
2, is 
where r12 
is the vector from point 1 to point 2. The common use of this expression 
is to transfer moments from a "balance center" to a reference of choice for a 
particular model. Expanding Equation (7.9) for a case of obtaining the moment at 
the center-of-mass of a model (cm) from the force and moment measured at the 
balance center (bc) with all components in wind axes gives Equation (7.10), where 
[
x
,
,
 y, zcm] 
are the coordinates of the desired center of mass in the wind axis frame 
with origin at the balance center: 


7.2 BALANCES 
2
3
9
 
7.2 BALANCES 
We have been treating relations between force and moment components on different 
reference frames. A wind tunnel balance is expected to separate these force and 
moment components and accurately resolve what is almost always small differences 
in large forces. A complicating factor is that the various force and moment compo- 
nents vary widely in value at any given air speed and each varies greatly over the 
speed range from minimum to maximum. Balance design and use are problems that 
should not be deprecated; in fact, it might truthfully be said that balance design is 
among the most trying problems in the field. 
Concept of a Six-Component Balance 
In an attempt to picture the situation most clearly, a conceptual but impractical wire 
balance based on spring scales is shown in Figure 7.3. The model, supposed to be 
too heavy to be raised by the aerodynamic lift, is held by six wires. Six forces are 
read by scales A, B, C, D, E, and F: The wires attached to A and B are parallel to 
the incoming air velocity vector and define a plane that can be taken as a reference 
plane for the balance. We will designate this the x-
y plane. These wires point in 
the x direction. The wire attached to F 
is perpendicular to the A and B wires and 
is in the x-y plane. This wire points in the -y direction. The wires attached to C 
and D are in a plane that is perpendicular to the x-y plane, which we designate the 
p z  
plane. The C and D wires are perpendicular to the x-y plane. Wires A and C 
are attached at a common point on the right wing. Wires B, D, and F are attached 
to a common point on the left wing. Finally the wire attached to E is parallel to C 
and D and is in a plane parallel to C and D and halfway between them: 
FIGURE 7
.
3
 Diagrammatic wind tunnel balance. 


240 
FORCES AND MOMENTS FROM BALANCE MEASUREMENTS 
1. Since the horizontal wires A, B, and F cannot transmit bending, the vertical 
force perpendicular to V, the lift, is obtained from the sum of the forces in 
the vertical wires: L = C + D + E. 
2. The drag is the sum of the forces in the two horizontal wires parallel to the 
direction of V: 
D = A + B. 
3. The side force is simply Y-= F. 
4. If there is no rolling moment, that is, no moment component in the direction 
of the x axis, scaIes C and D will have equal readings. But more generally a 
rolling moment will appear as 1 = (C - 
D) X b/2. Note carefully that this 
is with reference to a point halfway between the two wires C and D, through 
which the line of action of F passes, and in the plane defined as containing E. 
5. Similarly, a yawing moment, that is, a moment component in the direction 
of the z axis, will result in nonequal forces in the wires A and B and the 
yawing moment will be given by n = (A - 
B) X b/2. Here also note that 
this is a moment with reference to a point halfway between A and B and 
through which the line of F passes. 
6. The pitching moment is given by m = E X c. This is a moment about the 
line containing F
.
 
Exact perpendicularity between the wires must be maintained. For instance, if 
the wire to scale F is not exactly perpendicular to wires A and B, a component of 
the drag will appear (improperly, of course) at scale F and wilI be interpreted as 
side force. A similar situation exists in regard to lift and drag and lift and side force. 
Since the lift is the largest force by far in typical aircraft complete model wind 
tunnel work, extreme care must be taken to ensure that it is orthogonal to the 
other components. 
To illustrate the situation in more detail, consider a planar subset of lift, drag, 
and pitching moment, as indicated in Figure 7.4. We will assume that we can 
FIGURE 7.4 Effect of balance component skew. 


7
.
2
 BALANCES 
241 
determine precisely the direction of the x and z axes and apply loads along those 
axes in order to explore the reaction in the wires. The expressions for equilibrium 
in the X and Z directions are 
Assume the actual loads are rn = 0 and Z = 10X. What will our balance read with 
the improper alignment as indicated by Figure 7.4? Solving for A, C, and E gives 
Zcos E - 
X s i n ~  
C = 
- 
- 
cos E cos 6 - 
sin E sin 6 
-Xcos 6 + Zsin 6 
A =  
- 
- 
cos E cos 6 - 
sin E sin 6 
cos E - 
sin dl0 
cos E cos 6 - 
sin E sin 6 
]Z 
(7.12) 
1 
-cos 6 + 10 sin 6 
cos E cos 6 - 
sin E sin 6 
If the alignment is perfect, we of course get C = Z and A = -
X. But if each of 
the angles is only 0.002 rads, or about 0.l0, 
then C = 0.99982 and A = -0.9800X. 
This is a 2% error in the drag reading! This is not an artifact of our simple conceptual 
model of a balance. Alignments of multicomponent balances is very critical. And 
even after the best efforts, the result must be evaluated by calibration. We will 
discuss calibration in more detail later. It is advisable to thoroughly absorb the 
arrangement indicated by Figure 7.3 before proceeding to more complex balance ar- 
rangements. 
Terminology for Force-Measuring Devices 
Standards for Force Measurement The measurement of force, as with all other 
measurements of physical quantities, involves a hierarchy of comparisons, or more 
precisely a metrological chain, that leads back to some defined primary standards. 
Force, however, is a derived unit. In the SI, the unit of force is the newton, which 
is defied as the force required to accelerate a mass of one kilogram at one meter 
per second per second. The use of dead-weight testing machines as secondary 
transfer standards invokes the equivalence of gravitational and inertial acceleration 
effects and requires a knowledge of local gravitational field strength. The adopted 
"standard" value for Earth's gravitational field strength to relate the standard kilo- 
gram mass to a corresponding weight force is 9.80665 rn/sZ. 
It should be realized 
that it varies significantly from place to place. At Hammerfest, Norway, the value 
has been measured as 9.82618 m/s2 
while in the United States, at Miami, Florida, 


242 
FORCES 
AND MOMENTS FROM BALANCE MEASUREMENTS 
it has been measured as 9.79004 rnls2. 
A model for the variation of acceleration of 
gravity g 
with latitude A has been given by Moritz6 
as 
There is a systematic variation with altitude and measurable local variations associ- 
ated with geological densities. Another standard correction required for dead-weight 
machines used as transfer standards for force measurement is the difference between 
the buoyancy force on the standard weight and the test article due to differences 
in density. 
Load cells are widely used both for secondary standards and for measurement 
applications. Their output is not directly related to local gravitational field strength, 
but they are sensitive to other environmental and operational variables. If a load 
cell is checked against a "standard" weight, the result will, of course, be dependent 
on the local gravitational field strength. 
For detailed discussions of issues of metrology for force measurement Bray, 
Barbato, and Levi7 
may be consulted. Standards organizations that maintain related 
documentation include the International Organization for Standardisation (ISO), 
Organisation Internationale 
de Mktrologie Ugale (OIML), Bureau International des 
Poids et Mesures (BIPM), American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM), 
National Institute for Standards and Technology (NIST), and many others. 
Terminology of 'Ifulnsducer Chamcterization The historical definition of an 
"ideal" transducer has included that the output be proportional to the quantity being 
measured. An ideal transducer for a force component, say X, would provide an 
output, 0, 
related to X by the equation 0 
= kX, 
and ideally 0 
would be insensitive 
to all other variables. Real transducers only approximate the linear relationship and 
are 
always sensitive to other variables to some degree. A notional calibration curve 
for a transducer is shown in Figure 7.5. The curves as shown have exaggerated 
curvature compared to a typical high-quality transducer. The tolerance is typically 
a fraction of a percent so the lines all collapse. It is easier to see the details of the 
characterization 
by plotting the difference 
between the calibration data and the linear 
fit plus the difference between the calibration data and a second-order fit. A result 
of this will often appear as shown in Figure 7.6. These plots are sometimes referred 
to as residual plots. With the available computational power today, there is little 
reason not to use whatever curve form is needed to reduce the residuals to have a 
mean of zero with random distribution. However, a majority of commercial transduc- 
ers have their specifications given in terms of deviation from linearity. Each trans- 
ducer specification should be carefully studied and the maker required to provide 
details on the calibration procedure and data processing. The usual situations in 
wind tunnel applications are such that co~mnercial 
transducers will frequently be 
calibrated on site before being put into use. It is often possible to obtain better 
performance than the manufacturer quotes as nominal for a particular type. 
Tho 
fundamental types of balances for measuring 
total model forces and moments 
are in general use: external balances, which carry the loads outside the tunnel before 


7.2 BALANCES 
243 
Increasing Load Curve, 
Decreasing Load Curve ( 
I 
Least Squares Straight Line 
I 
20 
40 
60 
S
O
 
100 
Input Force, X, % 
FIGURE 7.5 Typical calibration curve for a transducer to show terminology. 
0 
20 
40 
60 
80 
100 
Applied Load % 
FIGURE 7.6 Characteristic variation of calibration of a transducer from linear and second- 
order fits. 


244 
FORCES AND MOMENTS PROM 
BALANCE MEASUREMENTS 
they are measured, b d  
internal balances, which fit into the models and send data 
out through electrical signals. Both types have their advantages, and few tunnels 
can get along with either one alone. It is also common to design, fabricate, and 
calibrate special load-measuring units for model parts. These are usually similar to 
internal balances but almost always simpler in concept and execution. 
Before proceeding further with considerations of various balance mechanisms, 
we will discuss aspects of the requirements on wind tunnel balances, with the main 
focus being on measurement of total model forces and moments. 
7.3 BALANCE REQUIREMENTS AND SPECIFICATIONS 
We have introduced some discussion of balance design and will follow with more, 
but we emphasize that it is our main purpose to impart some rudimentary knowledge 
about these systems so that a wind tunnel engineer can use them wisely. Actual 
balance design and construction require far more information than we can provide. 
We would like to issue a note of warning to those with little experience who might 
undertake the job. A wind tunnel balance is an immensely complicated apparatus, 
and its design and construction are much better left to balance engineers than to 
tunnel engineers. Scarcely a wind tunnel exists that has not been held back from 
use by long delays resulting from balance calibration, and sad indeed have been 
many tunnel engineers who found that they were saddled with research on balances 
rather than on airplanes. Buy the balance, then, if it is at all possible, and insist that 
it be set up and calibrated at the factory. If delays occur there, the tunnel is available 
for additional calibration, improvements to flow quality, and a host of other problems 
particularly besetting a new tunnel. 
Any wind tunnel balance is of necessity a compromise between the required 
maximum load capability of all components and the accuracy required for minimum 
loads. The solution to this problem is much simpler for an internal balance, since 
several balances can be designed and built for different load ranges and one selected 
for the desired loads. A risk with an internal balance is that the model loads may 
inadvertently exceed the balance capacity. This may result in a failed balance. For 
an external balance a careful study must be used to t
r
y
 to account for every type 
of model and test for which the balance will be used over a period of years. In 
this type of study there is no substitution for wide and long experience in wind 
tunnel testing. 
The expected loads that a balance must carry are primarily a function of the size 
of the tunnel test section and speed. If the size of a tunnel is doubled, the model 
size and the loads are increased fourfold for a fixed model-to-tunnel-size ratio, 
model attitude, and tunnel speed. It should be noted that in this case the Reynolds 
number goes up by factor of 2 and model volume by a factor of 8. 
As a rule of thumb the maximum model span will be equal to or less than 0.8 
of the tunnel width for a full model. For a half model, the model span will be equal 
to or less than 0.7 of the tunnel height. 


7
.
3
 BALANCE REQUIREMENTS AND SPECIFICATIONS 
245 
A model of an aspect ratio of 9 and a span equal to 0.8 of the tunnel width in 
an 8 X 1 2 4  
tunnel will lead to an area of 10.24 ft2. If the model is tested at a 
dynamic pressure of 60.0 lb/ft2, 
then qS = 614.4 lb. If one wishes to measure drag 
coefficient to +0.0001 in cruise condition, or one drag count, the drag balance must 
be able to resolve 0.06 lb, which requires it to measure the drag to an accuracy of 
50.03 lb. If one assumes the model is a powered model of a propeller-driven 
airplane, the maximum dynamic pressure when power testing will be close to 15.0 
Ib/ft2 
and qS = 153.6 Ib, and for one drag count the drag balance must be able to 
read 0.015 lb, or in other words be accurate to k0.008 lb. The same model, power- 
off, past stall could have a CD 
of 1.00 and at qS of 614.4 lb, which would yield a 
drag load of 614.4 lb. Thus, the drag balance should be able to resolve loads from 
0.008 to 600 lb, a ratio of 75,000 : 
1. Another way to look at the requirement is 
that the minimum reading should be 0.0012% of full scale. These values are typical 
of what is required for a general-purpose low-speed wind tunnel balance. 
The ratio of maximum to minimum values of the drag balance also has implica- 
tions for a computerized data system. If the desired ratio is 75,000 : 
1, then 17 bits 
resolution is required (216 = 65,536 and 2'' = 131,072). If a 14-bit (16,384) ADC 
is used, then the minimum drag value that can be detected for 600 lb full scale is 
0.037 lb, or four times larger than required. This problem is relieved, as discussed 
in Section 3.9, by taking multiple passes at the data and averaging the value. 
However, the minimum detectable value is still 0.037 Ib. The digitizing systems 
needed for external balances tend to be more akin, or actually identical, to five- to 
eight-digit integrating digital voltmeters than to high-speed ADCs used in signal 
processing or less demanding measurement systems. 
Although in the previous example the requirement of one drag count CD 
= 0.0001 
was used, the authors do not want to leave the impression that measuring to this 
level is easy or routine. One drag count is the goal for cruise drag, but in most 
cases it is difficult to get model repeatability when configuration changes are made 
and then restored to supposedly the same configuration to better than two or three 
counts. Special attention must be given during model design to having the ability 
to return to any desired configuration with extreme precision. And of course it is 
necessary to take very special care during model changes. A very small geometric 
change can produce several counts of drag variation. And, of course, the tunnel 
conditions must be measured to the corresponding level of accuracy. 
An external balance can be designed and built to obtain these ranges of load- 
resolving capability. This type of balance is quite large physically, and when designed 
to measure 
each 
of the six comuonents 
seuarately, such a range of values 
is obtainable 
- 
when the balance is carefully aligned, which is possible because of its size, corre- 
sponding rigidity, and robustness. 
This range of resolution is much more difficult to obtain with an internal strain 
gage balance and in the previous example for a propeller-powered model 
might require the use of two internal balances: one for power-off and a second for 
power-on testing. Unfortunately, testing the same model on two balances is not 
efficient and would typically require two separate tunnel entries. The two advantages 
of an external balance are its great resolving power and its ability to hold its 


246 
FORCES AND MOMENTS FROM BALANCE MEASUREMENTS 
calibration over very long periods of time. The disadvantages can be its size and 
often high initial cost and the time required to initially align or reduce the interactions 
between the six components. It is possible to calibrate the interactions and not align 
the balance. This option has become more attractive as calculations have become 
cheaper and faster. The computational algorithms have now become an essential 
complement to a balance. 
The advantage of a sting or internal balance is a lower initial cost, although this 
may be negated by building several with overlapping load ranges to meet possible 
testing requirements over a period of time. A second advantage is that one balance 
may possibly be used in several tunnels, assuming that the balance can be adapted 
to different stings. With special stings, an internal balance can often be used to 
reach higher angles of attack than can be obtained with an external balance. This 
is most useful for tests of fighters that are required to operate at extreme angles 
of attack. 
No single balance system will handle all possible tests for all possible vehicles. 
But an external balance proves to be the most versatile because of its large load 
range and adaptability to uses that were never thought of when it was designed. 
Table 7.1 lists some suggested values in terms of maximum coefficients that 
would be desirable to achieve with a balance. For a half-span model it should be 
noted that the values given for the longitudinal components, that is, CL, 
CD, 
and C,, 
apply, but the balance components are now CL 
= Cy, 
CD 
= CD, 
and C, = C.. This 
should not affect the yaw balance since the three moment components of external 
balances often have the same ranges. The requirement that the side-force 
component 
carry the full lift load may have an affect on the sensitivity of side force. A second 
problem with half models is that the center of lift of a half wing will not be at the 
balance moment center. In fact, it will be below the moment center, possibly one- 
half the distance from the centerline of the tunnel to the floor. This can lead to large 
rolling moments and can affect the load range of the roll balance. These comments 
apply to an external balance only. A sting balance for a half model would, in most 
cases, be designed for that purpose. 
The maximum values in terms of forces and moments should be based on the 
smallest model expected at the lowest expected dynamic pressures and the maximum 
values from the largest model at the highest expected dynamic pressure and the 
maximum values given in Table 7.1. If a compromise must be made in the balance 
design, care must be taken to ensure that the balance is more than adequate for the 
ranges of model size and dynamic pressure at which most testing is expected to 
take place. This means that if one needs a higher resolution in side force for a full 
TABLE 7.1. Probabie Maximum Coefficients Developed by Full- and 
Half-Span Models 
CL 
+4.0 
-2.0 
CD 
+1.0 
-1.0 
c
.
 
-1.0 
+1.0 
c
n
 
+0.20 
-0.20 
Cl 
+0.20 
-0.20 
c, 
+1.0 
-1.0 


7.3 BALANCE REQUIREMENTS AND SPECIFICATIONS 
247 
model than is available when the side-force balance maximum load is equal to the 
lift load and half-model tests are not a primary requirement, then the half-model 
requirements can be relaxed. It should be noted that an 8 X 12-ft tunnel model 
span equal to 0.8 tunnel width and an aspect ratio of 9 yielded a wing area of 10.24 
ft2. A half model with a span equal to 0.70 of the tunnel height would have an area 
of 13.94 ft2 for a full wing, since the Reynolds number will increase by the square 
root of the area ratio, or by 1.16. The main advantage of a half model lies in the 
reduction of model costs for the wing and, especially, the flap system. 
Care should also be taken not to overemphasize a small model at low dynamic 
pressure in determining the minimum loads. Quite often the small models are for 
research purposes and are used to determine trends, not values, for a flight vehicle. 
It would be almost the height of absurdity to size the minimum values of the balance 
for the NASA 80 X 120 VJSTOL test section (a part of the 40 X 80 
tunnel), for 
a 6-ft2 model at a dynamic pressure of 10 lb/ft2. 
The balance requirements previously discussed are for tunnels intended for re- 
. 
search and development testing and would range in size from 7 X 10 ft (70 ft2) and 
upward. Small tunnels intended for student use can have the tolerances relaxed. and 
they can be further relaxed for simple demonstration tunnels. 
Tunnels designed for purposes other than aircraft testing will have an entirely 
different set of values. Terminology for a particular application area may vary. For 
example, 
a "drag count" 
for automobile applications 
is ACd 
= 0.001 and the reference 
area is the frontal area instead of the planform area, as is used for lifting surfaces. 
Table 7.2 lists the balance ranges for the General Motors automotive tunnel. It 
should be noted that automotive engineers are not as interested in developing large 
lift coefficients as are aeronautical engineers, at least for general-use production 
vehicles. Racing automobile designers do work very hard on managing aerodynamic 
down load. 
In addition to the loading table, ranges for the pitch and yaw angles must be 
specified. Pitch angle range for two- and three-strut mounting systems will vary 
with the rearward distance of the pitch strut from the front struts but should in any 
event provide for 240". Usually yaw from -40" to +190° is provided. l b o  
degrees 
per second is a good rate of change for both pitch and yaw, although much higher 
rates are being put into some systems so that dynamic testing can be explored. 
Current data systems can take data much faster than the aerodynamic forces respond 
TABLE 7.2. Balance Load Ranges for General Motors Full-Scale Automotive 'hnnel 
Component 
Lift 
Drag 
Side force 
Pitching moment 
Yawing moment 
Rolling moment 
Low Range 
517 Ib 
360 ib 
517 lb 
2360 ft-lb 
2360 ft-Ib 
2360 ft-lb 
High Range 
1506 lb 
1012 lb 
1506 ib 
8114 ft-lb 
8114 ft-lb 
8114 ft-lb 


248 
FORCES AND MOMENTS FROM 
BALANCE MEASUREMENTS 
TABLE 
7.3. Permissible Measuring Errors in the Various Aerodynamic Coefficients' 
Low Angle of Attack 
High Angle of Anack 
Lift 
C, 
= tO.OO1, or 0.1% 
C
,
 = 20.002, or 0.25% 
Drag 
cD 
= ?0.0001, or 0.1% 
C
,
 = *0.0020, or 0.25% 
Pitching moment 
C
,
,
,
 
= 20.001, or 0.1 
% 
C,,, 
= 20.002, or 0.25% 
Yawing moment 
C, 
= 20.0001, or 0.1% 
C, 
= tO.0010. or 0.25% 
Rolling moment 
C, = tO.OO1, or 0.1% 
Cl = +-0.002, 
or 0.25% 
Side force 
Cy 
= 20.001, or 0.1% 
Cy 
= t0.002, or 0.25% 
Tor balance design requirements the actual loads should be figured using the smallest model expected 
to be tested and the lowest dynamic pressure. It is inevitable that the achievable uncertainty of the 
coefficients for the smallest models will be larger than for the largest models. 
to rapid changes of condition. The temptation to run through operating states too 
fast to get repeatable data must be resisted. This may be possible in some cases 
only if the relationship between the achieved precisions and the mean values reported 
are explicitly shown as the test proceeds. Otherwise, there is great pressure to take 
data too fast since the data system can certainly log the numbers at a high rate. 
- 
- 
The desired accuracies can be similarly attacked by first preparing a permissible 
error list from the aerodynamicist's viewpoint (Table 7.3). A critical maximum error 
condition may arise during powered testing of complete models because the dynamic 
pressure of the tunnel may then be unusually low. 
7.4 EXTERNAL 
BALANCES 
Four types of external balances have been in general use. These balances are named 
for their main load-carrying members-wire, platform, yoke, and pyramidal-
and 
are discussed in the following paragraphs. 
Wire Balances 
One of the earliest types of wind tunnel balance was the wire balance, similar in 
principle to Figure 7.3. Spring scales were not used for the balance output since 
their deflections would change the model attitude. The model usually was mounted 
inverted so that aerodynamic lift added to the weight to prevent unloading the wires 
as the resulting tension can never be allowed to diminish to zero. With this type of 
balance there was a large tare drag on the wires that was difficult to assess accurately. 
The wires tended to break, which could lead to the loss of the model. Wire balances 
turned out to be much less robust and versatile than the alternatives and have not 
been used extensively since the very early days of aeronautics. 
Platform, Yoke, and Pyramid Balances 
Currently, most external balances provide strut-type mounting of models. These 
balances provide mechanisms 
for changing the angle of attack and yaw and transmit 


7.4 EXTERNAL BALANCES 
249 
Front load membe 
FIGURE 
7.7 Greatly simplified diagrammatic sketch of some balance components. 
the model loads down into a system of linkages that separate them into force and 
moment components. Such an apparatus is shown diagrammatically in Figure 7.7, 
and a linkage system is shown in Figure 7.8. The general massiveness of a balance 
structure may be seen in Figure 7.9. 
Tracing the pathway followed by the loads from model to measuring unit (Figure 
7.7), we see first that the model as illustrated is supported on two front-load members, 
or "struts," and a tail strut.' The struts, in turn, connect to the inner part of a floating 
FIGURE 
7.8 Balance linkage. Lift linkage (not shown) is beneath the roll table. 


250 
FORCES AND MOMENTS FROM BALANCE MEASUREMENTS 
FIGURE 7.9 Massiveness of a wind tunnel balance is well illustrated by this photograph 
of a balance designed for a 150-mph wind tunnel with a 9-ft-diameter test section. During 
this early setup in the factory the load members have been dropped in place without going 
through their respective windshield support bases. As shown, the balance has approximately 
45" negative yaw. (Courtesy Georgia Tech Research Corporation, 1998.) 
ring frame that is free to turn (model yaw), and a mechanism is provided to raise 
or lower the tail strut to produce model pitch. The outer part of the floating frame 
is held in place by a system of struts that are 
specially designed to be strong in tension 
and compression but very weak in bending. These struts separate the components of 
the load by means of a linkage system and feed them into the measuring units or 
output transducers. Above the floating frame is a fairing turntable on which are 
mounted the windshields that m
i
n
i
m
i
z
e
 
the direct aerodynamic forces on the support 
struts. The load turntable is tracked by the fairing turntable through the use of a 
servomechanism arrangement. And, as the fairing turntable rotates, the windshields 
are rotated in the opposite sense by a gear-driven mechanism so that they remain 
parallel to the airstream. In some balances the tail-strut fairing is moved up and 
down to keep the exposed length of tail strut constant as the angle of attack is 
changed. The windshields are connected electrically so that upon contact with the 
load members they activate fouling lights and/or audible signals so that the malfunc- 
tion may be noted and corrected. 
The linkage system by which the force and moment components are separated 
have gradually worked into three different fundamental types? These are named 


~ 
~~~~~ 
~ 
~ 
7.4 EXTERNAL BALANCES 
251 
FIGURE 7.10 
Basic layout of a platform balance. 
platfarm, yoke, and pyramidal, according to the manner in which the main system 
is assembled. 
Platform Balance The platform balance (Figure 7.10) utilizes either three or four 
legs to support the main frame. For the three-legged type, the forces and moments are 
Platform balances are widely used. Rugged and naturally orthogonal, they may be 
constructed and aligned with a minimum of difficulty. But they also have disadvan- 
tages: (1) the moments appear as small differences in large forces, an inherently 
undesirable arrangement; (2) the balance-resolving center is not at the center of the 
tunnel and the pitching moments must be transferred; and (3) the drag and side- 
force loads put pitching and rolling moments on the load ring. These interactions 
must be removed from the final data. Some of the disadvantages are ameliorated 
by the ease of computation today as compared to several decades ago. Also, applica- 
tions such as automobiles and surface marine vehicles will be mounted on or near 
the floor, which is near the resolving center for a yoke balance. 
Yoke Balance The yoke balance (Figure 7.11) 
offers an advantage 
over the platform 
balance in that the moment-resolving 
center is near the center of the tunnel. However. 
- 
the inherent design of the yoke leads to bigger deflections than the platform balance, 
particularly in pitch and side force. Because the balance frame must span the test 
section in order to get the two upper drag arms in their positions, the yaw lever 
a
r
m
 
is exceptionally 
long. The high supporting pillars are subject to large deflections. 
Once again the final forces must be summed up: The drag is the addition of three 
forces, and the lift is the sum of two forces in the variant shown. The yoke balance 


252 
FORCES AND MOMENTS FROM BALANCE MEASUREMENTS 
FIGURE 7
.
1
1
 Basic layout of a yoke balance. 
as shown here brings out the pitching moment in the drag system instead of in the 
lift. For the yoke balance, the forces and moments are 
Pyramidal BaIance The complaints usually heard about the platform and yoke 
balances are largely overcome by the ingenious engineering of the pyramidal type. 
However, as usually happens, additional difficulties are added. 
These are the advantages: The pyramidal balance reads the moments about the 
resolving center, and the six components are inherently separated and read directly 
by six measuring units. No components need be added, subtracted, or multiplied. 
The difficulties involved in reading the small differences in large forces are elimi- 
nated, and direct reading of the forces and moments simplifies the calculations. 
Note that this is less of an advantage today than it was several decades ago when 
these systems were being intensively developed. 
Several criticisms of the pyramidal balance are warranted. The alignment of the 
inclined struts is so critical that both the construction and the calibration of the balance 
are greatly complicated. Furthermore (and this appears quite serious), deflections of 
the inclined struts may so change their alignment that the moments are not accurate. 
This effect must be thoroughly investigated during the calibration of the balance. 
The manner in which the pyramidal balance separates the moments is not simple, 
and it behooves the engineer and the student to approach the setup using an elemen- 


 
 
7.4 EXTERNAL BALANCES 
253 
;pl 
; 
x E 
*- 
FIGURE 
7.11 Two-dimensional schematic showing t
h
e
.
 
principle of the pyramid balance. 
tary truss system. Consider a truss in which two legs are jointed (Figure 7.12). The 
force D, acting through the pin joint 0, 
produces 
only tension in OE and compression 
in OE No force is registered at A. However, the force G, not acting through 0, 
produces bending in OE, and OE would collapse unless the force A = aGlb were 
present. If G and b are known, the size of the force A determines the point of action 
of G. In this manner, if G were a known drag force, its pitching moments about 
the resolving center 0 would be determined by the force A. 
Though the previous example illustrates the principle of the pyramidal balance, 
in actual practice a considerable revision is required. In order to prevent the legs 
of the pyramid from being in the airstream, they are cut off at what would be c in 
Figure 7.12. The truncated legs are 
then carefully aligned so that their extensionspass 
through a common point. The complete setup is illustrated in Figure 7.13. The 
forces and moments are 
Lift = 
total weight on lowest table 
Drag = D 
Side force = -C 
Pitching moment = -P X f 
Rolling moment = R X f 
Yawing moment = Y X a 
Deflections 
One of the most troublesome problems of wind tunnel balances is rigidity, or to be 
more accurate, lack of rigidity. Deflections in the balance may move the model 
from the resolving center and invalidate the moment data or nullify the balance 
alignment so that part of the lift appears as drag or side force. The answer to the 
problem is obvious: Either the deflections must be kept down to where they are 
negligible or they must be evaluated and accounted for in the data reduction process. 
Of course, keeping them down is preferable. 
- 
- 
. 
The largest 
source of deflection is the mounting system. This must be long to reach 
out of the test section and thin to avoid excessive interference. Both reauirements are 
A 
in direct antithesis to the criterion of minimum deflection. The only way the wind 
tunnel engineer can meet this problem is to use materials of high modulus of 
elasticity for the strut. The desire for the shortest mounting strut possible is a strong 
argument for the selection of a rectangular or elliptic jet shape. Deflections in the 


254 
FORCES AND MOMENTS FROM 
BALANCE MEASUREMENTS 
- 
r R e s o l v i n g  center 
FIGURE 7.13 PyramidaI or virtual center balance. 
balance frame may be diminished by having a deep and rigid framework. None of 
the common measuring units have deflections large enough to be serious, and so 
they rarely cause this type of trouble. 
The effects of deflections are evaluated during the process of calibrating the 
balance, and corrections, if necessary, are given to the computing staff for inclusion 
in the data work-up. The model itself is a source of deflection. 
Balance Linkages and Pivots 
The principal components of an external balance consist of a large number of levers 
that are designed to have minimum deflection under maximum load. This increases 
their weight and often their size. The joints between the levers are usually pivots 
with very small angular motion. It is required that the pivots have very low friction 
(ideally zero friction) to avoid hysteresis in the balance when the directions of the 
loads are reversed. Early pivots in wind tunnel balances were knife edges. Because 
knife edges can be damaged by shock loads and can only carry loads in a compressive 
direction, they have been replaced by flexure pivots. It should be noted that ball 
and roller bearings make very poor pivots where the angular motion is very small 
and loads must be carried perpendicular to the shaft axis of the bearings. Under 
these conditions both the balls and their races can easily develop flat spots and a 
resulting large amount of friction when rotated. 
The advantages of flexures are as follows: 
1. They can be designed to withstand loads in any direction with no lost motion 
between the coupled members. 
2. They are essentially frictionless, thus eliminating hysteresis effects. 


- 
-- 
- 
- 
-- - 
- 
7.4 EXTERNAL BALANCES 
255 
FIGURE 7.14 Flexures. Threads on rod flexure allow length adjustment. The Z flexure 
stock made on milling machine. Tho halves of X flexure are cut from stock and pinned 
together. (Photograph courtesy of University of Washington Aeronautical Laborato~y.) 
3. They will withstand relatively rough treatment. 
4. They are virtually wearproof; thus their characteristics remain constant over 
an indefinite period. 
Flexures are usually one of two types. The first is a composite or rod flexure. 
These are used to transmit loads along their axis with small angular rotation and 
the critical design load is compressive. As the length of the rod often must be 
adjusted, the ends consist of fine right- and left-handed threads that can be clamped 
in a nut that is split in two and bolted together. These flexures are machined out of 
a solid bar stock. Examples are shown in Figure 7.14. The second is a restrained 
flexure, or X flexure. These are almost frictionless pivots, and if the rotation is 
small, the center of rotation is fixed. They can be made by machining a bar into a 
Z shape on a mill. The bar is cut into strips and then assembled in an X shape with 
tapped holes in the top and bottom for assembly to other parts. With electric 
discharges milling, they can be made from one piece. TheX 
flexures are used in pairs. 
The X flexure can be less than half as stiff as a rod flexure and allows twice the 
rotation angle. When the X flexure is loaded at right angles to its axis, two of the 
flexure strips are in compression and two are in tension when acting as a pivot. 
Thus the change in stiffness of the tension strips is compensated for by the opposite 
change in stiffness of the compression strips.'' 


256 
FORCES AND MOMENTS FROM BALANCE MEASUREMENTS 
Balance Output Tfansducen 
The external balance elements are arranged to transfer the loads that appear on a 
model to a set of output transducers. A principal objective of earlier designs was 
to kinematically separate the standard six components so that each output transducer 
provided a signal that would bedirectly proportional to one and only one force or 
moment component. With cheap and fast computation universally available, this 
objective is now traded off against simplicity, greater robustness, or even better per- 
formance. 
The device used to measure the output of the balance should have the follow- 
ing characteristics: 
1. The curve of the applied load versus the indicated load should be invariant. 
Assuming that the curve is linear and passes through zero, the slope should 
remain constant over time. If the slope of the curve changes (slips calibration), 
it is most difficult to detect. This problem can be serious with digital data 
systems. These systems use amplifiers with DC response, and the amplifiers 
are prone to drift. Each installation must determine the stability of its systems 
and perform checks at the appropriate intervals. It is desirable to make end- 
to-end checks by the use of check weights at regular scheduled intervals. 
2. When the applied load is removed gradually, the measuring device should 
return to zero. The zero-shift problem is not as serious as slipping calibration. 
In most tunnels it is a standard policy to check the "balance zero" for shift 
at the end of each run or run series. If the zero shift is too large, the runs are 
repeated. Care must be taken with the end of run zero to make sure that the 
tunnel velocity is also zero. 
3. The measuring device should display no hysteresis. In general, this is not a 
problem with typical measuring units. Often when hysteresis appears, it is 
due to some portion of the system being loose and therefore undergoing some 
slipping, or more commonly there is some slight contact or fouling that has 
not been found. 
4. Every type must provide an appropriate interface to a data acquisition system. 
The following are some types of measuring units that have been used as output 
devices on wind tunnel balances. 
Automatic Beam Balance A sketch of an automatic beam balance is shown in 
Figure 7.15. The version sketched shows the type of sensing used in the 1930s to 
1970s. It consists of a "weigh beam" that has an electrically driven rider. When the 
beam drops down, a contact is made that causes the driving motor to move the rider 
in the direction that will balance the beam. A counter on the motor shaft locates 
the rider and may be calibrated to read the force weighed. The pendulum H (see 
Figure 7.15) can be adjusted to balance out the destabilizing component due to the 
weight of the beam. This type of force-measuring balance has the advantage that 
the measurement is always made in the balance null position and thus there is no 


7.4 EXTERNAL BALANCES 
257 
FIGURE 
7.15 Beam balance: A, driving motor; B, threaded rod; C, rider; D, 
reversing 
contacts; E, dashpot; E; flexure pivot; G, applied load; H, pendulum weight; I, counter. 
displacement of the system. The disadvantage is that they are relatively slow in 
reaching a balance condition, although it must be remembered that external balances 
can weigh several thousand pounds and cannot be expected to be highly responsive. 
In some cases unit weights are used so that the weigh beam is required to resolve 
only part of the full-scale range of the system. A number of weigh beam systems 
have been constructed that are capable of routinely resolving 1 part in 100,000 and 
maintaining calibration for extensive periods. 
Current designs for weigh beam systems use exactly the same principles as 
indicated by Figure 7.15 with two significant modifications. First, and most im- 
portant, the method of sensing the equilibrium state is to provide a linear differential 
transformer at the end of the weigh beam instead of the mechanical contacts. This 
eliminates the hysteresis problem and can be made very reliable as well as very 
sensitive. Second, some quite advanced oil pot damping systems are included to 
manage the dynamic motion of the weigh beam under unsteady loading conditions. 
Hydmulic Capsules The hydraulic capsule is a device that measures forces through 
the pressures they exert on pistons of known area. They are not exactly null, but 
the amount of deflection of the piston is so small as to be negligible. The resulting 
pressure is a function of the size of the load and is measured through accurate 
pressure gages. 
Electrical Measuring Devices There are several methods for measuring forces or 
- 
- 
pressures electrically, most of them depending on amplifying the effect that tiny 
deflections have on the capacitance, inductance, or resistance of the unit. For exam- 
ple, the resistance of a carbon pack varies as the pressure on it, and the current it 
passes for a fixed voltage may be used as an index of the load. The amount of 
current needed to keep the core of a solenoid in a fixed location is an index of the 
load on it. The change in capacitance of a plate condenser with small deflections 
of the plates may again indicate a load. The resistance of a wire changes with the 
tension of the wire, and the current passed for a fixed voltage may indicate the 
tension. And so ad infinitum. A hundred different setups may be possible. It should 


258 
FORCES AND MOMENTS FROM BALANCE MEASUREMENTS 
be borne in mind fiat through amplification the most minute changes may be noted 
and remarkable accuracy is possible. 
Strain gages have been used as measuring devices in external balances with a 
satisfactory degree of success. One maior manufacturer of balances has developed 
- 
. 
- 
a special high-voltage unit for this application. The electromagnetic arrangement 
that measures the forces by theZinount of current needed to maintain zero deflection 
in the unit has also been successful. This method is used in a majority of high- 
quality laboratory balances that are able to resolve 1 part in lo6. 
These systems 
often have a unit weight addition setup in order to extend their range with maxi- 
mum accuracy. 
By far the most widely used electrical measuring device is the wire strain gage. 
The wire strain gage consists of very fine wire cemented to a flexure. The load, by 
deflecting the beam by a minute amount, stretches the wires glued to the beam and 
changes their resistance and the amount of current that will flow through them for 
a fixed applied voltage. The gages are almost always arranged in a bridge circuit 
to increase the sensitivity. 
A wide range of commercial strain gages are available that vary widely in size, 
backing material, and sensitivity to temperature. The gages can be affixed to the 
flexure material with a variety of bonding agents, ranging from simple cellulose 
cement to more exotic adhesives, some of which require special curing techniques. 
Many commercially available signal conditioners supply bridge voltage and balanc- 
ing impedance. There can be one, two, or four active gages in a bridge, but generally 
either two or four gages are used to minimize the effect of temperature. Four-gage 
bridges also increase the sensitivity and accuracy. 
Strain gages are used more extensively for intemal balances and for special- 
purpose component load measurement than for output devices on external balances. 
A typical resolving capability for a strain gage device is 1 part in 20,000 as compared 
so many times this for some other devices. This is, however, more than adequate 
if a device can be produced or obtained with just the right total range for a particu- 
lar purpose. 
Calibration of External Balances 
External balances are usually attached very firmly to a large mass of concrete to 
obtain maximum stability and thus are calibrated in place, while intemal balances 
are calibrated outside of the tunnel with only check loads applied to the model in 
place. Some tunnels built in the 1970s that are designed to use both external and 
sting balances have designed the extemal balance so that it can be removed from 
the tunnel for calibration in a laboratory. However, this is relatively rare. 
Let us start by making clear the immensity of a wind tunnel balance calibration: 
With a competent crew the fust calibration of a new balance will take three months 
at least. This time frame supposes that adequate shop facilities for all sorts of 
changes are available and recognizes that the first "calibration" 
will almost inevitably 
involve many adjustments. Many balances have, however, subsequently served very 
well for decades with modest additional calibration efforts. 


7.4 EXTERNAL BALANCES 
259 
FIGURE 
7.16 Balance loading tee. Weights added at A, B, or C should produce no drag 
or cross-wind force, and a weight moved from E to F should produce no indicated change 
in drag. 
Calibration includes loading the elements of the balance to see whether they read 
what they should, ascertaining the deflections of the setup, loading the balance in 
combined cases that simulate the conglomeration of loads that various models will 
- 
put on it, loading with the balance yawed, measuring the natural frequency of the 
balance so that resonance can be avoided, and applying fluctuating loads so that it 
can be determined that the time average of balance output provides an accurate 
mean value. 
All the above requires considerable added equipment, and it is a good idea to 
make as much of it permanent as possible, since calibration checks will be needed 
many times during the life of the balance, although few if any of the same scale 
as the initial one. First in this list comes a loading tee, of which a schematic is 
shown in Figure 7.16 and a photograph is shown in Figure 7.17. 
The calibration tee must provide a method to accurately attach cables for applying 
the loads. A reasonable tolerance is 0.005 in, on their location. The cable attachment 
can be knife edge hooks or ball and socket joints with the balls swaged onto aircraft 
cable for large balances. Piano wire can be used for smaller balances. 
With any tee provisions have to be made to ensure that the loads applied by 
cables are parallel or perpendicular, as required in each case, to the tunnel centerlines 
for a wind axis balance. First the balance must be set at zero yaw. Then alignment 
lines are scribed on the floor using toolmaker's blue (or lines could be drawn on 
masking tape). A plumb bob can be used to align the pulleys. Next the cables are 
attached and an engineering level (optical) and 0.01 rulers can be used to level the 
cables, which must be loaded to about one-half of the full load. After leveling, the 
horizontal alignment could be checked. Pulleys should have a large radius, about 
8 in. minimum, and should be built for this purpose. The groove for the cable should 
be cut so that the cable lies on the top edge of a groove narrower than the cable 
diameter for positive alignment. The pads holding the pulleys should be adjustable 


260 
FORCES AND MOMENTS FROM BALANCE MEASUREMENTS 
FIGURE 7.17 
External balance loading tee. Each component can be independently loaded 
or combined loads can be applied. Shown are loads to side force and rolling moment. 
(Photograph courtesy of University of Washington Aeronautical Laboratory.) 
in the vertical and horizontal planes. The most difficult load is positive lift. One 
approach is to lay a strong steel beam across the top fillets and use a pivoted lever 
to load lift. This reduces the weights and either a cable or rod with ball joints can 
be used. This can be plumbed optically or by use of a precision bubble level. 
A set of calibrated weights will be needed. If it is decided not to buy a full set, 
they may usually be borrowed from the local state highway department. A half 
dozen or more dial gages for measuring deflections will also be needed. 
The fist step in calibration is a complete operational checkout of the measuring 
units and data read-out system. For a new balance each component should be loaded 
to the maximum load and balance deflections checked. The amount of deflection 
is a function of the balance design. These loads are also proof loads, although this 
usually is not a problem. Most balances have stops to protect the most sensitive 
and expensive parts in case of failure. These can be set at this time. A repaired 
balance should be put through the same loading cycle. It is common for new or 
repaired balances to requiTe two or three full-load loading cycles before they settle 
in and give good repeatability. 
The traditional method of calibrating external balances has been to adjust the 
balance to minimize 
the interactions. This was done to minimize the labor 
of reducing 
the data by hand. This practice resulted in direct balance readings very close to the 


7.4 EXTERNAL BALANCES 
261 
applied loads. Thus, when the coefficient data on repeat runs or between tests did 
not check, the raw balance readings proved useful in finding the source of the error. 
If balance readings agree in trends with the coefficients, then a check of the model 
configuration usually elicits from the customer that "the model is just the same, 
but" and the problem is solved. 
With the ready availability of digital computers it is possible in the process of 
calibration of the balance to measure the interactions and, rather than commit 
extensive time to reducing or removing them, derive a computational algorithm that 
will provide the desired components. This can be implemented to produce results 
on line as a test proceeds. This latter method has been common for internal balances 
as it is not possible to obtain the degree of component separation under those 
constraints that has been routine for external balances. 
The balance alignment 
procedure 
for obtaining minimum interaction is as follows: 
1. For each component, load and adjust the component's slope to 1 
: 
1 or until 
output reading is equal to the load. 
2. Load each component in sequence and reduce the interactions on the other 
five components (this assumes a six-component balance). The best way to proceed 
is to first make sure that lift is perpendicular to drag and side force using lift as 
the load. At the same time make sure the lift load passes through the moment 
center by checking pitching moment and rolling moment. Next, make sure drag is 
perpendicular to side force. This may require a recheck of lift, depending on the 
balance. This task is tedious on a new balance, but a feel for the balance is soon 
acquired that makes the job easier. When the interactions are minimized, the remain- 
der may be due to deflections. Output devices that are nulling are advantageous in 
minimizing deflection. 
3. During the work in 2, a plot of balance output similar to Figure 7.18 is useful 
to determine the error on each component due to its single-component loading. 
Balance loads should be applied from zero to full scale to zero. Plots of component 
loaded versus the other five components will show zero shifts and hysteresis. De- 
pending on the balance design, it may be necessary to check the interactions with 
the balance yawed. This is to ensure that the balance-resolving center coincides 
with the model trunnion. The trunnion is the point about which the model is pitched 
and yawed. If these two points do not coincide, the data reduction will have to 
account for the discrepancy. 
4. When minimum interactions have been achieved, repeated loadings should 
be made to check the balance repeatability. The setting of the safety stops should 
- 
- 
be rechecked. Combined loadings should also be applied to determine the magnitude 
of the second-deeree interactions. These are treated in more detail in connection 
- 
with internal balance calibrations later. It is also desirable to apply very small loads 
to check the balance sensitivity. At the University of Washington Aeronautical 
Laboratory a small aluminum bell crank mounted on a torsional flexure pivot was 
built for this purpose. The vertical arm 
was connected to the balance by fine piano 
wire. The horizontal arm 
contained the weight pan and a bubble level. This device 


262 
FORCES AND MOMENTS FROM BALANCE MEASUREMENTS 
FIGURE 
7.18 Plot of actual error versus applied load for the six force systems when each 
component is loaded separately. The straight line indicates the maximum permissible error 
of 0.01% o
f
 the applied load. 
was supported on a scissor jack stand. The jack stand was used to level the wire 
to the balance and level the bell crank. Then loads of 0.01 lb were applied to drag 
and side force, and moments of 0.01 in.-lb were applied to the yawing moment. 
The pan and gravity were used for lift, pitching, and rolling moments. This indicates 
the difficulty of applying full-range loads with the precision in loading that many 
of these balances are capable of resolving. In fact, it seems that in many cases the 
limitation on the accuracy of external balance measurements is actually the precision 
and accuracy with which calibration loads can be applied. 
5. The natural frequency of the balance about the three axes should be determined 
along with the effect of the model weight on the frequencies. As mentioned earlier, 
the balance also should be checked with fluctuating loads to ensure that it measures 
the mean value. 
Example 7.1 We consider a three-component balance to reduce the amount of data 
involved as compared to a six-component case. The balance is loaded as any balance 
and the outputs are plotted. It will be assumed that the balance can be adjusted. 
There are three components, L, D, and m, to be loaded over their respective ranges. 
The outputs from all three component output devices are recorded for each load 
applied, yielding nine functions, LR(LL), 
LR(DL), 
L R ( ~ &  
DR(LL), 
DR(DL). 
D R ( ~ L ) ;  
and 
mR(LL), 
mR(DL), 
mR(mL). 
I
n
 this notation, the subscript L means applied load and the 
subscript R means the reading from the output device. It is assumed that there is 
an adjustment that allows the zeros to be made precise. If the curves are slightly 


7.4 EXTERNAL BALANCES 
263 
nonlinear, they are replaced by the best linear approximation that passes through 
zero. Thus, for the lift reading the linear approximation relating loading to output is 
or, in matrix form, 
where F can be a force or a moment as required. This matrix equation can be 
inverted to give 
which is the required equation to determine the forces and moments applied to the 
balance by the model from the balance output readings. 
As an example, assume 
Then 
and the balance output equation is 
If one is trying to adjust the balance for minimum interactions, then from the 
ADR/hLL 
term it can be seen that the lift and drag are not perpendicular. The Kjl 
or the ArnR/AL, term shows that the balance moment center is aft of the geometric 
vertical centerline of the balance. Thus the curve can be used to provide information 
on the required adjustments. Of course, if the data system to be used is always 
available on line and the above results are sufficiently close, then these results can 
be used directly to relate output to loads during tests. 


264 
FORCES AND MOMENTS FROM BALANCE MEASUREMENTS 
7.5 FUNDAMENTALS OF MODEL INSTALLATIONS 
Any strut connecting a model to the balance can be considered to add three quantities 
to the balance output. The fust is the obvious result of the direct aerodynamic force 
on the exposed strut. The second is the effect of the strut's presence on the air flow 
pattern about the model. And the third is the effect of the model on the air flow 
about the strut. The last two items are usually lumped together under the term 
"interference," and their existence should make clear the impossibility of evaluating 
the total tare by the simple expedient of measuring the drag of the struts with the 
model out. 
The earliest attachments were by means of wires or streamline struts. The ruling 
criterion was to add the smallest possible drag and then either estimate it or neglect 
it. Since the advent of the image system of evaluating the tare and interference, 
which we will discuss at some length, these effects have been evaluated by measure- 
ments rather than being estimated. 
The mounting struts employed at first still tended toward the minimum drag 
criterion and had airfoil shapes. Later, however, many mounting struts of polygonal 
cross section were used. The idea behind this trend was that the Reynolds number 
of the mounting struts would always be quite low and the struts therefore might 
have not only a large drag but also a drag that varied widely for relatively small 
changes in shape or Reynolds number. The reason for such concern can be seen 
from the drag-versus-Reynolds-number plots for circular cylinders and spheres 
shown in Figure 7.19. To minimize the change in drag with Reynolds number, the 
transition point between laminar and turbulent flow should be fixed by some perma- 
nent method such as staking the transition point with a center punch. The main 
advantage of struts with a larger cross section, however, is that they will reduce the 
deflection of the model. 
Only a minimum length of strut is exposed to the airstream, the remainder being 
shielded by fairings not attached to the balance. In this way the tare drag of the 
mounting is decreased, sometimes being only 50% of the minimum drag of an 
1
0
'
 
lo5 
Reynolds number 
FIGURE 7.19 
Variation of the drag coefficient of circular cylinders and spheres with 
Reynolds number. 


7.5 FUND 
- - 
- 
 
- 
LLS 
OF MODEL INSTALLATIONS 
265 
average wing. It is not advisable to try to decrease the tare drag of the "bayonets" 
by continuing the windshields up close to the model because a fairing close to the 
model can increase the interference effects more than it decreases the tare. A proper 
balance between amount of exposed strut and proximity of the windshield to the 
model may be found by having adjustable sleeves at the windshield top. The sleeve 
location at which Cdo,,for the model plus tare and interference is a minimum is 
the best, since this indicates that the tare plus interference is a minimum too. 
Some balances yaw the model support struts oppositely to the model, so that the 
struts always remain parallel to the airstream and hence contribute the smallest 
possible effect when the model is yawed. Another useful arrangement is to have 
several sets of supports of varying size from which the smallest can be selected 
according to the load range. 
One feature sometimes considered necessary for the ordinary support system is 
a diaphragm seal that prevents 
flow from around the balance up between the supports 
and shields into the tunnel. There are two types of pressures that may cause this 
flow. The fnst is due to the basic tunnel design, which not infrequently results in 
- 
a test-section static pressure below the atmospheric pressure and hence in a pressure 
differential, 
sometimes quite large, between the balance chamber and the test section. 
The second pressure is that resulting from local flow induced by presence of the 
model. The flow can be eliminated by a light diaphragm seal. Closing off the balance 
room in no way changes the necessity for the support column seal. 
The attachment fittings usually come into the wing at about the 30-50% chord 
point. In complete airplanes, the most rearward center-of-gravity location may be 
used to give maximum room for the fittings. If a model of a multiengine airplane 
is to be tested, the mounting strut interference will be smallest if the struts do not 
attach at a nacelle point. 
Balance Aerodynamic Alignment 
By definition, lift is perpendicular to the remote velocity and drag is parallel to it. 
In an ideal tunnel with the flow parallel to the test-section boundaries, it would 
only be necessary to align the external balance so that lift is perpendicular to the 
ceiling and floor and drag are parallel to the ceiling and floor. Unfortunately, most 
tunnels do not have perfectly parallel uniform flow in the test section. Usually there 
is some up or down flow (usually called upflow) and some cross-flow. There is 
also a local upflow due to the air flowing over the fairing, which shields the balance 
mounting struts from the airstream. Because upflow affects the accuracy of drag, 
it is more critical than cross-flow for a full model. With a floor-ceiling-mounted 
half model the cross-flow would be most critical. The following discussion will be 
for a full airplane model. 
The tunnel flow angularity usually is not uniform across the tunnel in the region 
occupied by the wing, and it may vary with the dynamic pressure. For a given wing 
planform, an average value of the upflow can be obtained for a given dynamic 
pressure and the balance aligned so that drag is parallel and lift perpendicular to 


266 
FORCES AND MOMENTS FROM BALANCE MEASUREMENTS 
the flow. But for any other wing or dynamic pressure the balance would not be 
properly aligned. Furthermore, the problem of applying loads during the balance 
calibration when the loads are not level will just make difficult tasks more difficult. 
The usual procedure is to align the balance so that lift is perpendicular to the test- 
section ceiling and floor and drag are parallel to them or to an internal balance 
reference surface. Then the upfbw is measured and corrected for in the data re- 
duction. 
One thing simplifies the alignment. The lift for most tests is from 5 to 25 times 
larger than the drag, and it is usually sufficient to align so that no lift appears in 
the drag-reading apparatus without checking to see whether any drag appears in the 
lift-reading mechanism beyond ascertaining that the drag system is perpendicular 
to the lift. 
The balance alignment to the tunnel flow is generally accomplished by running 
a wing both normal and inverted from zero lift to stall. To ensure equal support 
strut interference for both normal and inverted runs, dummy supports identical to 
the conventional ones are installed downward from the tunnel roof. The arrangement 
is shown in Figure 7.20. The data from both normal and downward lift are plotted 
as lift curves (CL 
VS. a), 
polars (CL 
VS. CD), 
and moment curves (CL 
VS. C,). The 
negative lifts and moments are plotted as though they were positive, as shown in 
Figure 7.21. The angular variation between the lift curves is twice the error in setting 
the angle of attack and, as shown, indicates that the a is set too low. That is, when 
the balance angle indicator reads -lo, the model is really at 0
'
 to the average wind. 
The polar (Figure 7.22) shows that the lift is not perpendicular to the relative wind, 
part of it appearing as drag. Here the balance is tipped aft in reference to the relative 
FIGURE 7.20 
Arrangement for determining tare and interference simultaneously. 


7.5 FUNDAMENTALS OF MODEL INSTALLATIONS 
267 
FIGURE 7.21 Upright and inverted C, versus a curves. 
wind, for a component of the lift is decreasing the drag when the lift is positive 
and increasing it when the lift is negative. See Figures 7.22 and 7.23. 
The same procedure outlined above 
for a wing must be followed for each complete 
model. Upright or normal runs with the image system in place are followed by 
model inverted runs with the image system in place. These runs yield the true angle 
of zero lift and alignment correction. Additional 
runs needed for tare and interference 
evaluation are discussed in the next section. 
The tunnel time required for this balance alignment plus the additional time for 
tare and interference runs can be quite large. Also, many wind tunnel models are 
not designed so that they can be run both upright and inverted. Thus, in many wind 
tunnel tests these values are taken from data obtained from a calibration wing or 
model, and the upflow values are determined over the range of dynamic pressure 
used in the tunnel. If flow angle and velocity variations in the airstream are large, 
the above alignment would apply only to wings whose span and chord approximate 
the test wing. 
It is impracticable to align the balance for each model, and hence the misalignment 
correction is applied in the data reduction as follows. Suppose that the polars of 
the normal and inverted runs appear as in Figure 7.22. With the wing in the normal 
position the balance reads 


 
  
 
268 
FORCES AND MOMENTS FROM BALANCE MEASUREMENTS 
1 
Model normal 
h ~ o d e l  
inverted 
I 
Drag cwfficient. CD 
FIGURE 722 Drag polar, CL 
versus CD. 
FIGURE 7
.
2
3
 Influence of alignment, projection of lift in drag direction. 


7.5 FUNDAMENTALS OF 
MODEL INSTALLATIONS 
269 
where an, 
is the angle of misalignment (Figure 7.23). 
Hence 
The correct CD 
(CD,,) lies halfway between the CD,namal 
and CDjnvclvd 
curves. Let the 
difference between the curves at some CL 
be ACD. 
Then 
and, if the difference between the curves is read at CL 
= 1.0, the angle of misalign- 
ment, a
,
,
 
may be found from 
tan a
,
,
 
= (ACd2)c, 
= 1.0 
(7.20) 
The correction to the drag coefficient is then 
True CL 
is close enough to CLjnd 
SO that usually no correction to CL 
is needed. 
When a
,
 is a small angle, tan a
,
,
 
in Equation (7.20) 
is often replaced with the 
angle in radians. Rather than calculating tan a
,
,
 
in Equation (7.17) 
at one value of 
CL 
such as 1.0, it is better to measure ACD 
at several values of CL 
and plot ACD 
or 
ACd2 versus CL. 
Then fair in a linear curve or use linear regression to obtain the 
slope or tan a
,
.
 
l h o  
more important points in regard to the evaluation of the alignment correction 
remain. First, in order to have the tare and interference effects identical for both 
the model normal and inverted runs, the image system must be installed and the 
dummy struts arranged as in Figure 7.20. 
A second problem with the tunnel upflow and dynamic pressure calibration is 
that in some tunnels these values can be an undetermined function of time. Some 
tunnels will expand and contract with the weather, and wooden tunnels can be 
affected by humidity. This may cause a change in tunnel flow quality. A more 
serious change in tunnel flow can occur in tunnels equipped with screens to reduce 
turbulence. Screens tend to get dirty as the tunnel is run, and since they are located 
in the tunnel bellmouth, they can have a large effect on both the tunnel upflow and 
dynamic pressure. A simple way to check on this problem, besides visually checking 
screens and cleaning them, is to mn a calibration wing at several check q's in an 
upright position. If there is no change in the lift curve slope, the q calibration is 
the same. No rotation of the polar, either corrected or not corrected for upflow, 
means the upflow is the same. Another method to track upflow is to install a yawhead 
or similar flow-measuring instrument in a fixed location using a mount that maintains 
probe alignment. The probe is best mn without a model in the tunnel. This method 
is not as accurate or as sensitive as the calibration wing. 


270 
FORCES AND MOMENTS FROM BALANCE MEASUREMENTS 
The engineer who, upon finding a change in the data for a second series test of 
a certain model, proclaimed that aZ, 
was "not where he left it" was not entirely 
without scientific backing. The method of evaluating upflow with upright and 
inverted runs is the same with a sting balance. The sting balance can simplify 
inverting the model if the sting is capable of rolling 180". 
Although the error in angle o
f
 attack can be determined fmm the lift curve of 
Figure 7.21, the upflow angle is often so small that it is difficult to obtain from the 
lift curve. Usually the upflow angle is taken from Equation (7.20) or a plot of 
Equation (7.17) and added to the model's geometric angle of attack. For a model 
mounted in a normal upright condition with upflow in the tunnel 
ct = a,,,, + Actup (in degrees) 
(7.22) 
with Aa, in radians and CLW 
the wing lift coefficient. The above corrections to the 
angle of attack and the drag coefficient are not the total corrections. There are 
additional corrections owing to the constraint to the tunnel flow due to the walls 
or wall corrections (see Chapter 9). 
When the variations 
in upflow are very large in the region of the wing as measured 
by a yawhead, laser, or similar instrument, the following method can be used. The 
upflow at several spanwise stations of the wing is multiplied by the chord at that 
location. The product is then plotted versus the wing span and the area under the 
resulting curve is divided by the wing area to yield an average value for the wing. 
A similar method can be used to determine an average for the wing's downwash 
at the tail. This method is not as accurate because it is difficult to get the same 
accuracy with a flow probe as is given by a good balance. 
When evaluating the tunnel upflow balance misalignment, the model support 
tares in both upright and inverted runs must be known. The upflow for the tare and 
interference 
is obtained with model and image, as shown in Figure 7.20. This yields 
a tunnel upflow balance alignment without the local upflow effect of the balance 
fairing or wind screen. These balance alignment data are then used to evaluate the 
support and interference tares as detailed in the next section. When the model is 
then run both upright and inverted without the image system, the local upflow from 
the wind screens is also accounted for. 
When the tunnel upflow and balance alignment value is determined, that is, tan 
a
,
,
 the value should be checked by applying it via Equation (7.21) to both the 
upright and inverted runs. If tan a", 
is correct, the upright and inverted curve should 
collapse and form a single or true curve as in Figure 7.22. 
As can be seen, the determination of balance alignment and upflow is a time- 
consuming effort if it is done for each model that is tested. This is why it often is 
done with a calibration model. 
In order to correcffor misalignment of the side-force balance, two runs must be 
made, with both the tare and the interference dummies in place. The model in a 
normal position should be yawed in one direction and then inverted and then yawed 


7.5 FUNDAMENTALS OF MODEL INSTALLATIONS 
271 
in the same direction relative to the tunnel. The correct side-force curve will be 
halfway between the curves made by the model normal and the model inverted. 
The inversion is necessary to nullify effects of the model's irregularities. 
Side-force corrections as outlined are rarely made, since they entail a set of 
dummy supports that can be yawed; moreover, extreme accuracy in side force is 
not usually required. The principles of the correction, however, are important. 
It should be recalled that changes in the shape of a polar curve may be due to 
scale effects and that comparisons of various tests of similar airfoils must be made 
from measurements at the same effective Reynolds number. (It has been shrewdly 
noted that, if the section selected is one of the more "popular" 
types that have been 
frequently tested, it is nearly always possible to find some results that will "agree" 
with yours.) 
Evaluations of Tare and Interference 
Any conventional wind tunnel setup requires that the model be supported in some 
manner, and, in turn, the supports will both affect the air flow about the model and 
have some drag themselves. The effect on the free air flow is called interference. 
The direct drag of the supports is called tare. Although tare drags could be eliminated 
entirely by shielding the supports all the way into the model (with adequate clear- 
ances, of course), the added size thus necessitated would probably increase the 
interference so that no net gain would be achieved and a more diffcult clearance 
problem would be created. 
Evaluation of tare and interference is a complex job, requiring thought as well 
as time for proper adaptation for each particular test and subsequent completion. 
The student invariably suggests removing the model to measure the forces on the 
model supports. This procedure would expose parts of the model support not ordi- 
narily in the airstream (although the extra length could be made removable) and 
would fail to record either the effect of the model on the supports or the effect of 
the supports on the model. 
Independent Ewe and Interference Determination First let us consider a rarely 
used method that evaluates the interference and tare drag separately. Actually the 
value of the sum of the two will nearly always suffice without our determining the 
contribution of each, but, besides being fundamental, this long method may offer 
suggestions for determining interference for certain radical setups. The procedure 
is as follows. 
The model is first tested in the normal manner, the data as taken including both 
the tare and the interference effects. In symbolic form we have 
where DN 
is the drag of model in the normal position, 1
-
 
the interference of lower 
surface bayonets on the model, 1
-
 
the interference of the model on lower surface 


272 
FORCES 
AND 
MOMENTS 
FROM 
BALANCE 
MEASUREMENTS 
learame betwe 
model & suppcrl 
~indshlelds- 
Model supported on 
balance 
Model supported by Image system 
FIGURE 
7.24 Mirror (or "image") method of determining the effect of the supports on 
the model. 
bayonets, Im the interference of the lower support windshield, and TL 
the free-air 
tare drag of the lower bayonet. 
Next the model is supported from the tunnel roof by the "image" or "mirror" 
system. The normal supports extend into the model, but a small clearance is provided 
(Figure 7.24). The balance then reads the drag of the exposed portions of the supports 
in the presence of the model. That is, 
For the interference run the model is inverted and run with the mirror supports 
just clearing their attachment points (Figure 7.24). We then get 
where Din- is the drag of the model inverted (should equal the drag of the model 
normal, except for misalignment) and the symbol U 
refers to the upper surface. 
Then the mirror system is removed and a second inverted run is made. This yields 
The difference between the two inverted runs is the interference of supports on the 
lower surface. That is, Equation (7.26) minus Equation (7.27) yields 
By subtracting Equations (7.25) and (7.28) from the first run [Eq. (7.24)], the 
actual model drag is determined if the balance is aligned. As explained more fully 


7.5 FUNDAMENTALS OF MODEL INSTALLATIONS 
273 
in the previous section, the difference between runs made in the normal and inverted 
positions with the minor system in can be used to find the proper corrections 
for alignment. 
Tare and Interference Combined The support tare and interference effects can 
be found in three runs instead of four by using a slightly different procedure. In 
this case the normal run is made, yielding 
where IL = IMm + I- 
+ Iuw. 
Next the model is inverted and we get 
Then the dummy supports are installed. Instead of the clearance being between 
the dummy supports and the model, the exposed length of the support strut is 
attached to the model, and the clearance is in the dummy supports (Figure 7.20). 
This configuration yields 
The difference between Equations (7.30) and (7.31) yields the sum of the tare 
and interference, TL 
+ IL. The second procedure has the advantage that the dummy 
supports do not have to be heavy enough to hold the model, nor do they require 
any mechanism for changing the angle of attack. Actual setups are shown in Figures 
7.25 and 7.26. 
FIGURE 7.25 Three-support system with image system for evaluating tare and interference. 
(Photograph courtesy of Glenn L. M
a
r
t
i
n
 Wind Tunnel.) 


274 
FORCES AND MOMENTS PROM BALANCE MEASUREMENTS 
FIGURE 7.26 T
a
r
e
 
and interference runs on Boeing 767 mounted on single strut and pitch 
arm. 
The model is painted light blue on right side and black on left side for flow visualization 
and identification purposes. (Photograph courtesy of Boeing Aerodynamic Laboratories.) 
Approximate Method without an Image System A third method of evaluating the 
tare and interference, sometimes employed where an image system is impracticable, 
consists of adding extra dummy supports on the lower surface and assuming their 
effect to be identical with the actual supports. Sometimes there is danger of mutual 
interference between the dummies and the real supports. 
Appdmations of Tare and Znte?jference 
from 
Calibration Models Doubtless 
the increase of runs necessary to determine the small tare and interference effects 
and the concern expressed about the difference between those effects on the upper 
and lower surfaces seem picayune. Yet their combined effect often represents from 
10 to 50% 
of the minimum drag of the whole airplane--clearly not a negligible 
error. 
It should be noted that the tare and interference forces vary with angle of attack 
and model changes. They must be repeated checked and evaluated, particularly for 
major changes of wing flaps and nacelle alterations close to the support attachment. 
With many models every configuration must have its own support interference 
evaluated-
a long and tiresome test procedure. 
Because the evaluation of tare and interference requires large amounts of time, 
they often are approximated by evaluating them on a calibration model, and these 
values are then applied as approximate tares to other models. 


7.5 FTJNDAMENTALS OF 
MODEL INSTALLATIONS 
275 
Considerations of Tare and Zntederence for Vurious Mounting Systems For 
models of propeller-driven aircraft where the model is powered by variable- 
frequency electric motors, it is necessw to bring both power and water-cooling 
lines into the model. These usually are too large to be contained inside the mounting 
strut. If a special fairing is required to get the wires, for example, into the model 
or if they are taped to the mounting strut, the tares for these items must be evaluated. 
The easiest method is to make a set of pitch and yaw runs with the same model 
configuration with and without the wires. The difference between these runs is then 
added to the standard strut tares. 
A note of caution in regard to Figures 7.20 and 7.24: The images are supposed 
to be mirror images. However, if the model struts enter the model fuselage, the 
trunnion, which usually is on the balance moment center and the tunnel centerline, 
is not at the centerline of the model. When the model is inverted, the exposed 
portion of the image strut and the distance from its fairing to the model must be 
exactly the same as the upright model. This often requires the length of the image 
fairing exposed to the tunnel flow to be either longer or shorter than the standard, 
or lower, fairing. Thus, it generally is a good policy to make the image fairing 
longer than the normal fairing and let it extend through the tunnel ceiling. 
In the three-run method of taking tare and interference there is a possibility of 
air flowing in and out of the gap between the mounting strut and the fairing if the 
standard struts do not have a seal at their tops. To get the correct tare and interference, 
the image system must duplicate exactly the geometry in this region. 
For a support system that uses two supports on the wing and a tail support, an 
alternate method is sometimes used. The reason for this alternate treatment is that 
the length of the tail support varies as angle of attack is changed. This factor so 
complicates the dummy arrangements that a system is usually employed that does 
not require a complete dummy tail support. 
The procedure is as follows: Consider the second method of evaluating 
the tare and 
interference. When the image system is brought down to the inverted model, a short 
support is added to the then upper surface of the model where the tail support would 
attach in a normal run. The piece attached corresponds in length to the minimum ex- 
posed portion of the tail support andincreases the drag of the model by the interference 
and 
t
a
r
e
 
drag of a tail support on the model's lower surface. For angles of attack other 
than that corresponding to minimum length of exposed tail support, the drag of the 
extra exposed tail support length must be evaluated and subtracted. 
A rear-support windshield that moves with the rear support to keep a constant 
amount of strut in the airstream could be employed as long as the added interference 
of the moving shield is evaluated by a moving-shield dummy setup. 
The evaluation of the tare, interference, and alignment of a wing-alone test 
follows the procedure outlined above, except that further complication is introduced 
by the presence of a sting that must be added to the wing to connect it to the rear 
strut of the support system. The tare and interference caused by the sting may be 
found by adding a second sting during the image tests. As may be noted in Figure 
7.27, the attachment of the sting to the rear support includes a portion of the strut 
above the connection, and the dummy sting has a section of support strut added 


276 
FORCES AND MOMENTS FROM BALANCE MEASUREMENTS 
FIGURE 7.27 Setup for determining tare and interference of sting. 
both above and below its connection point. This complication is needed to account 
for the interference of the strut on the sting as follows: When the wing is held at 
a high angle of attack, there will be an obtuse angle below the sting. When the 
wing is inverted and held at a high angle relative to the wind, there will be an acute 
angle below the sting, for the rear strut will then be extended to its full length. To 
eliminate this difference between the normal and inverted tests, the support strut is 
extended above the sting attachment point, so that the sum of the angles between 
the sting and the support is always 180". The image sting has the same arrangement. 
Note that although the angles between the sting and the rear support vary with the 
angle of attack, the image sting is always at right angles to its short rear-support 
strut. Furthermore, the image rear-support strut does not remain vertical but changes 
its angle with the wing. The error incurred by failing to have the sting image system 
simulate the exact interference and rear-strut angle is believed to be negligible. 
Tare and interference for the tail strut alone may be evaluated, as shown in Figure 
7.28. For asting mount Figure 
7.29 shows the arrangement. The setup for determining 
the tare and interference for a fork support is shown in Figure 7.30. Here the model 
is supported externally and a small clearance is left where the struts come into the 
wing. This measures the drag of the fork plus the effect of the wing on the fork 
but not the effect of the fork on the wing, which experience has shown to be small. 
Hence, the tares are used as approximate tares where the desire to save tunnel time 
precludes taking the usual tare and interference runs. 
Figure 7.31 shows the results of a wing-alone test for a NACA 0015 wing of 
aspect ratio (AR) 6.0. The wing in this particular test was small, and the corrections 
for tare, interference, and alignment are correspondingly large, but the variation of 
the corrections is typical. The following points are of interest: 


7.5 FUNDAMENTALS OF MODEL INSTALLATIONS 
277 
Clearance 
between 
dummy bayonet and 
image windshield 
/ 
Detachable 
1 
tail strut 
FIGURE 7.28 
Setup -for determining tare and interference of the tail support. 
. .
,
 
-
.
-
*
,
a
 
FIGURE 
7.29 Tare and interference: supersonic transport with surface sting support in 
NASA Langley 4 X 7-m tunnel. (Photograph courtesy of NASA Langley and Dynamic 
Engineering, Inc.) 


278 
FORCES AND MOMENTS FROM BALANCE MEASUREMENTS 
FIGURE 7.30 
Tare and interference determination for a fork-type support. (Courtesy Uni- 
versity of Washington Aeronautical Laboratory.) 
1. The correction for tare and interference decreases as CL 
(and a) 
increases. 
2. The incidence strut drag decreases with increasing a. 
(The amount of strut 
exposed decreases with a
.
)
 
3. The alignment correction increases with CL. 
A large amount of interference may arise from air that bleeds through the wind- 
shields that surround the support struts to protect them from the windstream. These 
struts frequently attach at points of low pressure on the model, and if the shield is 
brought close to the model, a considerable flow may be induced that will run along 
the model. This flow may stall the entire underside of the model and produce results 
that are not only wrong but also unsteady and difficult to evaluate. It is therefore 
frequently advantageous to terminate the windshields well below the model and let 
the test be subjected to added but well-defined tare drag and to provide seals to 
stop the bleed flow. See Figure 7.32. 
Subsonic testing of military aircraft is often done over angle-of-attack ranges 
from 0" to 9
0
°
 
and missiles from 0" to 180". When the model is a slender body and 
is mounted on a swept strut parallel to the body axis and free stream, the strut will 
be similar to a splitter plate behind a cylinder. A splitter plate behind a cylinder 
can inhibit the vortex formation and reduce the wake pressure. When this occurs 
with a wind tunnel model, there is an improper flow simulation. The effect of the 


7.5 FUNDAMENTALS OF MODEL INSTALLATIONS 
279 
Drag Coefficient, 
C , 
FIGURE 731 Corrections for a wing-alone test: a, sting and support tare and interference; 
b, drag of exposed incidence strut; c, alignment. 
splitter plate on a cylinder is a function of the plate size and location relative to 
the cylinder and Reynolds number." 
The problem of properly taking and evaluating support tares and interferences 
for models at a high angle of attack is difficult. The models are generally mounted 
on stings with internal balances making the use of mirror images difficult. If the 
model is supported by auxiliary supports, there can be mutual interferences between 
the support, the model, and the normal sting. Auxiliary supports may require a 
second internal balance, adding possible complexity to the model. And finally, there 
is the complexity caused by the large range of angles that must be covered. 
i 
FIGURE 7.32 Effect o
f
 bleeding. 


280 
FORCES AND MOMENTS FROM BALANCE MEASUREMENTS 
A number of reasonably common mounting arrangements are discussed in the 
next section. 
Complete Aircraft and Submarine Mounting 
Every tunnel program has its cirnin set of objectives that must be used to guide the 
choice of mounting arrangement. There is always some tare andlor interference. 
The inevitable trade-offs that are made between tare magnitude and interference are 
somewhat different for the various mounting schemes. 
Single-Strut Mounting This arrangement is by far the simplest. Only a single 
windshield is needed, and it need not move as the model is rotated in yaw. An 
example is shown in Figure 7.33. The single strut is satisfactory for models and 
nacelles and may be used in conjunction with wingtip supports to evaluate tare and 
interference. The single strut usually mounts in the body of the model. The lateral 
spacing of the trunnion pins must be as large as possible to carry the rolling moments 
and to prolong the life of the trunnion pin bushings when the model has asymmetric 
stall (this structure is buried in the model body). When the strut is made with a 
relatively large cross-sectional area, it is fairly rigid in torsion (yaw) and a fair lead 
may be incorporated in its leading edge for wires for instrumentation, power to 
drive the horizontal tail, hinge moment data, and the like. Because the wires are 
internal to the strut, additional tare and interference runs are not required for such 
FIGURE 7
.
3
3
 Single strut with pitch arm. Both strut and pitch a
r
m
 rotate in yaw. (Photo- 
graph courtesy of University of Washington Aeronautical Laboratory.) 


7.5 FUNDAMENTALS OF MODEL INSTALLATIONS 
281 
FIGURE 7.34 Fork-and-pitch-arm-type mounting strut. Both fork and pitch a
r
m
 rotate in 
yaw. (Photograph courtesy of University of Washington Aeronautical Laboratory.) 
wires, and because the upper end of such a strut is large, it is difficult to use for 
wing-alone tests. 
Single Strut with Fork An increase in resistance to roll deflections may be gained 
by splitting the single strut into a fork at the top, as shown in Figure 7.34. This 
method may have less torsional (yaw) rigidity, as the forward struts that carry the 
trunnion pins are usually of a small cross section. With small-cross-section struts, 
the tare and interference effects are less. This system usually requires additional 
tare and interference studies if, for example, wires are taken into the model. Both 
the single strut and single strut with fork have a single windshield that is not a part 
of the balance. The structure inside this windshield can be quite robust, thus limiting 
the support system deflections to the struts that are exposed to the airstream. The 
balance fairing and its enclosed balance structure can be 
designed to be removable 
below the tunnel floor, thus allowing a stiff, nonpitching strut to be attached to the 
balance. This strut with a flat plate that yaws can be installed flush with a splitter 
plate above the wind tunnel floor for half models and building/structural shape tests. 
Single Strut Only In this design the model pitching andlor yaw mechanism is 
inside the model, as shown in Figure 7.35. 
Two-Strut Mounting The 
two-strut mounting systems surpass the single-strut sys- 
tem for rigidity in both torsion (yaw) and roll but add the complication that the 
windshields must be moved and rotated as the model is yawed. Figure 7.36 shows 


282 
FORCES AND MOMENTS FROM BALANCE MEASUREMENTS 
FIGURE 7.35 
Smg~e 
strut wlrn pircn and yaw mechanism inside model. (Photograph 
courtesy of Glenn L. Martin Wind Tunnel.) 
FIGURE 736 F-86D on two-strut support. (Courtesy of the Boeing Co.) 


-
-
 
~- 
----- .
-
 
7.5 FUNDAMENTALS OF MODEL INSTALLATIONS 
283 
FIGURE 737 'bo-strut tandem. (Photograph courtesy of Texas A&M University Low 
Speed Wind Tunnel.) 
a setup with the mounting struts side by side; in Figure 7.37 they are employed 
in tandem. 
Three-Point Mounting The conditions of rigidity, tare, and interference 
evaluation 
and ease of varying the angle of attack are all met satisfactorily by the three-point 
supporting system. This system is more complex in that it requires that two and 
sometimes three windshields be arranged to yaw with the model, as can be seen in 
Figure 7.38. The rear strut introduces side forces that complicate the yawing moment 
measurements of a yawed model. 
Wingtip Mounting When it becomes necessary to determine the pressure distribu- 
tion of regions close to the mounting struts, the models are sometimes mounted 
from the wingtips, leaving the fuselage and nacelles in air unobstructed by support 
fittings. Models of larger scale may be tested with wingtip mounting, and valid 
comparisons can be obtained of the effect of component parts. An example of a 
wingtip-mounted installation is shown in Figure 7.39. 
Mountingfrom the Tunnel Roof 
A 
few balances 
mounted above the tunnel support 
the model in an inverted position for "normal" 
running, as illustrated in Figure 7.40. 


284 
FORCES AND 
MOMENTS FROM BALANCE MEASUREMENTS 
FIGURE 7
.
3
8
 C-130J on three-strut support. (.Courtesy 
of the Boeing Co.) 
This arrangement seems to be a holdover from early wire balances that supported 
the model similarly so that the lift forces would put tension in the wires. No particular 
advantage seems to accrue from inverted testing. On the contrary, such a balance 
position hinders the use of a crane to install models, and the terminology of testing 
"normal" and "inverted" becomes itself inverted compared to the more common ar- 
rangements. 
FIGURE 7.39 Tip mount providing cleaner flow near wing mot. 


7.5 FUNDAMENTALS OF MODEL INSTALLATIONS 
285 
FIGURE 7.40 
Ceiling-supported model. Inverted testing is quite common in Europe. (Pho- 
tograph courtesy of British Aerospace Defense.) 
There also can be 
extra 
costs associated with this method in obtaining a sufficiently 
rigid structure above the tunnel on which to mount the balance. 
Mountingfrom a Tail Sting Engineers using small supersonic tunnels found that 
struts normal to the flow such as those used in low-speed tunnels cause excessive 
blocking in supersonic tunnels, and now almost invariably use a sting mount, as 
illustrated in Figure 7.41. In order to use the same models in low-speed tunnels 
(which are cheaper) the sting mount is employed. Sting mounts are fine for those 
airplanes having jet engine exits at the fuselage tail, since this furnishes a place for 
a sting. Tare and interference can be difficult to evaluate when the sting diameter 
requires a change in the aft fuselage contour. 
When an internal balance is used, especially for a heavy, high-Reynolds-number 
model, the axial balance load range may have to be excessively large, since it will 
have to carry sin a times the model weight, or 400 lb for an 800-lb model at a = 
30". A drive system for a sting support for a small tunnel is shown in Figure 7.42. 
Reflection Plane and Similar Arrangements 
These are used to reduce model cost or obtain a modest increase in Reynolds number. 


286 
FORCES 
AND 
MOMENTS 
FROM 
BALANCE 
MEASUREMENTS 
FIGURE 7.41 F-22 model on high angle of attack sting system. (Courtesy of Lockheed 
Martin Co.) 
Clearance f 0 r  
moximum angle 
Aluminum tube 
FIGURE 7.42 Parallelogram linkage for angle-of-attack control used in 40 X 4041-1. 
low- 
speed tunnel. 


7.5 FUNDAMENTALS OF MODEL INSTALLATIONS 
287 
FIGURE 7
.
4
3
 L-1011 reflection plane model setup. (Courtesy of San Diego Aerospace 
Museum.) 
Half Models The largest scale models may be tested by having them split down 
the plane of symmetry, only one-half of the model being present. Asymmetric flow 
is prevented by a large plate at the plane of symmetry or by mounting the model 
on the floor, as shown in Figure 7.43. Such an arrangement, though obviously 
unsuited for yaw tests, yields accurate pitch, lift, and downwash data at the maximum 
Reynolds number. The increase in Reynolds number over that of a full model is 
about 20%. The main advantage appears to be in the model construction costs. 
Care should be taken that the horizontal tail does not approach the tunnel wall 
too closely or stability at the stall will appear much too optimistic. Some gap is 
provided between the half fuselage and the ground. This close proximity leads to 
flow interaction between the tunnel floor and the fuselage. The uncertainty in the 
details of this interaction is such that this type of mounting is used primarily to 
study wing aerodynamics. It is not used to develop or study fuselage shapes. 
Mounting on a Turntable The use of large-scale panel models for investigation 
of control surfaces is discussed in Chapter 11. These panels require mounting 
arrangements different from those for wings and complete models. We include 
discussion of several mounting arrangements here. 
When the model is mounted on a turntable flush with the tunnel wall, the forces 
and moment on the turntable are included in the data and are difficult to separate. 


288 
FORCES AND MOMENTS FROM BALANCE MEASUREMENTS 
short strut. 
Small Clearance 
Fortunately, for the type of tests usually sought with this arrangement, the absolute 
value of the drag is not needed, and the effect of the endplate on lift is negligible. 
Mounting on a Short Strut Mounting the panel model on a short strut, as shown 
in Figure 7.44, has the advantage of decreasing the tare drag of the setup, but it is 
hard to evaluate the effect of the slot. Theoretical considerations indicate that a slot 
of 0.001 of the complete span, not panel span, will decrease the effective aspect 
ratio enough to increase the induced drag by 31%; a slot of 0.01 span will cause 
an increase of 47%. The effect of viscosity (not included in the above figures) will 
tend to decrease the error listed above, but the degree of viscous effect has not been 
clearly established. If the slot can be held to less than 0.005 span, its effect will 
probably be negligible; few engineers believe that 0.02 span is acceptable. 
Mounting as a Wing w
i
t
h
 an Endplate Moutning the panel as a wing with a 
small endplate to assist in keeping the spanwise lift distribution as it should be is 
shown in Figure 7.45. No endplate of reasonable size will prevent tip flow; hence 
the snapwise load distribution with this mounting will be greatly in error. 
The last paragraphs 
draw attention to the advantage of having a yoke-type balance 
frame, whether or not the balance is a yoke balance. The presence of lateral brace 
members to which bracing wires may be attached is a great convenience. Such 
members are obviously necessary for wingtip mounting. 
Some balances have a ring that completely encircles the tunnel jet. Though the 
ring offers a number of brace points, the part of the ring above the test section 
interferes with the installation of the image system. 
7
.
6
 INTERNAL BALANCES 
Internal balances are used extensively for complete model work and even more 
extensively for measuring 
loads on parts of models. A six-component 
internal 
balance 


 
.  
.  
 
7
.
6
 INTERNAL BALANCES 
289 
FIGURE 7.45 
Panel mounted as a wing with endplate. 
must address all the problems faced by a six-component external balance, but it 
must accomplish its purpose within a tightly specified and highly restricted volume 
and shape. Even the best internal balance cannot match the overall dynamic range and 
component independence of most external balances. But the option of matching the 
properties of an internal balance closely to a specific need greatly expands the 
options available when planning an experimental investigation. 
The two transducer types that are most widely used for internal balances are 
strain gages and piezoelectric elements. Of these two, strain gages far outnumber 
piezoelectric devices. The reason for this is that although piezoelectric devices are 
extremely stiff and have outstanding frequency response, they do not measure steady 
loads well. In practice, the terms internal balance and internal strain gage balance 
are effectively synonomous. 
Basic Aspects 
There are two basic types of elements in an internal balance: force elements and 
moment elements. In any six-component system there will be three force units and 
three moment units. 
Force-measuring elements employ either a cantilever beam or a column arrange- 
ment. An eccentric column provides greater sensitivity but also allows more deflec- 
tion, as does a single cantilever. The choice might well depend on the particular 
balance size and arrangement needed for a specific model. The axial force "cage" 
shown in Figure 7.46~ 
is one of the most common types. This unit can be made 
very sensitive by sizing the flexures, but since the model is attached to the cage, it 
is subjected to the relatively large normal forces. One might thus expect (see Figures 
7.46b and 7.47) an obvious interaction to occur because of the deflection of the 
cage flexures. A unit designed at David Taylor Model Basin (DTMB), shown in 
Figure 7.46c, has reduced this kind of interaction to a minimum. All forces except 


290 
FORCES AND MOMENTS FROM BALANCE MEASUREMENTS 
-Mounling holes for 
ollochina.to stina 
~ o d e l  
mounting surface 
(0) 
,
M
o
d
e
l
 
mounting surface 
A
+
 
lorce 
I 1
1
 
FIGURE 
7.46 
Axial force gages. 
axial load are carried by the webs as shear or direct tension or compression. A rod 
transmits the axial force to a cantilever beam mounting the gages. 
The arrangement for normal force readout is shown typically in Figure 7.48. In 
this case, the wiring is arranged so that the difference between two moments is read 
electrically. Since the normal force is equal to the difference of the two moments 
/Drag 
Goge 
Gages 
FIGURE 7.47 Normal force interaction on axial 
force. 
1 
Normal Force 


7.6 INTERNAL BALANCES 
291 
Normal force 
Pitching 
T
*
$
-
n
l
 - 
- 
(0) 
(b) 
FIGURE 7.48 Normal force and pitching moment gage arrangement: (a) 
differential circuit 
for normal force; (b) summing circuit for pitching moment. 
divided by the distance between gages, the unit may be calibrated directly in terms 
of applied normal force. It is important that both gage stations have the same section 
properties, Ily, and matched gages. The greater the gage spacing, the more accurate 
the normal force readout. If Mf and M, are the front and rear moments, then the 
normal force N is given by (M, - 
Mf)ld, where d is the spacing between gages. It 
is noted that the same arrangement may be used to measure side force. 
Pitching or yawing moments may be measured by the same gage arrangement 
discussed above except, as shown in Figure 7.48, the bridge is connected as a 
summing circuit. The differential circuit employed for normal force will also yield 
the moment if the moment reference point is between the two gage stations, for, then, 
where &f is measured from the front gage station. Another way is indicated in 
Figure 7.49, where the pitch gages are "stacked" and located between the normal 
force gages. For rolling moment a torque tube or a double-beam type with gages 
mounted on the side faces of the beams can be utilized. There are many mechanical 
variations in internal balance design, but the basic arrangement of strain gages 
attached to flexures is common to all. 
With the advent of electric-discharge-milling capability many internal balances 
are made out of one piece of material. This eliminates problems with hysteresis in 
mechanically attached joints. If the balance is made of separate parts and fastened 
together, great care must be used to avoid slippage, which leads to hysteresis, and 


292 
FORCES AND MOMENTS FROM BALANCE MEASUREMENTS 
- 
Normol force (also on bottom) 
Axial force A 
Pitching moment (olso on bottom) 
/ 
Model mounting 
surface 
FIGURE 7.49 Three-component strain gage balance (NASA design). 
in obtaining the desired alignment. Internal balances have also been made success- 
fully of built-up parts welded together with an electron-beam-welding proces~.'~ 
The choice of material is a matter of engineering judgment, and both aluminum 
and steel are used. A common steel that has been used is AISI 4340M. The heat 
treatment of this steel requires quenching; thus there can be distortion of machined 
parts, including breaking of the parts due to thermal shock. For this steel it is 
better to machine after heat treatment. If vacuum melt 4340M is used, the physical 
properties remain the same but fatigue life is increased. Two other steels that do 
not require quenching in the heat treating (they are cooled in the furnace) are 17- 
4PH, a stainless steel, and the maraging family of steels. Both of these present no 
matching problems and will not warp when heat treated. The purpose of heat treating 
the steels is to raise the yield point and increase the fatigue life. 
Since the flexures in a balance are designed on the basis of bending strain, 
advantages in some designs may be achieved by the use of aluminum alloys. The 
cost of the balance material is of little relative importance when compared to the 
design and fabrication costs as well as the tunnel downtime due to a balance failure. 
Basically, the choice of material and method of fabrication is a matter of good 
engineering judgment. 
In addition to three- and six-component balances used to measure the overall 
aerodynamic characteristics of models, many special balances normally using strain 
gages are built. These can include wing and tail root bending moments; loads on 
wheels, doors, and nacelles; and the most common control surface hinge moments. 
Perry18 has presented the fundamentals of transducer design and given some de- 
sign guidelines. 
Control surface hinge moment balances can be built in many ways. One method 
is to build gaged brackets that bolt to the main surfaces and the control surface. 
Each bracket is bent to set the control at the desired angle. Each bracket must be 
calibrated. This method is useful on models that have limited space. Another method 
is to use a precision-sealed ball bearing in the outboard hinge. The inboard end of 
the control surface has a strain gage beam rigidly attached to a pin. This pin slides 
into a close fitting hole in a metal control surface. To set control surface angles, a 
hole is drilled through the control surface for a roll pin and the pin is attached to 


7.6 INTERNAL BALANCES 
293 
the hinge moment balance (one hole for each control surface angle). The use of a 
beam that is rigidly attached to the main surface and uses a friction clamp to hold 
a hinge pin on the control surface is not too successful, because the angle of the 
control surface will often change due to slippage of the friction clamp. 
Sources of Balance Interactions 
No balance is capable of perfectly measuring the loads that it was intended to 
measure. By this is meant that the lift load component can only make a change in 
the lift-load-sensing element, with no change in the other five components due to 
lift load. There are two general sources of errors in balances. The first arises from 
misalignment of the balance parts and is caused by manufacturing tolerances in 
both the parts and their assembly. These are linear or first degree. The second arises 
from the elastic deformation of the various parts. These are second degree and 
nonlinear, There could be higher order terms due to plastic deformation of balance 
parts, but in this case the parts have improper dimensions and there is an error in 
the balance design. 
Initially we shall not consider problems in the balance-sensing elements such as 
temperature effects on strain gages or possible effects from the electronics used to 
obtain signals from the balance. 
The purpose of calibrating a balance is to arrive at a set of equations that can 
be used to determine the loads applied by the model through the output signals. 
These are called the balance interaction equations. In the past external balances 
were adjusted to make the interactions as small as possible. When these small 
interactions were nonlinear, they were replaced by linear approximations. 
This was 
done to minimize the personnel and time required to obtain the model forces. 
With the advent of dedicated computers it is possible and highly desirable to be 
more sophisticated in applying corrections to the raw balance sensor outputs. Bal- 
ances are designed and built to meet various test requirements. But all balances 
show certain mechanical similarities. For any balance sensor to be able to produce 
an output requires a deflection in the balance. This deflection must be an elastic 
deflection so that the sensors' output is repeatable. 
CurryL4 
illustrates the source of errors in a balance by considering a load sensor 
(Fig. 7.50) that is intended to measure axial force. The effect of the normal force 
N, the pitching moment M, and the axial force A on the load sensor is determined. 
The sensor will have an output A', and this is to be measured along the load axis. 
Now if there is an angular displacement P between the measuring axis and the 
load axis, components of the applied normal force will appear along the measuring 
axis. Thus the sensor output A' becomes 
Balance design criteria dictate that the balance be rigid to support the model and 
that the parts be built to close tolerances to minimize misalignments. Thus P can 


294 
FORCES AND MOMENTS FROM BALANCE MEASUREMENTS 
I 
Norrnol force N 
I 
Lood sensor 
A '  Meosured reoclion along 
measurinq axis 
I 
Measuring axis 
Pitching rnornenl m 
about point o 
/-- 
- 
Axial force A 
FIGURE 7.50 Schematic of axial balance load sensor. 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
be considered to be a small angle. If $ is in radians, then cos P = 1, sin P = P, 
and Equation (4.1) becomes 
Lood oxis 
Now assume that due to manufacturing 
tolerances there is a small initial misalign- 
ment of the measuring axis relative to the load axis. This misalignment is constant, 
and the angle will be Po. 
When the normal force acting through the center of the sensor is applied, the 
sensor and its support will deflect as a cantilever beam with an end load. This 
results in a misalignment due to normal force PI. The application of a pitching 
moment about the point may cause the beam to deflect in a different mode, causing 
an angular displacement pz. 
The deflection curve of the deflected beam and sensor 
are, of course, different with these two loads. 
Thus PI and P2 
are independent of each other and are only functions of the 
normal force and the pitching moment. Since Po is constant and PI 
and P2 
will vary 
with the loads, they can be written as 
The total angular displacement will be the sum of the misalignment and the 
deflections due to loads: 
Substituting Equation (4.3) into Equation (4.2) yields 
The sensor output A' is thus a function of the axial load, the initial misalignment 


7.6 INTERNAL BALANCES 
295 
(the first-degree term), and displacements due to the other loads (second-degree 
terms). 
If the axial force sensitivity constant is defined as kA 
(output units per unit of 
axial force), then the axial output 0, = kAA1. 
Thus Equation (4.4) becomes 
Solving for the axial load yields 
A = - -  
'
A
 
(C,N + CzN2 
+ C3 
NM) 
k
'
 
The terms in parentheses are the balance interactions. The term OAlkA 
is the 
sensitivity term and is usually called raw data, the uncorrected output from the axial 
force sensor. The linear term C,N is the initial angular displacement and is generally 
due to tolerances in manufacture and assembly. The second-order, or quadratic, 
terms CzNZ 
and C3NM are due to elastic deformation. The interactions are not 
dependent on the component sensitivities but are 
only functions of balance geometry 
and material properties. They are functions of the modulus of elasticity, which in 
turn is a function of temperature. Strain gages also are affected by temperature. 
This implies that the balance sensitivity as well as the interactions will be dependent 
on temperature. 
The presence of the second-order interactions means that the raw data values 
depend on both the applied load and the initial load. See Figure 7.51. 
In a multicomponent balance each of the measuring components may be 
considered to have six degrees of freedom in overall deflections. Each degree 
FIGURE 7.51 Nonlinear balance load sensor output. 


2
9
6
 
FORCES AND MOMENTS FROM 
BALANCE MEASUREMENTS 
of freedom may be influenced by more than one applied load component (as 
A' was influenced by N and M). In addition to overall deflections, deflections 
within the supporting members and flexures that comprise the internal configuration 
of the sensing element also contribute to the interactions. These deflections 
should be considered in a more comprehensive analysis that would include the 
creation of a detailed finite element model of the balance. In analyzing the 
deflections and their resulting interaction terms, one source of deflection and 
the resulting interaction terms may be considered at a time since superposition 
applies. A six-component balance has 27 interactions. 
When using a six-component balance, all six components must be recorded since 
the balance interaction equations for each component contains terms from all six 
components. If the lateral components are not recorded, there will be errors in the 
longitudinal components and vice versa. 
Calibration of Internal Balances 
The calibration procedure serves several purposes, including 
1. to proof load the balance; 
2. to determine balance coefficients; 
3. to determine deflections as a function of load; 
4. to check repeatability over short time intervals; 
5. to check stability over longer time intervals; 
6. to determine sensitivity or minimum load for response; and 
7. to determine hysteresis. 
Processes Multicomponent internal or sting balances are generally calibrated out- 
side the tunnel. The calibrations require a rather elaborate calibration rig, an example 
of which is shown in Figure 7.52. The system provides capability for the balance 
to be rotated through 360" and pitched in the vertical plane. The pitching motion 
is used to keep the applied load system aligned to the model attachment portion of 
the balance, just as the model will be when the system is loaded in the tunnel. This 
means the model attachment portion is kept horizontal for all loading conditions 
since this system uses weights and gravity to apply the loads. It also allows the 
balance and sting deflection to be measured. The provision for rolling the system 
allows positive and negative loads in lift and side force to be applied with hanging 
weights. Such a rig usually has positive stops at 0°, 9
0
°
,
 
180°, and 270" to facilitate 
these loads. Loads can also be applied at other roll angles, as models on sting 
- ~ 
balances are often rolled rather than yawed. Calibration bars are used to apply the 
loads. These bars are indexed so that various values of moments can be applied 
while holding the normal or side force constant. 


7.6 INTERNAL BALANCES 
297 
FIGURE 7.52 Calibration mount for internal strain gage or sting balances. This balance 
is being subjected to combined loads of lift, rolling moment, and pitching moment to determine 
second-order interactions. (Photograph courtesy of Boeing Aerodynamics Laboratories.) 
The orientation of the loads applied to the balance must be positively and precisely 
correlated to the model orientation when the model is attached to the balance. This 
alignment is usually accomplished by pins, keys, or splines rather than through any 
system of adjustments so that the accuracy of reproducibility is close to machine 
tool limits. 
At zero load the calibration bar is leveled. As loads are applied at each load 
station the bar is again leveled and the deflection of the sting and calibration bar 
is recorded along with the balance outputs. The deflection measurements are. used 
to correct indicated angles of attack during the test. 
A large number of load combinations is required in order to obtain the balance 
coefficients and estimate their reliability. The time required to do a complete six- 
component balance calibration with manually applied loads runs into weeks with 
several people involved. There are at least two fully robotic balance calibration 
systems available commercially. These systems can carry out a complete six-compo- 
nent calibration in a few hours with a much smaller number of people required. It 
appears likely that calibration will become a service provided commercially rather 
than a process that is supported internally in a large number of tunnel-related labora- 
tories. 


298 
FORCES AND MOMENTS FROM BALANCE MEASUREMENTS 
Mathematical Problem of Balance Calibration 
and Utilization A six-component 
balance subjected to a load F 
provides a corresponding output 0 
where each of these 
vectors has six elements. The relation between these can be expressed formally as 
and the inverse relation as 
The common practice is to remove offsets and assume a second-order 
functional 
approximation for these relations. The resulting form is 
The last terms in these equations are the residuals. Minimizing these terms can 
provide the basis for choosing the coefficients of the above second-order approxima- 
tions. To develop these in more detail, we can represent Equations (7.40) and (7.41) 
in matrix form by 
where @ and Kl 
are 27-element vectors consisting of the six components, the squares 
of the six components, and the 15 cross products of the six components taken two 
at a time of F and 0. The terms [A] and [
T
I
 
are 6-row-by-27-column matrices 
containing all the coeffkients indicated by Equations (7.40) and (7.41). If we remove 
E and y from Equations (7.42) and (7.43), respectively, and then transpose, we 
obtain the equations 
If 27 loading conditions are chosen and executed, this will result in 27 sets of (0, 
F
,
 c
P
,
 0) 
that can be used to assemble the equations 


REFERENCES 
AND 
NOTES 
299 
where [OT1 
and [ml 
are 6-column-by-27-row matrices. Here, [@TI 
and [
a
T
]
,
 
are 
27 X 27 matrices entirely determined by the loading combinations chosen. In 
principle, we can solve for the coefficient matrices by inverting the loading matrix 
and the output matrix and premultiplying, to obtain 
For systems of this size and complexity, this direct attack may, but quite likely 
will not, give good results since numerical conditioning problems are common. In 
any case, it is possible to obtain more useful information by techniques such as 
response surface methods from experimental statistics. Draper and SrnithIs 
and many 
others may be consulted. Among many effects that must be carefully evaluated is 
hysteresis. This requires 
repeated loading sequences in which the loads are increasing 
and decreasing. The required number of loading combinations in practice will be 
many times the 27, which is the minimum number to populate the basic matrices 
above. 
Temperature Sensitivity and Other Items Apparent strain caused by changes in 
the balance temperature at zero load (zero lift) can be caused by temperature 
gradients 
across the balance structure and by the average temperature level of the sensing 
elements. The zero shift due to temperature can be reduced by use of factory- 
compensated gages; use of bridges with four active arms and thermal-sensing- 
compensating wire in the bridge circuit; and finally insulating, heating, or cooling 
the balance to minimize both temperature excursions and gradients, if possible. 
The following should be kept in mind. To the extent that the data readout system 
may be considered as having infinite 
impedance, with no shunting paths in balancing 
circuits, the interactions may be considered independent of the data systems. If, 
however, the balance is calibrated on a data system that does not have infinite 
impedance, then the data system used during test work must have the same impedance 
as the calibration data system. Also, the effects of shunting paths across arms of 
the bridges or across "half bridges" will modify the individual arm 
or half-bridge 
sensitivity to the quantities they sense. Thus the interaction quantities that these 
elements sense may fail to cancel to the same extent that they would with either 
no shunting paths or different shunting paths, which will produce differences in the 
interactions as indicated by the output data. 
REFERENCES AND NOTES 
1. AIAA, "Recommended Practice for Atmospheric and Space Flight Vehicle Coordinate 
Systems," ANSIIAIAA R-004, 1992. 
2. Etkin, B., and Reid, L., Dynamics o
f
 Flight, Stability and Control, 3rd ed., Wiley, N
e
w
 
York, 1996. 


300 
FORCES AND MOMENTS 
FROM 
BALANCE MEASUREMENTS 
3. SAE, "Vehicle Aerodynamics Terminology, Recommended Practice," SAE J1594, 
June 1987. 
4. ' Milliken, W. E, and Milliken, D. L., "Race Car Vehicle Dynamics," SAE, Warrendale, 
PA, 1995. 
5. Lewis, E. V., Ed., Principles of Naval Architecture, 2nd rev., Vols. 1-3, Society of Naval 
Architects and Marine Engineers, Jersey City, NJ, 1988. 
6. Moritz, H., "Geodetic Reference System," Bull. GPodisigne, 62, 348-356, 1988. 
7. Bray, A., Barbato, G., and Levi, R., Theory and Practice of Force Measurement, Aca- 
demic, London, 1990. 
8. This is the most frequently used arrangement for aircraft and external balances. Others 
are discussed subsequently. 
9. There are many others. 
10. Gratzer, L. B., "Optimum Design of Flexure Pivots," Report 390, University of Washing- 
ton Aeronautical Laboratory, Seattle, WA, 1953. 
11. Mouch, T. N., and Nelson, R. C., "The Influence of Aerodynamic Interference on High 
Angle of Attack Wind Tunnel Testing," AIAA Paper 78-827, presented at the AIAA 
Twelfth Aerodynamic Testing Conference, 1982. 
12. Ewald, B., ''The Development 
of Electron Beam Welded One Piece Strain Gage Balances," 
AIAA Paper 78-803," in Proceedings 
of the Tenth AIAA Aerodynamic Testing Conference, 
AIAA, Washington, DC, 1978, pp. 253-257. 
13. Perry, C. C., Ed., Modem Strain Gage Transducers, Their Design and Construction, 
Series in Epsilonics, MicroMeasurements, Inc., Raleigh, NC, Ll-IV.2, 1981-1984. 
14. Curry, T. M., "Multi-Component Force Data Reduction Equation," in Proceedings of 
Technical Committee 
on Strain Gages, Third SESA International 
Congress on Experimen- 
tal Stress Analysis, Chapter 7, University Park, PA, May 1971. 
15. Draper, N. R., and Smith, H., Applied Regression Analysis, Wiley, New York, 1966. 


8 Use of Wind Tunnel Data: 
Scale Effects 
One of the top airplane designers of the World War I1 era in Great Britain has been 
credited with the statement that he "could go on designing airplanes all day long 
if he had not also to build them and make them fly," and his point is surely well 
taken. Data may easily "be taken all day longv-
as long as they are not used to 
design airplanes or other vehicles or full-scale devices that cannot be tested directly 
at operating Reynolds numbers. 
All discrepancies that arise because of the use of models for experimental data 
gathering rather than actual articles might properly be considered "scale effects." 
However, the common use of the tern scale effects refers to differences that arise 
when the fluid dynamic dimensionless parameters, primarily Reynolds number for 
"low-speed" flows, are not the same in the experiments and in actual operations. 
Most test articles have some geometric differences as compared to the actual op- 
erating articles. Differences arising from these typical geometric differences are 
simply referred to as geometric effects. In the case of automobile aerodynamic 
experiments, some of the largest issues arise from the fact that test articles are 
commonly extremely different in geometric detail from actual vehicles. 
The very subject of extrapolating wind tunnel data to full scale will probably 
elicit a g
r
i
m
 
smile from many aeronautical 
engineers who have had the responsibility. 
The aerodynamicist disparages the wind tunnel engineer; the wind tunnel engineer 
thinks the aerodynamicist wants too much; and if any poor soul is assigned the 
combination of jobs, well, one is reminded of the classic humorous tale of crossing 
a hound dog and a rabbit wherein the offspring ran itself to death. Yet, it is essential 
that each of the persons engaged in various aspects of aerodynamic development 
grasp the fundamental contribution of each approach to seeking the necessary facts. 
A reasonable indication of reality lies in the fact that wind tunnels are very 
rarely called upon to test exactly scaled operational models. Though this offers a 
magnificent "out" to the wind tunnel engineer, it is not meant that way. Reynolds 
number effects on small items are too great even if they could be accurately con- 
structed; hence the small excrescences are mostly left off the models. In many cases 
the aerodynamicist who plans on adding these items selects the lowest possible drag 
estimates, with the net result that he or she underestimates their interference and 
overestimates the performance of the vehicle. The cure for this situation is to 
consolidate these items and minimize their effect. Room for improvement can surely 
exist when examples can be cited of airplanes that have no less than 22 separate 
air intakes and dozens of removable inspection panels. 


302 
USE OF 
WIND TUNNEL DATA: SCALE EFFECTS 
There is very limited correlation between flight test and wind tunnel data outside 
company files. This lack is attributed to the dual reasons that after flight test there 
is rarely time to back up and correlate with the wind tunnel and that, even where 
it is done, the success or failure of the methods used is generally considered 
company 
proprietary for the very good reason that the information is expensive to obtain. 
There are 
only a handful of papers in available literature with detailed information 
and actual data from correl&chs of wind tunnel and flight results. 
Any flight test and wind tunnel correlation suffers from a great number of 
unknowns. The tunnel data suffer from inexact or unknown Reynolds number 
extrapolation, possible uncertainties in corrections to the data such as tare and 
interference and wall effects, errors in duplicating the power on effects with fixed- 
pitch propellers, simulation of flow around or through jet engine nacelles, omission 
of manufacturing irregularities and small excrescences, and insufficient deflections 
of the model under load. Some models are built to simulate a lg load. The flight 
test data suffer from pilot techniques, accelerations due to gusts, errors in average 
center-of-gravity locations, determination of true air speed, and unknowns of propel- 
ler efficiencies, jet engine operational characteristics, 
and other power plant effects. 
Considering the impressive room for disagreements, the generally good agreement 
found in the few available reports is remarkable. 
The situation in other fields, including automobile aerodynamics, yacht hydrody- 
namics and aerodynamics, and submarine hydrodynamics, is essentially parallel to 
that in aeronautics. 
There is a positive aspect that should not be missed: Much design work is 
considered successful if improvements are achieved, regardless of whether the 
methods available, be they computational, analytical, or experimental, provide abso- 
lute accuracy in predicting all performance quantities of interest. Accurate quantita- 
tive predictions of the actual device performance is, of course, always the most 
desirable achievement. 
We will take up, in t
u
r
n
,
 
each of the important aerodynamic quantities usually 
measured in the tunnel and say what we can about their use. The boundary layer 
is the key. The understanding of scale effects is essentially the understanding of 
boundary layer properties and behavior as they are affected by differences in the 
model and full-scale articles. Wakes are also important, although wakes can be 
considered to be the children or descendants of boundary layers in the context of 
vehicle aerodynamics and hydrodynamics. 
8
.
1
 BOUNDARY 
LAYER 
Due to viscosity, the air or water in contact with the body surface has the same 
velocity as the body surface. There is a region of generally high velocity gradient 
that is typically small in extent relative to body dimensions over which the air 
velocity transitions from the velocity of the body to essentially "free stream," or 
more accurately to a velocity that would exist in a potential flow around a body 
similar to the actual body over parts where there is no separation. The region in 


8.1 BOUNDARY 
LAYER 
303 
which this velocity change takes place is called the boundary layel; and the velocity 
gradients in the boundary layer very largely determine whether the drag of a body 
is x or lox. 
The various properties 
of boundary layers are very important in determin- 
ing scale 
effects. Critical aspects are locations at which the boundary layer transitions 
from laminar to turbulent and where separation occurs. There are many papers and 
books on boundary layer theory to which reference may be made for details. Exam- 
ples are Schlichting' and Yo~ng.~ 
It was discovered during early research 
in aerodynamics that a turbulent boundary 
layer has much greater associated skin friction drag than does a laminar boundary 
layer. Consider as illustrative the drag on a flat plate aligned with the free stream. 
Take the reference area as the planform area, base the Reynolds number on the 
chord or streamwise dimension, and account for the fact that both sides experience 
skin friction so that the wetted area is twice the reference area. The contributions 
to total drag coefficient from skin friction drag for laminar and turbulent boundary 
layers are given by 
These are plotted in Figure 8.1 along with a drag curve of a 23012 airfoil. 
The boundary layer thickness, defined as the distance from the surface to the 
point where the velocity in the boundary layer is 0.99 times the velocity just outside 
~ 
~ 
. .  
. . . . . . . .  
M 
. . . . . . . . .  
. . . . . .  
. . . . . . . . .  
. , . . , , .  
. . . . . .  
........... 
.... 
. 
NmA 
2301 
2
.
.
 
......... 
. . . . . .  
. . . . .  
. 
. 
,
,
.
.
 
. 
. 
, 
, . . , , .  
.- -
:
:
 
7 7 .
-
 
. . . . . . . . .  
. . . . . . . .  
. . . . . . . .  
. . . . . . . . .  
. . . . . . . . .  
. . . . . . . . .  
. . . . . . . . .  
. . . . . . . . .  
. . . . . . . . .  
. . . . . . . . .  
. . . . . . . .  
. . . . . . . . .  
. . . . . . . . .  
. . . . . . . .  
. . . . . . . . .  
. . . . . . . . .  
. . . . . . . .  
1 
o5 
1 
o6 
1 0' 
1 
o8 
Reynolds Number 
FIGURE 8.1 C,,. versus R.,. (From Jacobs, E. N
.
,
 
"The Variation of Airfoil Section 
Characteristics w
i
t
h
 Reynolds Number," 
NACA 
TR 
586, 
1
9
3
7
.
)
 


304 
USE OF WIND TUNNEL DATA: SCALE EFFECTS 
the boundary layer, is another property of interest and is given approximately by 
where I is the distance from the body leading edge and Re! 
is the Reynolds number 
based on 1 and free-stream velocity. 
Several important features of boundary layer behavior should be kept in mind. 
First, both boundary layer drag and thickness are functions of Reynolds number. 
Second, laminar boundary layers have far less drag but also far less energy with 
which to surmount roughness or comers, so laminar layers "separate" 
from a surface 
much more easily than do turbulent layers. Third, the maintenance of a laminar 
boundary layer becomes more difficult as the Reynolds number (its length) increases. 
Fourth, a laminar boundary layer is encouraged by a pressure falling in the direction 
of flow. This is referred to as a "favorable gradient" whereas the situation when 
the pressure is rising in the direction of the flow is referred to as having an "adverse 
gradient." Fifth, the location of the "transition" 
from laminar to turbulent flow is a 
topic of ongoing research. And this location is usually estimated from a variety of 
sources of information ranging from available methods of transition prediction to 
experience-based 
rules of thumb. This 
is true 
for all currently available computational 
methods as well as wind tunnel experiments. 
Modem airfoil design procedures can produce favorable pressure gradients over 
a large portion of the chord. The extent of laminar flow can be increased by very 
smooth surfaces and by either removing the boundary layer by suction or energizing 
it by surface blowing. In the light of these actions we may examine how a flow 
can be changed widely under conditions of changing Reynolds number. 
Assume that the wing shown in Figure 8.2 is in a stream of such turbulence that 
flow along a surface with constant pressure (perhaps a flat pate parallel to the free 
stream) will result in a boundary layer that changes from laminar to turbulent at a 
Reynolds number of 1 X lo6, 
and further assume a model size and velocity such 
that the Reynolds number based on airfoil chord length shown in Figure 8.2a is 
1 X lo6. 
We note two items: First, the laminar boundary layer is unable to negotiate 
the curve of the airfoil and considerable separation is indicated; and, second, transi- 
tion takes place before the Reynolds number reaches 1 X lo6 
since the flow down- 
stream of the maximum thickness is passing into an adverse pressure gradient that 
discourages the continuation of the laminar boundary layer. Here, then, is a case 
where we may consider there to be too much laminar flow because it leads to a 
relatively high resultant drag. The behavior described corresponds to point A in 
Figure 8.1 and the way the boundary layer behaves on a 23012 airfoil at a Reynolds 
number of 300,000. The additional drag due to separation is a result of higher 
pressure drag as compared to skin friction drag. 
Returning to Figure 8.2b, which corresponds to a higher Reynolds number, we 
see that the transition point has moved forward according to the third cited feature 
of boundary layer behavior and now we have the maximum laminar flow and 


8.1 BOUNDARY LAYER 
305 
Laminar 
boundary 
layer 
Turbulent 
Transition 
point 1 
. ~ 
,Transition 
point 
(4 
FIGURE 8.2 Effect of increasing Reynolds number on boundary layer flow. 
minimum drag. This corresponds to point B in Figure 8.1 and a 23012 airfoil at a 
Reynolds number of 650,000. 
The still higher Reynolds number illustrated in Figure 8 . 2 ~  
fails to show a 
decrease of drag, even though both laminar and turbulent drag decrease with increas- 
ing Reynolds number, since there has been a great increase in the region of turbulent 
flow. This corresponds to point C in Figure 8.1 (R, = 1.2 X 106). 
A further increase in Reynolds number yields a reduction in drag coefficient, 
although the transition has now reached the minimum pressure point and its further 
forward motion is resisted by the falling pressure (favorable gradient) from the 
leading edge to that point. 
Since the details of the pressure pattern of every airfoil is unique, and since the 
same may be said of every airplane or other vehicle design, it is apparent that tests 
made in the Reynolds number range where laminar separation occurs on the test 
model will be exceedingly difficult to extrapolate accurately to Reynolds numbers 
much larger than the test Reynolds number. 
The effects can be profound on essentially all qualities of interest-forces, mo- 
ments affecting stability, hinge moments, and so on. Obviously, it is highly desirable 
either to provide wind tunnel Reynolds numbers equal to operating values, which 
is seldom feasible, or to somehow make the model boundary layer behave more 
like that of the full-scale vehicle at operating Reynolds numbers. The two features 
that are most critical are the locations of boundary layer transition from laminar to 
turbulent and the locations of separation. 
The location of transition is dependent on a number of factors. Among them are 
the Reynolds number, the surface details, the pressure gradient, and the turbulence 
level in the external stream. Generally speaking, the higher the Reynolds number, 
the sooner the transition on a given shape. The problem commonly faced, therefore, 
is how to cause transition to occur earlier on a model than it would if no attention 


306 
USE OF WIND 
TUNNEL 
DATA. SCALE EFFECTS 
were given to this issue. The most common tool used for this purpose is a boundary 
layer trip device. 
The locations of separation are more difficult to manipulate with success since 
the most common situation is that separation occurs sooner at lower Reynolds 
numbers typical of tunnel tests than at typical operating Reynolds numbers. It is 
easy to cause separation earlier-than its natural tendency but difficult to delay it. 
There are, therefore., no standard practices for dealing with "scaling" 
of separation 
points. Some situations, such as in wind tunnel tests of buildings, in which model 
and full-scale geometries have sufficiently sharp comers, produce separation at 
essentially fixed locations independent of Reynolds number. These are easy cases 
with which to deal since there is little or no effect of scale on separation locations. 
When separation occurs on curved surfaces, as on the upper surfaces of wings near 
stall, then the separation location is almost always strongly affected by Reynolds 
number and therefore exhibits a strong scale effect. 
8.2 TRIP STRIP 
A trip strip is an artificial roughness added to the model to f
i
x
 the location of 
transition from a laminar to turbulent boundary layer on the model. The trip strip 
can also, in some situations, prevent a separation of the laminar boundary layer 
near a leading edge of a curved surface. If, however, the trip strip either protrudes 
too high above the surface or has too great an amount of roughness, it can produce 
effects other than just fixing the transition location. If the elements of the trip device 
are too large, then there may be additive drag directly on the elements themselves 
and/or the newly turbulent boundary layer may be robbed of sufficient energy that 
early separation will occur downstream of or even at the trip device. These are 
undesirable effects. 
We give accounts of a number of ways trip ships have been created. 
1. Grit. The traditional trip strip based on NACAlNASA3 
reports is a finite- 
width strip of grit. When properly applied, the grit gives a three-dimensional hip 
that simulates the way natural transition occurs, which is always over some stream- 
wise extent rather than very suddenly. The two commercially available materials 
that are commonly used are carborundum and ballotine microbeads or balls. They 
both are available in graded sizes with nominal diameters (see Table 8.1). The width 
of the trip strip is usually 0.125-0.250 in. Masking tape is used to lay out the trip 
strips and then one paints or sprays on shellac, lacquer, artist's clear acrylic, or 
superhold hair spray. The hair spray has the advantage of being soluble in water 
and thus can be removed without harm to the model finish. After spraying or 
painting, the grit is dusted or blown on the wet adhesive. The grit is difficult to 
apply to vertical and lower surfaces, but this can be done by bending a card into a 
V and with skill blowing the grit onto the surface. It is difficult to obtain a repeatable, 
uniform, relatively sparse distribution of the grit. If the grit is dense packed, the 
trip willapproach a two-dimensional trip, which is undesirable. Also, during the 


8.2 TRIPSTRIP 
3M 
TABLE 8.1. Commercial Carborundum Grit Numbers and Corresponding 
Particle 'Diameters" 
Grit Number 
Nominal Grit Size (in.) 
I 
Grit Number 
Nominal Grit Size (in.) 
course of a test the grit breaks away from the adhesive. Both of these problems can 
lead to lack of repeatability of data from run to run during a test and from test to 
test. The resulting data variability is most severe in drag. Sample boards and photo- 
graphs of grit density can be helpful in improving repeatability. This method has 
been the most widely used historically but has increasingly 
been replaced by methods 
that provide more precision in repeatability as instrumentation systems have im- 
proved. 
2. -0-Dimensional 
Tape. These consist of 0.125-in. printed circuit drafting 
tape or chart tape. The trip strip is built up with multiple layers of the tape. The 
surface must be clean and oil free to obtain good adherence of the first layer of 
tape. If layers of multiple-color tape are used, it is easy to detect a layer that has 
blown off the model. The tape requires the height of the trip strip to vary in discrete 
steps due to the tape thickness. The two-di&ensional tape acts on the boundary 
layer in a different manner than the three-dimensional grit, and thus its simulation 
is not as good as a more distributed roughness such as grit. 
3. W
i
r
e
,
 
Thread, or String. This is similar to the two-dimensional tape but the 
thread or string is glued down in the same manner as the grit, by spraying the 
surface with an adhesive and stretching and pressing the thread onto the surface. 
This method is not often used, although the use of wire in this manner was one of 
the earliest methods. 
4. Three-Dirnentional Pinked Tape. Tape is cut in two using dressmaker's pink- 
ing shears. This leaves two pieces of tape with triangular edges. The tape is applied 
to the model with the 90" points pointing forward. Layers of tape can be built up 
to give various heights and the points staggered in the span direction to give a more 
representative transition than straight two-dimensional tape. 
5. Triangles. Tape and pinking shears are used to make small triangles that are 
applied to the model. Multiple layers can be used to increase the thickness. This 
method is slow to apply. 


308 
USE OF WIND TUNNEL DATA: SCALE EFFECTS 
6. Epoxy Dots. A vinyl tape with backing is run through a modified computer- 
paper-tape4 machine. This produces holes of 0.050 in. diameter, 0.100 in. center to 
center. The tape less backing is then applied to the model surface. An epoxy 
compound is forced into the holes. When the epoxy sets, a series of dots above the 
surface with heights equal to the tape thickness form the trip strip. The tape can be 
obtained in different thicknesses-or multiple layers can be used. See Figures 5.14, 
5.15, and 8.3 for a model with natural transition and with fixed transition using the 
dot-type trip strip. 
The epoxy dot method has become the method of choice in many laboratories. 
It provides good control and repeatability while appearing to induce transition at a 
controlled location that is very similar to natural transition. 
7. Othel: The exposed portion of streamlined mounting struts may be "staked" 
by the use of center punches to yield a permanent transition strip. Round struts have 
been knurled to yield the same results. 
FIGURE 8.3 Fixed transition at 8% chord using 0.007-in.-high epoxy disks: CL 
= 0.28, 
R,, = 1.26 X 106 
(based 
on average chord). 
(Photograph 
courtesy of University of Washington 
Aeronautical Laboratory.) 


-- 
8.2 TRIP STRIP 
309 
Location 
The trip strip is intended to simulate the boundary layer transition on the full-scale 
device. Obviously it is desirable to use the best available methods to predict the 
location of transition for any particular test article. The following gives general 
guidance: 
1. Lifting Su@aces. Lifting surfaces include wings, horizontal and vertical tails, 
and auxiliary fins such as winglets. The trip strip is applied to both sides of the 
surface. For NACA four- and five-digit airfoils and conventional wing construction, 
the full-scale transition will occur at approximately 10% of the chord at cruise lift 
coefficients. For the newer laminar flow airfoils and smooth composite skin, full- 
scale transition can be as far aft as 60% of the chord, although this will move 
forward on the upper surface as the angle of attack is increased beyond cruise values. 
If the transition is fixed near the leading edge for composite skin laminar airfoils, 
there will be larger changes in the lift, drag, and pitching moment. For general- 
aviation-type aircraft with production quality airfoils, Holmes and 0bara5 
present 
a summary of measured transition in flight and some comparison with tunnel tests, 
plus extensive references. 
2. Fuselage, Nacelles. For fuselages that have the maximum thickness well 
forward, the trip strip is often located where the local diameter is one-half the 
maximum diameter. For a low-drag body, one designed for extensive laminar flow, 
the trip strip is put at 20-30% of the body length. Care should be taken to ensure 
that laminar flow is not reestablished aft of the trip strip. Where a windshield, inlets, 
or blisters protrude from the main contour, an additional trip strip is often used to 
prevent the reestablishment of laminar flow. For flow through nacelles, a trip strip 
inside the nacelle is placed about 5% aft of the hi-light, and usually flow visualization 
is used to ensure that the boundary layer is tripped. The trip strip on the outside is 
also about 5-10% aft of the hi-light. 
In applications where there is a possibility of reestablishment of laminar flow, 
flow visualization such as sublimation or oil flow should be used to ensure that 
there is no laminar flow aft of the trip strip. See Figures 5.14, 5.15, and 8.3. 
Height of the Trip Strip 
Braslow and Knox6 give means of estimating the heights to be used for trip strips. 
The height of the trip strip can be chosen from the following: 
Here Ref, 
is the Reynolds number per foot based on free-stream speed; Kis a constant 
(actually a Reynolds number) based on grit roughness. The value of K is 600 for 
Reynolds numbers greater than 100,000 based on free-stream speed and distance 
from the leading edge to the trip strip. This is the minimum Reynolds number for 


310 
USE OF WIND 
TUNNEL 
DATA: SCALE EFFECTS 
FIGURE 
8.4 Results of a transition study using a series of grit sizes. (Redrawn from data 
courtesy of Verdian-Calspan 
Operations.) 
transition based on roughness. According to Braslow and Knox,6 if the Rey- 
nolds number based on distance to the trip strip is less than 100,000, the value of 
K increases to about 1000 
at very small Reynolds number. The height h is in inches. 
The use of Equation (8.5) yields trip strip heights that can be used for stability 
and control tests but does not yield enough information for performance tests, that 
is, drag due to the trip strip. When drag data are required, a trip strip height buildup 
should be run. 
Results of a study made to determine the required grit size are presented in 
Figure 8.4. With increases in grit size to 
about 0.003 in., the drag coefficient increases 
quite rapidly. This 
is interpreted as an indication that a completely turbulent boundary 
layer has not been established downstream of the transition trip. Above a grit size 
of 0.004 in., the rise of drag with grit size is considerably smaller and is constant. 
This indicates that transition is complete and the increasing drag is a pressure drag 
on the transition strip. In this case, the grit size that should be used for testing is 
indicated to be between 0.003 and 0.004 i
n
.
 To correct the measured wind tunnel 
drag for the effect of the trip strip, the data for fully established transition are 
extrapolated back to zero trip strip height, as indicated by the dashed line in Figure 
8.4. The drag correction is then the delta between the model drag with trip strip 
and the zero-height-extrapolated 
drag value. This delta then corrects for the pressure 
drag caused by the trip strip, while the trip strip itself ensures that the laminar-to- 
turbulent transition is at the proper location. If the tunnel test is run at various q's 
and the drag correction is required at all of them, then the trip strip height should 
be determined for each q. The largest height of the hip strip will be determined by 
the lowest dynamic pressure. The lowest height is determined by the highest q. If 
this is used, then there is a risk that the boundary layer will not be tripped at the 
low q. This implies that in the most complete test plans the trip strip height will 
be changed with each q; thus it becomes of paramount importance that the trip strip 
application is repeatable and easy to apply. This influences the type of trip strip 


8.2 TRIP STRm 
311 
that is used. As noted in item 1 at the beginning of this section, grit may be hard 
to repeat, therefore two-dimensional tape (2) or pinked tape (4 and 5) or epoxy dots 
(6) may be preferred. 
The height of the trip strip should also be determined over the range of CLS 
from 
cruise through CLmm 
for airc~aff 
yacht keels, or other lifting surfaces. Since the trip 
strip height is determined for a given test Reynolds number or test q, 
there will be 
the following effect on CLmm 
Below the q used to determine the trip strip height, 
the Ch, 
will increase with q or Reynolds number as expected. Above the q used 
to determine the height of the trip strip, the CLm may decrease with increasing q 
or Reynolds number. If this happens, the trip is extended above the edge of the 
boundary layer, and if located far enough forward on the surface, the hip strip has 
become a stall strip. This is almost always the case when the trip strip is at 5-10% 
of the chord, as required by the NACA four- and five-digit series airfoils. The trip 
strip acting as stall strip is usually not a problem with laminar flow airfoils with 
the trip at 30% chord or greater. It may be the best policy to make the runs for the 
variation of C
h
m
 with Reynolds number without trip strips. If leading-edge laminar 
separation is suspected, it can be checked by flow visualization. 
Transition or trip strips are not needed on all models. If the model shape is such 
that it precludes the formation of laminar flow, then trip strips are not required. 
This is often the case with many architectural models of buildings, bridges, open 
lattice towers, trees, shingled roofs, and the like. If there is a question about laminar 
flow and transition, the effect of trip strips can be measured, but care must be 
taken to ensure that the trip smp does not cause premature separation. Again, flow 
visualization will be useful as a positive check. 
The effect of various fractions of laminar and turbulent flow on drag coefficient 
can be estimated by use of Equations (8.1) and (8.2) with appropriate weighting 
factors. Figure 8.5 shows the drag coefficients corresponding to various amounts 
of laminar and turbulent boundary layers at various Reynolds numbers estimated 
in this way. Zero form drag is assumed. In this chart are shown the theoretical 
minimum wing drag of 100% laminar flow and the decrease in drag coefficient due 
to extension of the laminar layer. For example, extension of the laminar layer from 
20 to 60% at R, = 2 X lo6 
reduces the drag coefficient from 0.0073 to 0.0048. In 
fact, it is just this extension of laminar flow that reduces the profile drag of the 
laminar flow airfoils. 
Some general observations concerning scale effect on minimum drag for these 
sections are in order because of their greater extent of laminar flow. Over the lower 
range of Reynolds numbers (up to R, = 9 X lo6) 
a gradual decrease in minimum 
drag occurs. This reaction is attributed to the thinning of the boundary layer. At the 
higher Reynolds numbers the drag increases steadily, at least up to R, = 25 X lo6, 
because of the forward movement of transition. Of course, again airfoil geometry 
(camber, thickness, thickness form) influences the general behavior, but the scale 
effect is due primarily to the relative strengths of the two competinglinteracting 
boundary layers. Comparison tests of two difference airfoils of different families 
can be most deceiving if the evaluation is done at low Reynolds numbers. For 
example, the 6S3-418 
airfoil displays much larger profile drag than the 0012 section 


312 
USE OF WIND TUNNEL 
DATA: SCALE EFFECTS 
inar ljoundarylayer 
..o.: 
. ? O . . .  .
:
4
9
.
:
.
:
.
 
. . . . . .  
.......... 
- 
. . 
. . . . .  
?.--'&..-.?c 
'--- 
' --+. & 
. 
. .60,2??& 
--.. 
: 
. . . . . . . .  - 
%-* . . . . . .  
-G. 
.. 
. . . . . . .  
'
i
 
.
.
.
.
 
: 
............ 
. . . . . .  
.....I 
.-. .... 
.'.'.' 
....... 
. . . . . . . .  
: 
: l o o e %  
. . . . . . .  
. . . . . . .  
. . . . . . .  
. . . . . . .  
. . . . . . .  
1 
1 
oa 
Reynolds Number 
FIGURE 8.5 
C
,
,
,
 
versus R, for various percentages of laminar flow. Zero form drag 
assumed. 
at low Reynolds numbers, whereas a full-scale conditions just the opposite is true. 
The six-series section has extensive laminar separation in the low Reynolds number 
range; the 0012 has far less separation at the lower Reynolds numbers and hence 
has lower drag. 
In extrapolating drag coeff~cients 
it is necessary to make due allowance that the 
Reynolds number of the tunnel data is the "effective" Reynolds number. This 
procedure is necessary because the part of the drag associated with skin friction 
decreases with increasing Reynolds number. Thus for a given effective Reynolds 
number the friction coefficients are larger than at a numerically equal Reynolds 
number in a very low turbulence stream. The difference between measured drag 
and the actual drag at the equivalent free-air Reynolds number may be read from 
the turbulent drag curve of Figure 8.1. An example is given. 
Example 8.1 The drag of a wing is measured at a test Reynolds number of 3 X 
lnh and a turbulence factor of 2.0. The measured drag coefficient is 0.0082. Find 
the equivalent free-air drag coefficient. 


8.3 DRAG 
313 
2. From the turbulent drag curve of Figure 8.1, CD 
equals 0.0073 at R, = 3 X 
106 and 0.0066 at Re = 6 X lo6: 
3. The measured drag is therefore too high by 0.0007, and CD = 0.0082 - 
0.0007 = 0.0075. 
8.3 DRAG 
Although some might argue that the difficulties of measuring drag are less important 
than stability and control (because drag affects performance, but not safety), the 
simple truth is that whether or not a plane is ever built depends very much on the 
drag data obtained in the wind tunnel and how favorably potential customers can 
be led to receive it. 
The first conclusion (from Figure 8.1) is that, even though comparison tests 
between objects may be made with fair accuracy, a test Reynolds number of 1.5 X 
lo6-2.5 X lo6 
would be needed if extrapolation is intended. An ameliorating condi- 
tion is that, if a low Reynolds number separation 
exists and is cured by some change, 
the probability that it will arise at a higher Reynolds number is extremely small. 
If an effort is made to maintain a true profile on the full-scale airplane, tunnel 
wing drag extrapolated to the net Reynolds number (by the aid of Figure 8.5) should 
be only slightly optimistic owing to the drag of the flap and aileron cutouts, control 
surface inspection doors, and pitot tubes, antennas, other excrescences, and the like 
that are not represented on the model. 
The effects on the minimum drag of a complete airplane are more difficult to 
handle. There are truly an immense number of small items on a full-scale aircraft 
that cannot he represented at model scale. Whether they undercompensate or over- 
compensate for the drag reduction expected from higher Reynolds number is any- 
one's guess. Frequently the engineer assumes that the two exactly compensate, but 
he or she would hate to guarantee better than ?0.0010 in CD, 
except in cases where 
the company has extensive flight experience with a series of evolutionary airplanes 
so that the tunnel results can be viewed essentially as incremental data for design 
changes. This is also true for other methods, including computational aerodynamics. 
Similarly, the rate of change of drag with lift, usually considered as the change 
in span efficiency factor e, should not change for straight wings.' For instance 
(Figure 8.6), it has been observed that, when 
for a given airplane is plotted 
against the total drag coefficient CDz 
the graph is nearly a straight line. Furthermore, 
since we may write 
where AR = aspect ratio, it becomes apparent that the slope of the line dCddG 


314 
USE OF WIND TUNNEL DATA: SCALE EFFECTS 
FIGURE 8.6 Plot of 
versus Cm 
for a NACA 23012 at two Reynolds numbers. 
may be used to find e. Fortunately the slope of this line is practically independent 
of Reynolds number, and a wind tunnel test may hence be used to determine full- 
scale e. A plot of the drag polar for the 23012 airfoil at two Reynolds numbers is 
given in Figure 8.6. 
As we have noted, the determination of the amount the c-versus-CDT 
curve is 
moved over (i.e., the scale effect on Cm&cam,) with increasing Reynolds number 
is not so simple; in fact, no direct rule is known. If similar tests have been completed 
in the past and flight tests made, perhaps the comparison will yield the ACD 
necessary. 
For an entirely new aircraft, the minimum drag may be measured at several speeds, 
and a plot of Cm,- versus log Re may be made. The straight line that usually results 
from such a plot may be extrapolated to find the approximate full-scale Cm,m, 
as 
indicated in Figure 8.7. 
Another method, particularly for components, consists of converting the tunnel 
test point to a skin friction coefficient by the equation 
S 
C
f
 = Cm 
(wemd area) 
and spotting this point on a plot of Cf versus Re. The point is then extrapolated 
along the turbulent skin friction curve to the full-scale Reynolds number. The 
resulting skin friction coefficient is then converted to a ACm. 


8.3 DRAG 
315 
1
0
'
 
10' 
Reynolds number 
FIGURE 8.7 
Plot of CD, 
versus log RN. 
A third method of extrapolating the total aircraft to a full-scale Reynolds number 
is as follows (see Figure 8.8): 
1. Plot CD-versus-CL 
tunnel data. 
2. Subtract CDi 
= C,h 
AR. 
3. Estimate CL- (full scale) from Figure 8.9, taken from Jacobs8 or other sources, 
and extend Cm until it is horizontal at CLm. The increased curvature of the 
Cm curve should be moved to an increased CL 
in a manner similar to that 
described in Section 8.4. 
4. Decrease Cm,min(hl,el, 
by the CD 
change in wing drag from the tunnel Reynolds 
number to full scale. See Figure 8.1. (This is the controversial step. Some 
engineers make no change 
to tunnel Cm,- because manufacturing 
irregularities 
on the actual aircraft may increase the drag as much as increased Reynolds 
number decreases it.) 
5. Add CDi 
back in to get the final extrapolated drag curve. In this step use values 
of CL 
up to CLmm 
(full scale). 
Special attention should be paid to the extrapolation of CD 
at C
,
,
,
.
 
In many 
cases the engineer neglects the drag increase that accompanies the increase of CL- 
with Reynolds number, and predicted glide angles near CLm are then considerably 
above the attained values. 
The methods outlined above for getting full-scale values from tunnel data are 
successful only when applied by experienced aerodynamicists and are most success- 
ful when applied by aerodynamicists experienced with the entire development pro- 
cess of a particular company. 


316 
USE OF WIND TUNNEL DATA: SCALE EFFECTS 
FIGURE 8.8 Extrapolating airplane drag curve to full-scale Reynolds number. 
In closing we may state that, though the low-drag "bucket" found in the tunnel 
may be a bit optimistic, the shape of the drag curve up until CLmu 
effects predominate 
seems to follow closely the drag obtained in flight. 
If comparisons are to be made between tunnel and flight test data, the tunnel 
data must be corrected for trim drag. For a tail-aft aircraft there is usually a down- 
Effective Reynolds number, 
millions 
FIGURE 
8.9 Effect of Reynolds number on C
,
.
,
-
.
 


8.4 LIFT CURVE 
317 
load on the tail to trim the airplane. This negative tail lift increases the drag 
of the horizontal tail due to its lift and increases both the lift and induced drag of 
the wing. 
The prediction of aircraft drag and performance has always been an empirical 
process. The preliminary design prediction methodology accounts for the drag of 
existing designs from flight tests plus results of wind tunnel and flight research. As 
the aircraft design moves to specific aircraft configurations, these are tested in wind 
tunnels. At the end of the design process an optimum aircraft shape has evolved. 
This final shape is not necessarily an aerodynamic optimum, but an aircraft optimum 
that has involved trade-offs between weight, function, complexity, costs, and perfor- 
mance. Similar processes are operative for all other engineering developments of 
cars, boats, buildings, or whatever. 
8.4 
LIFT CURVE 
The effect of Reynolds number on the lift curve is quite strong and often quite 
unpredictable. We will discuss first the work of Jacobs8 on the NACA forward- 
thickness airfoils and then some other profiles. 
Forward-Thickness Airfoils 
JacobsS indicates that variations in lift curve slope with changes in Reynolds number 
are very small, but in general the lift curve will be more linear as the Reynolds 
number increases. The slope will increase slightly? and the stall will become more 
abrupt. (See Figure 8.10.) Lift curves already linear at the lower Reynolds numbers 
will have the linear range of angle of attack extended at higher ones. It follows that 
CLm 
and the angle at which it occurs are increased. The amount of the increase of 
both angle and CLmar 
is of paramount value to the engineer. 
The method outlined by Jacobs makes it possible to determine the CLm at 
Reynolds numbers below 8.3 X lo6 
for a large group of airfoils and enables the 
engineer to estimate possible Reynolds number effects on new airfoils. 
The method is to read the CLmar 
at Re = 8.3 X 106 
and the stall type from Table 8.2. 
Then the increment (usually negative) is selected from Figure 8.11 and added 
to the high-Reynolds-number CLm 
to get CLmm 
at the desired Reynolds number. Un- 
fortunately' this seemingly simple method is of lessened value in most practical 
cases for two reasons: First, it concerns section 
q
,
,
 values when wing CLmar 
values 
are usually needed; and, second, the engineer will probably not find the desired airfoil 
in Table 8.2. 
Many methods exist based on using lifting line, vortex lattice, or surface panel 
models to predict the span load distribution of the wing and hence its downwash. 
The local kepolds number is known, and the location of the first stalled region 
and wing CLm 
can be estimated. The success of these methods depends on knowing 
the effect of Reynolds number on the wing airfoil sections. 


318 
USE OF 
WIND TUNNEL DATA: SCALE 
EFFECTS 
Angle of attack for infinite aspect ratio, a
,
 
FIGURE 8.10 
Effect of Reynolds number on the lift curve. 
TABLE 8.2. Stall Types for Selected Airfoils 
Airfoil NACA 
Stall Type 
0006 
A 
0009 
B
o
 
0012 
Co 
0015 
D
o
 
0018 
E
o
 
002 
1 
El 
0025 
E
z
 
0030 
- 
2212 
c
3
 
2409 
Bz 
2412 
c
2
 
2415 
Dz 
2418 
Ez 
4406 
A
3
 
4409 
B
4
 
Airfoil NACA 
Stall q p e  
4412 
c
4
 
4415 
0 4  
4418 
E
4
 
442 
1 
E
5
 
23006 
A 
23009 
c
z
 
23012 
Dz 
23015 
Dz 
23018 
& 
23021 
Ez 
43012 
D
4
 
43015 
D
4
 
43018 
E
4
 
63012 
0 6  
63018 
El 


FIGURE 8
.
1
1
 
Estimating full-scale CLm. 
The way around the problem is largely empirical. Some engineers have had 
sufficient 
experience 
correlating tunnel data with flight tests so that they feel qualified 
to estimate CLm due to Reynolds number. Most of their estimations run around 
ACLm = 0.15 for the range from a tunnel test at Re = 1.5 X lo6 
to full-scale 
Reynolds number = 6 X lo6. 
For large jet-transport aimaft with leading-edge and multielement trailing-edge 
flaps, the extrapolation to much higher Reynolds number in the range of 60 X lo6 
at the wing root for a B-747-type aircraft is much more 
difficult. Such an extrapolation 
requires an experienced aerodynamicist 
and flight test data. The method is as follows 
(refer to Figure 8.11): 
1. The linear part of the lift curve from tunnel data is extended with the same 
slope. 
2. Through the value of CL, (full scale) as estimated, a horizontal line is drawn. 
3. The curved portion of the test lift curve is then raised until it has the proper 
value of CL, and shifted laterally until it joins the linear part of the constructed 
full-scale lift curve. 
The net result is a full-scale lift curve having the proper value of zero lift, slope, 
and CLm but probably having an angle of maximum lift that is too great and a stall 


320 
USE 
OF WIND TUNNEL DATA: SCALE EFFECTS 
that is too gentle. These two deficiencies are not serious, however, and the engineer 
has at least something with which to work. 
Since the speed of the airplane is reduced for landing, it is sometimes possible 
to obtain tests at the landing Reynolds number in a tunnel of moderate capacity. 
Maximum-lift coefficients measured in different wind tunnels agree much better 
when based on "effective" 
Reynolds numbers than when based on the test Reynolds 
number. Increased Reynolds numbers obtained by added turbulence are often satis- 
factory for maximum-lift measurements. 
Hillsl"ound 
agreement on CLmm 
within t-0.1 when data from 1.5 X lo6 
were 
extrapolated to 26 X lo6 
by Jacobs's method. 
Low-Drag Airfoils 
The effect of scale of the lift characteristics of the six series of laminar flow airfoils 
has not been as thoroughly investigated as for the other airfoils previously discussed. 
And there are now a very large number of custom-designed airfoils using modem 
airfoil programs. Fortunately some data on Reynolds number effects are available 
in Loftin and Bursnallll for a number of six series sections up to Re = 25 X lo6. 
Although the effects vary with form, thickness, and camber, some general remarks 
can be made. The angle of zero lift and the lift curve slope are virtually unaffected 
by scale, but the effects on maximum lift follow one of two general tends depending 
on the airfoil thickness ratio. For thickness ratios of 12% or less there is little effect 
over the lower Reynolds number range (up to Re = 6 X lo6). Increasing Reynolds 
number beyond this area produces a rapid increase in CL,, to a more or less constant 
value, which then decreases slowly on up to around Re = 25 X lo6. Turbulent 
separation beginning at the trailing edge seems to be responsible for this. 
For the thick sections the trend is toward a continual increase in CLmax 
with 
increasing Re. The large-scale effect exhibited by an 18% thick airfoil seems to be 
related to the rapidly changing condition of the boundary layer at the leading edge. 
New airfoils tested at fairly low Reynolds numbers present a difficult task of 
estimating behavior at much greater Reynolds numbers. 
8.5 FLAP CHARACTERISTICS 
We are usually justified in expecting a little more from a flap full scale than is 
found in a tunnel at low Reynolds numbers, provided that the basic airfoil does not 
suffer extreme effects itself. In a number of examples flight turned up about 0.2 
more flap lift coefficient increment than did the tunnel. Figure 8.12 illustrates a 
tunnel range in which the flap increment was unaffected by scale. 
With the current computational ability to design airfoil sections via computer with 
the desired pressure distributions 
for cruise flight and then using leading- and trailing- 
edge flaps for high lift, the problem of extrapolation wind tunnel data for R, effects is 
quite difficult. See Figure 8.13 for the effect of scale on the F-111A flaps down. 


8.5 FLAP CHARACTERISTICS 
321 
10" 
FIGURE 8.12 
Effective Reynolds number 
Effect of Reynolds number on Cbmar, 
flaps down. 
3.6 
I 
,
W
 
Full rcola 
3.2 
2.8 
2.4 
CL 
2.0 
1.6 
1.2 
0.8 
0 
1
6
 
24 
32 
FTGURE 8.13 Effect of scale on the lift characteristics of the F-111 aircraft. (Courtesy of 
NASA Ames.) 


322 
USE OF WIND 
TUNNEL DATA: SCALE EFFECTS 
FIGURE 
8.14 Effect of Reynolds Number on a 662-215 (a = 0.6) Airfoil. 
8.6 PITCHING MOMENT 
The static longitudinal stability of airplanes having airfoils with forward thickness 
(such as the 23012) seems to change little from typical tunnel Reynolds numbers 
of around lo6 
up to flight values of around 20 X lo6. Usually the tunnel-flight 
discrepancy is in the direction of slightly more stability of the airplane than was 
predicted in the tunnel. 
But the extrapolation of pitching moments when the airfoil thickness is well 
rearward (such as in the 65 and 66 series airfoils) is far more difficult to handle. 
The pitching moment variation of the 66,2-215 (a = 
0.6) airfoil is shown in Figure 
8.14 from tests made in the British compressed-air tunnel and is reported by  hill^.'^ 
Obviously, the extrapolation of even the data made at 1.8 X lo6 
would be a very 
difficult job. Nor were trip strips of much value here. Satisfactory tests were accom- 
plished only by going to high Reynolds numbers. 
8.7 LONGITUDINAL STABILITY AND CONTROL 
In general the longitudinal characteristics will not be seriously different from those 
indicated by tunnel tests. Frequently one finds the model neutral point a little farther 
forward than full scale when power is off and in pretty fair agreement with power 
on for propeller-powered aircraft. The elevator needed to trim rarely varies more 
TABLE 
8.3. Hinge Moment and Downwash Data Comparisons 
--
 
Parametef 
Wind Tunnel 
Flight Test 
dChldu 
(8, = 0") 
-0.0014 
-0.0011 
dCh/d8 
-0.0044 
-0.0044 
d d d a  
0.45 
0.41 
"Ch 
= hinge moment coeffkient S = control deflection. 


8.9 LATERAL STABILITY AND CONTROL 
323 
TABLE 8.4. Directional Stability Parameters 
Parameter 
Wind Tunnel 
Flight Test 
dC,ldsR 
-
0.00126 
-
0.00085 
d
+
/
d
8
,
 
-
0.787 
- 
1
.
3
9
 
dCJd* 
-
0.0010 
-0.0005 
dChIdSR 
-
0.0037 
-
0.0027 
d
C
.
l
d
+
 (free) 
, -
0.00125 
- 
0.00045 
than 2" from that indicated by the tunnel. Some other characteristics as determined 
by wind tunnel and flight tests of a two-engined propeller-driven aircraft may be 
of interest, even though they cannot be taken as typical; they are given in Table 8.3. 
8.8 DIRECTIONAL STABILITY AND CONTROL 
The directional stability in flight in a number of instances has been seriously less 
than indicated in the wind tunnel, necessitating a redesign of the vertical tail. The 
reasons for this difference are not fully understood. In a number of airplanes the 
rudder was not powerful enough to yaw the aircraft into rudderlock on the model, 
but did so in flight. Catastrophes have been avoided only because rudderlock flight 
tests are always made quite gradually and with full cautions as appropriate when 
anticipating possible trouble. The comparative values in Table 8.4 are from wind 
tunnel and flight tests of two-engine propeller-driven aircraft. 
8.9 LATERAL STABILITY AND CONTROL 
The agreement between flight and tunnel tests on the lateral parameters seems to 
be generally satisfactory. The disagreement between tunnel and flight for aileron 
power is expected from considerations of cable stretch and wing flexibility. The 
values listed in Table 8.5 are from wind tunnel and flight tests of a two-engine 
propeller-driven aircraft. Of course, though they are normal values, they cannot be 
taken as typical for all airplanes. 
TABLE 8.5. Lateral Stabilitv Parameters 
Slope 
Wind Tunnel 
night Test 


324 
USE OF 
WIND TUNNEL DATA: SCALE EFFECTS 
8.10 CORRELATION OF WIND TUNNEL TO FLIGHT DATA 
This is an area where most of the data are kept by companies as closely guarded 
secrets. 
When comparisons are made between tunnel and flight data, it must be kept in 
mind that there are uncertainties in the data obtained by each method. In flight test 
the data are taken at full-scale Reynolds numbers and the aircraft's roughness and 
excrescence effects are properly included. The full-scale drag effects of control 
surface and flap gap leakage, air conditioning, cabin pressurization, heat exchanger, 
thrust reversers, engine-nozzle modifications, and so on, can best be evaluated by 
flight test. The limitations in flight test are the inability of doing an airplane buildup. 
It is difficult to fly an aircraft tail on and tail off to obtain the horizontal tail effect. 
(Although some control engineers seem to think all they need to do is manipulate 
the controller gains or put in a neural net and let it "learn.") In flight test the total 
drag of the complete aircraft is obtained from which only general conclusions can 
be drawn. Quite often there is not sufficient data to assess the effect of variations 
in Reynolds number. Thus Reynolds number effect can be concealed in the parasite 
drag or drag rise due to the Mach number. This may require the analysis to use an 
assumed effect of Reynolds number. For analysis it is desirable to separate the drag 
polar into the following parts: 
1. CDed,, 
due to friction, pressure, interferences, excrescences, and roughness; 
2. ACDP, 
the variation of CDp 
with CL 
due to friction, pressure, nonelliptic span 
load, vortex, and so on; 
3. CDi, 
induced drag variation with C, 
and aspect ratio, due to span load or vortex 
lift; and 
4. ACD,, the drag due to compressible 
waves and shock-wave-induced separation. 
If this separation of the various parts of the total drag is to be obtained, a large 
number of flight test data points are required and very complete wind tunnel data 
are needed as a guide to the analysis. 
In analysis of flight test data it is not correct to assign all of the drag variation 
with lift to the wing, as the drag of the fuselage and other parts of the aircraft also 
vary with lift. Trim drag from the lift and drag of the horizontal tail must be 
accounted for when trying to determine the drag of the wing. The negative lift of 
the tail increases the wing lift required for level flight and therefore the induced 
drag of the wing. The tail itself also has a parasite and induced drag that must be 
taken into account. The tail operates in the wing downwash so its lift is usually not 
perpendicular to the flight path. Drag data from flight tests are only as accurate as 
the installed thrust (either jets or propellers) can be measured or predicted. 
An additional problem with flight test data is that it often is acquired while 
the aircraft is accelerating. For example, CL,, is obtained with the aircraft either 
decelerating at about 1-
3 knotslsec andlor sinking. This makes the C
L
,
,
 
from flight 
test higher than the true CL,, by 0.2 or so. It is difficult both to obtain and analyze 
data taken from flight tests. 


REFERENCES AND NOTES 
325 
The use of wind tunnel tests to predict airplane drag has the following advantages. 
A specific aircraft configuration can be studied one component at a time over the 
lift coefficient 
and Mach number range. This allows trim drag, interference, 
nonellip- 
tic span load, pitch up on swept wings, and the like to be studied in detail. As deltas 
in many cases are not affected by Reynolds number, new designs or aerodynamic 
features 
can be compared against 
model standards whose full-scale values are known. 
There can be problems with wind tunnel data when corrections such as support 
and interference tares, blockage corrections, and wall corrections are not properly 
applied. 
Two-dimensional pressure 
drag can be extrapolated to full-scale 
Reynolds number 
using the skin friction laws of Schlichting12 
and Squire and YoungI3 when the 
experimental pressure distribution of the airfoil is used to compute the local veloci- 
ties. See also Jones14 
and Bicknell.15 
Depending on the size of the program, there may only be a small number of 
tunnel entries (in some cases only one) during the design stage. When this occurs, 
there is a strong chance that the tunnel results have been used to modify the design 
and that the model and aircraft are no longer similar, making comparison difficult, 
if not possible. 
With V/STOL vehicles it is difficult to obtain steady-state data, especially in 
transition between vertical and horizontal flight. In the wind tunnel the data are 
often steady state, assuming that it is taken outside of the flow breakdown region. 
This requires extreme care in attempting to match tunnel and flight data. 
Neal16 makes a comparison using both flight test data and wind tunnel test data 
from the NASA Ames 40 X 80-ft tunnel of a Learjet Model 23 using a 0.15 scale 
model and the second airplane built. Based on mean aerodynamic chord, the 0.15 
model was tested at R, = 1.4 X 106. The airplane in the 40 X 80-ft tunnel was 
tested at Re values of 4.1 X lo6 
and 8.4 X 106. The flight test data were taken at 
Re = 8.6 X lo6. 
The data correlation between the 40 X 80-ft tunnel and flight test 
was good. The variation in CLm with Re was similar to NACA series 6 airfoils. 
The ACLm from the 0.15 scale to full scale was 0.32, both for flaps up and 40X
0 
flaps. Other than an anomaly in am 
between the 0.15 and full scale, the lift curve 
was similar to Figure 8.10. The 0.15 scale model had a higher drag level and the 
polar was rotated. There were also slight changes in C
,
 
flaps up tail on, but not 
for tail off, and slight changes in the slope of C, versus CL. 
Although the most comprehensive information on wind tunnel to full-scale corre- 
lation is certainly held as proprietary, there are many useful reports available. 
Examples include reports and papers by Millikan,17 
and Hockman,18 
Linden,Ig 
McKin- 
ney,2O Stalford?' Moul," Ster~ge,~) 
Paterson," MacWill~inson~~ 
and RooneyZ6 
and 
their co-authors. 
REFERENCES AND NOTES 
1. Schlichting, H., Boundary Layer Theory, 7
7
t
h
 ed., McGraw-Hill, New York, 1979. 
2. Young, A. D., Boundary Layers, AIAA education series, AIAA, Washington, DC, 1989. 


326 
USE OF WIND TUNNEL 
DATA: SCALE EFFECTS 
3. Braslow, A. L., Hicks, R. M., and Harris, R. V., "Use of Grit 
Boundary Layer 
Transition Trips on Wind Tunnel Models," NASA TN 
D-3579, 1966. 
4. For those readers who may not have been around then, there were several means of 
recording machine readable data for computers in the period 1950-1980. One was paper 
tape, in which patterns of holes were punched. 
5. Holmes, B. J., and Obara, C;?, "Observations and Implications of Natural Laminar 
Flow on Practical Airplane Surface," ICAS-82-5.1.1., in Proceedings of the Thirteenth 
Congress of International Council of the Aeronautical Sciences, Vol. 1, AIAA, New 
York 1982, pp. 168-181. 
6. Braslow, A. L., and Knox, E. C., "Simplified Method for Determination of Critical Height 
of Distributed Roughness Particles for Boundary Layer Transition at Mach Numbers 
from 0 to 5, NASA TN 
4363, Sept. 1958. 
7. The parameter e for swept wings is not as tractable as for straight wings. Sometimes 
the tip stall is reduced by a higher Reynolds number in a manner that increases e, and 
other times e is reduced. 
8. Jacobs, E. N., "The Variation of Airfoil Section Characteristics with Reynolds Number, 
NACA TR 
586, 1937. 
9. At very low values of the Reynolds number, about 150,000, the lift curve again steepens, 
and dCJdcc may then exceed 2dradian (see chapter on small wind tunnels). 
10. Hills, R., "Use of Wind Tunnel Model Data in Aerodynamic Design," J. Roy. Aero. Soc., 
155, 1-26, Jan. 1951. 
11. Loftin, L. K., Jr., and Bursnall, W. J., "The Effects of Variations in Reynolds Number 
between 3.0 X 106 and 25.0 X 106 
upon the Aerodynamic Characteristics of a Number 
of NACA 6-Series Airfoil Sections," NACA TN 1773, Dec. 1948 (also reissued as 
TR 964). 
12. Schlichting, H., Boundary Layer Theory, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1960, pp. 620625. 
13. Squire, H. B., and Young, A. D., "The Calculation of the Profie Drag of Aerofoils," 
ARC R&M 1838, 1938. 
14. Jones, B. M., "Flight Experiments on the Boundary Layer," J. Aeronaut. Sci., 5, 81- 
101, 1938. 
15. Bicknell, J., "Determination of the Profile Drag of an Airplane Wing in Flight at High 
Reynolds Numbers," NACA TR 
667, 1939. 
16. Neal, R. D., "Correlation of Small-Scale and Full-Scale Wind Tunnel Data with Flight 
Test Data on the Lear Jet Model 23," Paper 700237, SAE National Business Aircraft 
Meetings, 1970. 
17. Millikan, C. B., Smith, J. E., and Bell, R. W., "High Speed Testing in the Southern 
California Cooperative Wind Tunnel," J. Aeronaut. Sci., 15, 69-88, Feb. 1948. 
18. Hockman, M. T., and Eisiminger, R. E., "The Correlation of Wind-Tunnel and Flight 
Test Stability and Control Data for an SB2C-1 Airplane," J. Aeronaut. Sci., 15, 5-17, 
Jan. 1948. 
19. Linden, J. E., and Obrimski, E J., "Some Procedure for Use in Performance Prediction 
of Proposed Aircraft Designs," SAE Preprint 650800, Oct. 1965. 
20. McKinney, L. W., and Baals, D. D., Eds., "Wind-Tunnel/Flight Correlation-
1981," 
NASA CP 2225, 1982. 
21. Stalford, H. L., "High-Alpha Aerodynamic Model Identification of T-2C Aircraft Using 
EBM Method," J. Aircraf, 18, 801-809, 1981. 


REFERENCES AND NOTES 
327 
22. Moul, T. M., and Taylor, L. W., Jr., "Determination of an Angle-of-Attack Sensor Correc- 
tion for a Light Airplane," J. Aircraf, 18, 838-843, 1981. 
23. Stengel, R. E, and Nixon, W. B., "Stalling Characteristics of a General Aviation Aircraft," 
J. Aircraft, 
19, 425-437, 1981. 
24. Paterson, J. H., MacWilkinson, D. G., and Blackerby, 
W. T., "A Survey of Drag Prediction 
Techniques Applicable to Subsonic and Transonic Aircraft Design," AGARD CP 124, 
1973. 
25. MacWilkinson, D. G., Blackerby, W. T., and Paterson, J. H., "Correlation of Full Scale 
Drag Prediction with Flight Measurements on the C141A Aircraft-Phase 11, Wind 
Tunnel Test, Analysis, and Prediction Techniques. Vol. I-
Drag Predictions, 
Wind Tunnel 
Data Analysis and Correlation," NASA CR 2333, Feb. 1974. 
26. Rooney, E. C., "Development of Techniques to Measure In-Flight Drag of a U.S. Navy 
Fighter Airplane and Correlation of Flight Measured Drag with Wind Tunnel Data," 
AGARD CP 124, Oct. 1973. 


9 Boundary Corrections I: Basics 
and Two-Dimensional Cases 
The flow conditions in a wind tunnel are quite obviously not completely the same 
as in an unbounded airstream or in "free air" in the case of aircraft or in an 
environment with only one plane boundary, as may be supposed for ground vehicles. 
There is no difference traceable to having the model at rest and the air moving 
relative to the local earth reference. However, the distances of some or all of the 
stream boundaries from the article under test are usually less than the correspondig 
distances for actual operations. This is the most fundamental of the effects that must 
be evaluated. In addition the wind tunnel stream may not have the same distribution 
of flow properties in space and time, even within its more limited extent. A uniform 
stream is the most commonly envisioned operational 
condition that is to be approxi- 
mated by a wind tunnel simulation. Relatively small deviations can have significant 
effects on resulting surface stress distributions and corresponding total forces. An 
example of a nonuniform stream condition is the presence of a longitudinal static 
pressure gradient in the test section with a corresponding variation in the speed of 
flow. Another example is the existence at the lateral boundaries of either solid walls 
plus boundary layers or relatively still air plus shear layers, which do not exist in 
actual operations. 
The material in this and the next two chapters is focused on vehicle-type applica- 
tions. Environmental or wind engineering applications may differ due to the fact 
that substantial spatial and time variations in the flows are intentionally introduced. 
We introduce terminology that has evolved over decades and reflects the effects 
of the finite stream. We endeavor, in subsequent sections, to provide more detailed 
descriptions and models of various effects. The presence of lateral flow boundaries 
a finite distance from the body under investigation produces several effects that 
are interdependent but to a first approximation have been traditionally considered 
separately. We define the following terms: 
Horizontal Buoyancy This refers to a variation of static pressure along the test 
section when no model is present. It is nonzero in many wind tunnels. It 
produces a drag force analogous to the hydrostatic force on objects in a 
stationary fluid in a uniform gravitational field. It may produce a significant 
effect in the thrust direction for some short-section free-jet configurations. 
This should not be confused with the static pressure variation along the test 
section that is induced by the presence of a test article. There is a possible 
interaction of the two gradients in some cases of sufficiently large test articles. 


BOUNDARY CORRECTIONS I: BASICS AND TWO-DIMENSIONAL CASES 
329 
This interaction is the subject of ongoing discourse among practicing profes- 
sionals. This effect may be considered as a nonunifonnity of flow in the 
streamwise direction but is induced by the lateral boundaries. 
Solid Blockage The ratio of the "frontal area" of an article to the stream cross- 
sectional area is effectively zero in most actual operations. In wind tunnel 
tests, this ratio reflects the relative size of the test article and the test section. 
It is usually chosen in the range of 0.01-0.10 with 0.05 being typical. An 
effect of this ratio being finite is that the surface stresses are larger than for 
the corresponding free-air condition in the case of a closed test section and 
smaller for an open jet. The effect is greater at a given value of the ratio for 
the closed test section than for the open jet. This effect is represented by 
considering the "blockage" to produce an effective change in oncoming flow 
speed or dynamic pressure. This representation to a first order assumes no 
change in the distribution of the surface stresses as a result of the finite area 
ratio. This assumption is obviously not valid for "large" 
values of the blockage. 
Wake Blockage This effect is a result of the finite size of a body wake and is 
somewhat similar to solid blockage. It is more complicated because the size 
of the wake is itself a function of the body shape and the ratio of the wake 
area to the tunnel area. The magnitude of the correction for wake blockage 
increases with an increase of wake size, which corresponds to an increase in 
drag. In a closed test section wake blockage increases the measured drag. 
Wake blockage is frequently considered negligible with an open test section, 
since the airstream is then free to expand. Actually it is more free to expand 
than in an infinite stream. 
Streamline Curvature This refers to an alteration to the curvature of the stream- 
lines of the flow about a body in a wind tunnel as 
compared 
to the corresponding 
curvature in an infinite stream. For a wing the moment coefficient, lift, and 
angle of attack are increased in a closed wind tunnel and decreased in an open 
jet. Note that this recognizes an alteration of the pattern of surface stresses 
on a test article associated with the finite distances to boundaries. This effect 
will produce hinge moments that are too large in a closed test section and too 
small in an open one. 
Normal Downwash Change This refers to the component of induced flow in 
the lift direction at the test article. It is changed due to the finite distances to 
the boundaries. A closed jet makes the lift too large and the drag too small 
at a given geometric angle of attack corresponding to a smaller downwash at 
the test article than in an unbounded stream. An open jet has the opposite effect. 
Spanwise Downwash Distortion This refers to an alteration to the local angle 
of attack along the span of a lifting wing. In a closed test section the angles 
of attack near the wingtips of a model with large span are increased, making 
tip stall start at a lower geometric angle of attack. The effect of an open jet 
is the opposite (tip stall begins at a higher geometric angle of attack), and in 
both cases the effect is diminished to the point of negligibility by keeping 
model span less than 0.8 tunnel width, at least for high-aspect-ratio wings. 


330 
BOUNDARY CORRECTIONS I: BASICS AND 
TWO-DIMENSIONAL CASES 
This is fundamentally a three-dimensional effect and will not be present in 
two-dimensional applications. 
Tail Downwash Change This refers to an alteration to the normal downwash 
(and other components of induced flow) behind the wing so that the measured 
tailsetting and static stability require adjustment. In a closed jet the wing wake 
location is higher than in fiee 
air and the model is more stable. The opposite 
is true in an open jet. This stability effect is large. This is fundamentally a 
three-dimensional effect associated with the trailing vortex system. 
Asymmetric Downwash Distortion This refers to an alteration to the normal 
flow about an asymmetrically loaded wing such that the boundary effects 
become asymmetric and the observed rolling and yawing moments require 
adjustment. This is a three-dimensional effect. 
Propeller Induction Attenuation This refers to an alteration to the flow into a 
thrusting propeller such that a given thrust occurs at a speed lower than it 
would in free air. The opposite is true when an open jet is employed. The 
effect is opposite when the propeller is braking. This effect is frequently 
considered negligible when a free jet is employed. 
Fortunately, there are few tests for which a
l
l
 the above corrections must be 
applied. The classical application of all of these effects is in a linear manner. 
They are 
each estimated and the final adjustment is a superposition of the individual 
effects. 
It is important to understand that the effects being considered so far are conse- 
quences of the fact that a wind tunnel test section is finite in size. Other effects 
must also be considered and evaluated. These include flow nonuniformities such 
as flow angularity 
and spatial variations in dynamic pressure. In addition the 
contribu- 
tions to measurements due to tare and interference must be evaluated. All of these 
are treated elsewhere. It is necessary that the influence of those effects has been 
removed insofar as possible or practical before wall effects are considered. 
We consider the basic formulation of treatments of wall effects in this chapter 
and more details with results for two-dimensional cases. Three-dimensional cases, 
which are the majority in practice, are considered in more detail in Chapter 10. 
Some additional applications are considered in Chapter 11. 
9
.
1
 
DESCRIPTIONS OF WIND TUNNEL FLOW 
Flows in Closed and Open Test Sections 
We describe generally occurring features of flow states in closed test sections and 
open jet test sections with streamlined bodies and bluff bodies present. Figure 9.1 
shows sketches of closed test sections with a streamlined and a bluff body. There 
is much less volume of rotational flow created by the streamlined body than the 
bluff body. However, the situations shown always have a clear separation between 
the highly rotational flow originating from the test article's boundary layers and 


9.1 DESCRIPTIONS OF 
WIND TUNNEL FLOW 
331 
onTunnel Surfaces 
Flow ouhr'de of boundary 
layers and 
Wall layer thins wiih favorable gradient 
wake is prach'cally 
potential ilow. 
Ire L 
Lift 
,Wake 
Closed Jet with 
Closed Jet with 
Streamline Body 
FIGURE 9.1 Closed test-section cases. 
wake and the boundary layers on the tunnel surfaces. This ignores the fact that there 
will usually be some support structure that extends from a tunnel surface and also 
has boundary layers and a wake. When test articles are 
mounted on a tunnel surface, 
then there is a direct interaction of the tunnel surface boundary layer and the test 
article boundary layer. 
The sketches actually overemphasize the influence of the bodies by showing the 
bodies and rotational flow regions larger in proportion to the tunnel size than is 
usually the case in practice. 
Figure 9.2 shows sketches of an open jet tunnel with a streamlined and a bluff 
body. Here there is a free shear layer at the boundary of the test-section flow instead 
of a wall boundary layer. This generally results in a higher level of unsteadiness 
than is the case for closed test sections. 
All currently used wall correction methods make use of the existence of the 
essentially inviscid flow region that separates the rotational flow generated along 
the tunnel boundaries and the rotational flow generated by the test article. The 
classical methods ignore the boundary layers and shear layers along the tunnel 
boundaries. In addition, most wall correction methods have been developed using 
the assumption that the test-section length is sufficient so that the entrance and exit 
flows can be considered to be parallel to the test-section boundaries. 
Flowouhide oishear layers and 
on Tunnel Surfaces 
wake Is 
practically 
potential 
flow 
Open Jet with Streamline Body 
Open Jet with Bluff Body 
FIGURE 9.2 
Open jet test-section cases. 


332 
BOUNDARY CORRECTIONS I: BASICS AND TWO-DIMENSIONAL CASES 
- 
Flow outside of boundarylayers and 
wake Is practically 
potential H
o
w
 
Lift 
Wake 
.
V
 
- 
Closed Jet with Streamline Body 
Closed Jet wlth Bluff Body 
FIGURE 9 3  Working models for closed test section. 
Flow Models for Closed and Open Sections 
The working models for developing wall corrections are then as indicated in Figures 
9.3 and 9.4. For the closed test-section case, 
the 
flow is considered 
inviscid throughout 
with the test article and its wake represented by an equivalent body. The tunnel walls 
are parallel and extend to infinity upstream and downstream. For the open test section, 
the flow is considered inviscid throughout and with the test article and its wake repre- 
sented by an equivalent 
body. The 
stream boundariesare 
constant-pressure 
streamlines 
with the pressure equal to the ambient pressure outside the stream. 
Idealized Example 
We show in this section a model of a body plus wake that is constructed by use of 
the classical singularities, doublets, sources, and sinks. The resulting body is an 
idealized version of a circular cylinder with a wake somewhat like that which exists 
at supercritical Reynolds numbers. We anticipate the discussion of the method of 
images in the next section. The equation for the stream function of a doublet aligned 
parallel to the x axis located at (xd, &) with strength 2 n U ~ a ~  
plus a stream with 
speed Uo 
can be written as Equation (9.1). The length scales are normalized to h, 
which we will consider to be half of the tunnel height. The equation for the x 
component of velocity is given by Equation (9.2): 
U 
-- 
- (X - 
xd)' - 
(Z - 
zdl2 
u@' [(x - 
~
d
)
~
 
+ 
(Z - 
~
d
)
~
]
~
 
The equations for the other basic solutions m 
e sirnila 
r and can b 
b
e
 found in 
standard aerodynamic texts. We show here a simple but instructive set of plots. We 
have constructed the streamlines 
for a cylinder with radius equal 0.2 in unconstrained 
flow and in a tunnel with height equal 2.0. The streamline patterns are shown in 
Figures 9.5 and 9.6. We then add a simulated wake by placing a source at the origin 


9.1 DESCRmrIONS OF WIND TUNNEL 
FLOW 
Zero Thdmess Shear Layers Separat ng Tunnel Flow from 
Ou escenl A r are theretore L nes of Connant Pressure 
Lift 
,Wake 
,
"
 
- v  
Open Jet with Streamline Body 
Open Jet with Bluff Body 
FIGURE 9.4 Working models for open test section. 
~ ~- 
0.8 
t 0.8 
C 
6 
0.4 
w 
; 
0,2 
- 
0.0 
m 
2 
0.2 
r 
; 
0-4 
0.6 
0.8 
1 
.o 
1.5 
1 
0.5 
0 
0.5 
1 
1.5 
2 
Distance Along Stream Direction 
FIGURE 9.5 Streamlines for cylinder in free air. 
Dlstance Along Tunnel 
FIGURE 9.6 Streamlines for cylinder constrained by tunnel. 


334 
BOUNDARY CORRECTIONS I: BASICS AND TWO-DIMENSIONAL CASES 
1 
.o 
0.8 
0-6 
C 
6 
0.4 
C 
; 
0.2 
z O.O 
; 
0.2 
$ 0.4 
0.6 
0.8 
1.5 
1 
0.5 
0 
0.S 
1 
1.6 
2 
Distance Along Stream 
FIGURE 9.7 
Streamlines for cylinder plus wake in free air. 
with strength such that the eventual half body will have a half height of 0.1 and 
show the streamlines in Figures 9.7 and 9.8. The differences may not be dramatic 
to the untrained eye, but these are very significant differences to a wind tunnel 
engineer. The size of the blockage shown is beyond the limits used for high- 
accuracy work and has been chosen so that the differences are visible on plots of 
this size. The streamwise velocity increments induced by the constraint of the walls 
for the cylinder, the wake body, and the combination are shown in Figure 9.9. There 
are several things to notice from this figure. First is that the velocity increments 
are quite large relative to the accuracy of measurements that are typically sought 
I 
~ 
I 
1 
-5 
1 
0.6 
0 
0.5 
1 
1.6 
2 
Dlstance Along Tunnel 
FIGURE 9.8 Streamlines for cylinder plus wake constrained by tunnel. 


9.2 MATHEMATICAL MODELS 
335 
FIGURE 
9.9 
Streamwise velocity increments due to tunnel constraint. 
in aerodynamic design work. For the combination above, the velocity increment at 
the centerline is about 5.5%, corresponding to a dynamic pressure increment of 
about 11%. These will be approximately proportional to the blockage value so a 
blockage of 5%, which will be more typical, will produce velocity and dynamic 
pressure 
increments of about 1.3 and 2.6%, respectively. Second, the velocity incre- 
ment due to constraint varies throughout the Nmel volume. The variation at a 
given streamwise station will interpolate between the curves shown for the center- 
line and the wall. Third, the velocity increment at the tunnel center from the simu- 
lated wake is larger in proportion to its size than that of the cylinder itself. This 
indicates a necessity for treating wake effects carefully for cases with substantial 
separated flow. 
9.2 MATHEMATICAL MODELS 
We limit ourselves here to treatment of incompressible models of the flow. The 
fluid equations of motion for this case have been given by Equations (1.41) and 
(1.42). We will use only the steady, inviscid, and irrotational 
approximation for wall 
correction determination here, so the Equation (1.42) becomes simply the Bernoulli 
equation as developed and given by Equation (1.43). We rewrite it here as 


336 
BOUNDARY CORRECTIONS I: BASICS AND TWO-DIMENSIONAL CASES 
We also recall the introduction of a velocity potential + 
in Equation (1.41) and the 
resulting expression of the continuity equation. This produced Laplace's equation: 
The flow in the wind tunnehutside the rotational region enveloping the model 
is well approximated by solutions of this equation with appropriate boundary condi- 
tions on the various surfaces. Laplace's equation is perhaps the most studied partial 
differential equation in the history of applied mathematics. One of the most useful 
treatments continues to be by Kellogg,' who thoroughly develops the fundamentals 
although he focuses on gravitational field and electric field applications. Milne- 
Thomson2 and Lamb3 focus 
completely on fluid dynamic 
applications. 
These classical 
works give treatments for relatively simple geometries. 
The two most extensively applied methods for relatively simple geometries are 
complex variable methods 
for two-dimensional treatments 
and modeling using super- 
positions of singularities to construct flow fields of interest. A special case of the 
latter is the method of images, which is useful when there are planes or other 
surfaces through which there is to be no flow. This can often be obtained by 
positioning singularities in periodic patterns relative to the surfaces. The method of 
images has been extensively applied to wind tunnel wall correction studies. We will 
present some results in the following sections. 
Complex geometries require computationally intensive methods and have been 
treated in detail since the advent of digital computers. Finite difference methods 
along with all of the techniques that have been developed in the voluminous work 
on computational fluid dynamics in the last 30 years can in principle be used to 
solve Laplace's equation. These techniques generally fail to take advantage of the 
known special properties of the solutions of the equation and are more computation- 
ally intensive than necessary. The most effective methods for complex geometries 
are based on superposition of singularities, as was done in the classical work for 
simpler geometries. The use of currently available computers allows models to be 
made up of thousands of singularities. Katz and Plotkin4 
give extensive treatment 
of these methods for various geometries when there is no external boundary. The 
addition of the wind tunnel walls or the edge of the free jet can be treated using 
methods described there. There are several extensively developed "panel codes" 
that have been widely used in the aeronautics community. These include PMARC, 
VSAERO, and PANAIR. 
A few paragraphs above we glibly declared that Laplace's equation "with appro- 
priate boundary conditions" 
describes important regions of flow in the wind tunnel. 
The determination of appropriate boundary conditions is not easy. It is a continuation 
of the problem that has always faced aerodynamicists upon recognizing that the 
Navier-Stokes equations are the equations that it would be most advantageous 
to use 
and solve but also recognizing that obtaining the full solution of the Navier-Stokes 
equations is beyond our resources. We utilize solutions of Laplace's equation as 
approximations to the unavailable solutions to the Navier-Stokes equations. It is 


9.2 MATHEMATICAL MODELS 
337 
known that there are many solutions to Laplace's equation that do not approximate 
real flows. The real flows are presumed to be solutions to the Navier-Stokes equa- 
tions. It is by specifying the boundary conditions that particular 
solutions 
of Laplace's 
equation are selected. The most famous such specification is the Kutta or Kutta- 
Joukowsky condition for airfoils. In our application to wind tunnel wall corrections, 
we must select the region of flow to which Laplace's equation will be considered 
a good model by specifying the boundary of the region and the mathematical 
boundary conditions on all surfaces that enclose the region. 
The same problem has been faced in classical aerodynamics studies. When the 
entire flow is very streamlined and there is very little flow separation, taking the 
region to be the entire volume outside the solid surfaces and applying a boundary 
condition of no flow through the solid surfaces along with auxiliary specifications 
such as the Kutta condition will work quite well. As the regions of separation and 
thick boundary layers increase in volume, the problem becomes more difficult. It 
is necessary to arrive at estimates of "effective" surfaces defining the volumes in 
which Laplace's equation is to be used to model the flows. There are important 
precedents in the developments 
of iterative methods in which potential flow methods 
are used to compute pressure distributions, followed by use of boundary layer codes 
to compute boundary layers, followed by recomputation of the potential flow using 
new surfaces based on the addition of boundary layer displacement thickness to the 
underlying geometric surface, and so on. The problem treatment becomes more 
difficult when there are large regions of separated flow. 
It is necessary to invoke some experimentally based information to assist in 
obtaining the solutions to any aerodynamic problem whether it is in the wind tunnel 
or otherwise. This is true even for the most ambitious of the current efforts to utilize 
large-eddy simulation techniques to reach useful computational solutions of the 
Navier-Stokes equations. In the case of wind tunnel applications, there is the advan- 
tage that there will be experimental data on the specific items under study. The type 
of data available will vary with the objectives of the experiments. Total force 
data will be most common. Flow visualization data, pressure data, and flow field 
measurements are, of course, common. And increasingly pressure measurements on 
the wind tunnel surfaces are being included for the specific purpose of applying 
them to wall correction estimates. In varying ways the experimental measurements 
are applied to determine the region in which Laplace's equation will he expected 
to be a good model for the flow. 
We can identify two aspects to our problem of applying Laplace's equation. First 
we must be able to obtain solutions for given boundary conditions on the bounding 
surfaces of a well-specified 
region. Second we must be able to find effective surfaces 
that bound the region in which Laplace's equation will be considered to be a useful 
model 
of the flow. The 
direct 
application of standard iterative methods using boundary 
- 
layer computations still represents more computational effort than is typically avail- 
able for wind tunnel wall correction determination, as does the a~vlication 
of full- 
- 
& 
blown NavierStokes computations. Fortunately, direct use of experimental data ob- 
tained during the tests provides important assistance in this effort. 


338 
BOUNDARY CORRECTIONS I: BASICS AND TWO-DIMENSIONAL CASES 
Method of Images- 
When there is sufficient symmetry and the detail required is not too great, the 
classical method of images can be applied. This is the way wall corrections have 
been evaluated for decades. We describe some aspects of this method here. 
It is well known that the flow pattern about a wing may be closely simulated 
mathematically by replacing it with a vortex system composed of a lifting line 
vortex and a pair of trailing vortices. For detailed near-flow-field simulation the 
lifting line approximation can be replaced by a vortex lattice. Similarily, a solid 
body may be represented by a source-sink system, and a wake may be represented 
by a source. Thus the entire airplane or component may be simulated by "artificial" 
means to almost any degree of accuracy desired, depending, of course, on the 
complexity of calculations that can be tolerated. Fortunately, a very simple fmt- 
order setup suffices for a rather good approximation. 
Students of fluid theory are well acquainted with the simulation of a boundary 
near a source, sink, doublet, or vortex by the addition of a second source, sink, 
doublet, or vortex "behind" the boundary to be represented. Solid boundaries are 
formed by the addition of an image system that produces a zero streamline 
matching 
the solid boundary. An open boundary requires an image system that produces a 
zero velocity potential line that matches the boundary in question. After the image 
system is established, its effect on the model is the same as that of the boundary 
it represents. 
We may see how to make up an image system by considering the following case 
for a vortex in a closed rectangular tunnel; and we note herewith that it is usually 
necessary to satisfy the conditions only in the plane of the lifting line. A three- 
dimensional image system is necessary to get the boundary-induced upwash aft of 
the wing, the streamline curvature effect, or the corrections for a wing with a lot 
of sweepback. 
Consider a single vortex A that we wish to contain within the solid walls 1 and 
2 (Figure 9.10). To simulate wall 1, we need a vortex B of sign opposite to that of 
A, and for wall 2 a vortex C of the same sign as B. Now, however, vortex B needs 
a vortex B' to balance it from wall 2, and vortex C needs a vortex C' to balance it 
from wall 1, and so on out to infinity with vortices of alternating sign. 
The containment of a wing or vortex pair similarly becomes that shown in Figure 
9.11a for vertical walls and in Figure 9.11b for horizontal walls. 
The image system for a closed rectangular test section thus becomes a doubly 
infinite system of vortices. Figure 9.12 shows the image system needed for a wing 
in a closed rectangular tunnel when the three-dimensional quantities are required. 
We may, through elementary vortex theory and logic, develop the form that 
corrections for boundary-induced upwash will take for an arbitrarily shaped test 
section. The only mathematical tools needed are the expression for the induced 
velocity w due to a vortex of strength r at a distance I: This is for a semi-infinite 
vortex, that is, starting at the lifting line and trailing to infinity in one direction: 


-
 - 
~ -
-
 
~- 
9.2 MATHEMATICAL MODELS 
339 
FIGURE 9.10 Vortex arrangement for simulation of vertical boundaries. 
The relation between lift and circulation for a uniformly loaded wing is 
Combining the two, we get 
Now r represents the vortex spacing in the image system, which we may express 
as some constant times a tunnel dimension, say the tunnel height h, and the model 
wing span may be expressed in terms of the tunnel width B. The induced angle at 
the centerline of the test section is then 


340 
BOUNDARY CORRECXIONS I: BASICS AND TWO-DIMENSIONAL CASES 
FIGURE 9
.
1
1
 Vortex pair arrangement for simulation of (a) vertical boundaries and (b) 
horizontal boundaries. 
for any one image, and, summing the whole field, setting B18~rkb 
= 6, 
and noting 
that hB is the test-section area C, we have 
for the complete system. This equation is in degrees; the subscript W denotes that 
the correction is based on the wing lift. 


9.2 
MATHEMATICAL MODELS 
341 
FIGURE 
9.12 Image system for a closed rectangular test section. 
It develops that 8 is completely determined by the shape of the test section, the 
size of the model relative to the test section, the type of spanwise load distribution 
over the model, and whether or not the model is on the centerline of the test section. 
Equation (9.8) is hence a general form useful for all wings and test section as long 
as the wing is small (less than 0.8B) relative to the test section so that the upwash 
at the tunnel centerline may be taken as the average upwash. 
Since the induced drag coefficient may be written as 
where ai 
is the induced angle, the change in induced drag caused by the boundary- 
induced upwash becomes 
Equation (9.9) is also a general form. The manner in which the downwash affects 
larger models and how it must be handled for the special cases of asymmetrical 
loadings is covered later. 
Panel Methods 
We use the term panel here generically to include all methods in which the solutions 
are developed by using a superposition of singularities or fundamental solutions 
and the boundary conditions are satisfied on a finite number of points on the selected 
surfaces (usually the tunnel walls). An early implementation of this type of method 
was given by J0ppa.S There have been a number of computations over the years 
reporting the use of contemporary design panel codes for configurations in wind 


342 
BOUNDARY CORRECTIONS I: BASICS AND TWO-DIMENSIONAL CASES 
tunnels. Generally; however, these have not found their way into routine use by 
wind tunnel engineers for wall corrections. Their cost in resources has remained 
too high for the additional increments in effectiveness that they promise, and they 
must still be augmented by experimental data in ways that are not standard when 
they are used by the design aerodynarnicists. 
We will present some examples of application of these panel methods in later 
sections. 
Measured Variable Methods 
The use of measured variables to augment purely theoretical approaches has been 
done in several ways and continues to evolve. The preceding treatments involve a 
variety of parameters that must be determined. The usual basis is on geometry plus 
idealized models of the flow. An example is the span of the trailing vortices used 
in the calculation of downwash effects. A closely related assumption is the trajectory 
of the trailing-vortex system. Both of these could in principle be obtained from 
flow measurements and results from the obsenrations could then be used in the flow 
models for wall correction assessment. 
The most important 
methods using measured variables 
are 
represented 
by the work 
of Maskell: Hackett and Wilsden,' and Ashill and Keating.s Maskell's result makes 
use of the measured drag coefficient for improved blockage corrections. Hackett 
and Wilsden introduced the method now known as the "wall signature" 
method, in 
which pressures measured at the walls are used to construct a relatively simple 
singularity set to represent the test article and then calculate the wall effects based 
on that singularity set. The method given by Ashill and Keating is called the two- 
variable method. This method provides a calculation of wall effects without the 
necessity for knowing the geometry of the test article. That this is an area continuing 
to be developed can be seen by reference to recent publications by Hackett9 in which 
there is an improvement of the method of applying Maskell's6 earlier development 
along with a challenge to some aspects of blockage methods included in the classical 
methods described in this book as well as to other publications by Ashill, Jordan, 
and Simmons1" 
as well as Rueger, Crites, and Weirich" and others. 
Pressure Signature or "Haeket-Widen" Method In 1974 Hackett and BolesIz 
showed that tunnel wall static pressures may be used to infer wake geometry and 
hence wake blockage. Hackett and Wilsden13 and Hackett, Wilsden, and Lilley14 
followed in 1975 with an extension involving a row of pressures along the center 
of the tunnel side wall, which gave the axial distributions of both solid and wake 
blockages. These "wall pressure signatures" were analyzed using chart look-up 
methods that give a hands-on feel for the physics involved. In the interests of 
greater 
flexibility (shorter test 
sections, more complex "signatures"), influence matrix 
methods were then introduced.15 This version also included means for estimating 
tunnel-induced upwash. The method applied to a jet in cross-flow has also been re- 
ported.I6 


9.2 MATHEMATICAL MODELS 
343 
Note: 
- 
OS, 0
,
 and -4 
oll hove spon bS. 
Total wall supenelocity 
'signature!' 
I / 
Solid /bubble blockage 
(Due to* 0
.
1
 
Wale blockoge 
contribution (Due to Ow) 
Au 
- 
- 'J* 
I 
A 
FIGURE 9.13 Nomenclature for Hackett's blockage correction. 
The "chart" methodt4 
provides a good illustration of the approach. For a model 
on the tunnel centerline, pressures are measured along the side wall from ahead of 
the model to a point downstream, yielding a pressure distribution similar to that 
shown in Figure 9.13 with the velocity peak just aft of the model. For analysis, the 
profile is divided into a part due to solid and bubble blockage (symmetric) and a 
part due to wake blockage (antisymmetric). The wake blockage source strength Q, 
comes from the wake signature analysis. Initially the wake source is placed at a 
streamwise location X2 coincident with the model midlength. The solid blockage 
parameters, the source-sink strength Q,, and the spacing c, are obtained from a 
chart look-up procedure.l3.l4 
When the wake blockage signature is measured in a 
sufficiently long test section, the velocity ratio goes from zero upstream of the 
model to a constant value downstream determined by the wake size. To achieve 
this, the test-section length should be about 1.5 times its effective diameter with 
the model at 0.5 diameters from the nozzle. For shorter tunnels neither the upstream 
zero value nor the downstream constant value will be reached. However, versions 
of the method15 
are able to handle this situation. 


344 
BOUNDARY CORRECTIONS I: BASICS AND TWO-DIMENSIONAL CASES 
A least-squarescurve 
fit of a parabola is applied to the upper part of the symmetric 
curve. If the pressure peak does not match X2 
assumed initially, the wake is moved 
and another iteration is made. The use of a parabolic fit and forcing the wake source 
to be midway between the solid source-sink pair provide consistency of application. 
Once the wake source and the peak are aligned, parameters defining the symmetric, 
solid blockage curve are used-with charts to obtain the source-sink spacing c, and 
the strength Q,. The three source strengths and their locations are used to build up 
an interference velocity AulU, or blockage "epsilon," 
by adding the three component 
parts on the centerline. Again, a chart is used for these calculations. Charts for a 
rectangular tunnel of W/H 
= 1.43 and a program listing for the method are given 
by Hackett, Wilsden, and Lilley.I4 
As the previously described method was somewhat slow for "on-line," real-time 
calculations, an improved method was developed.15 
Beside the blockage correction 
from the source-sink model, an angle-of-attack correction using vortices was added. 
This method also handles swept wings and jets in a cross-flow and uses a skewed- 
line singularity algorithm for sources, doublets, and horseshoe vortices. The method 
uses influence matrices at user-specified locations for line-source elements and 
horseshoe vortices and uses measured wall conditions to solve for their strengths. 
The source matrices are the sum of two other matrices corresponding to the direct 
influence of the line sources and a matching but opposite sign source situated 
far downstream to satisfy continuity. The side-wall pressures are still used for 
blockage corrections. 
The ceiling and floor pressures at the same longitudinal distance in the tunnel 
are used to obtain the lift interference. The vortex-induced effects include vertical 
velocities at the side walls, which, in extreme high-liftflarge-model cases, will affect 
wall pressures and hence appear to represent a blockage dependent on lift. For this 
reason, the lifting solution is done fust and is available for an optional computation, 
which removes this spurious effect. The corrected side-wall data then reflect the 
true blockage. 
The effects on the measured pressures of model offset from the tunnel center, 
sweep, and angle of attack we discussed. To minimize computer storage and run 
time requirements, the equations for singularity strength are solved for overspecified 
boundary conditions using a least-squares algorithm. This has the additional benefit 
of smoothing the curve fit through the tunnel wall data. These procedures are 
described, as are the equations for the source and vortex strengths. 
The matrix method of calculating the blockage correction is capable of being 
run on a computer in real time. For powered tests it is desirable to run at constant 
values of jet momentum coefficient, or tip speed ratio for rotors. The tunnel dynamic 
pressure with blockage corrections can be determined "on-line" and adjusted to 
- 
obtain constant normalized values. 
The blockage corrections,I4 
together with Glauert's angle-of-attack corrections, 
were applied to four floor-mounted wings. These have ratios of wing area to tunnel 
cross-sectional area from 1.67 to 16.7%. The data agreement was quite good for 
lift and fairly good for induced drag. The same report also shows good correlation 
on sphere drag above and below the critical Reynolds number. The measured pres- 


9.2 MATHEMATICAL MODELS 
345 
sures in the tunnel were predicted and compared to measured results for Reynolds 
numbers above the critical value, and good agreement was achieved past the major 
diameter. Similar correlation of measured pressures corrected for blockage was 
achieved for three geometrically similar idealized automobile models in the 16.25 
X 23.25-ft Lockheed tunnel. 
Poz~orini'~ 
reports on the application of the pressure signature method to extreme 
attitude experiments. 
Two-Variable, or "Ashill-Keating," Method We contemplate here a situation 
like that indicated by Figure 9.3 with a possibly large region of rotational flow fol- 
lowing interaction with the model but with the rotational flow not making contact 
with the walls in the vicinity of the model. We follow the development of Ashill 
and Keating.s 
Take the streamwise direction as the x direction. Then there is a region 
of flow within the tunnel for which the perturbation potential + 
defined by the relation 
satisfies Laplace's equation. Here, U
,
 
is the stream speed in the tunnel far upstream 
of the model and @ is the total velocity potential. The region of applicability is 
bounded by a surface, S,, 
that just encloses the rotational region of flow surrounding 
the model and trailing downstream 
and a second surface, S2, 
that essentially 
coincides 
with the tunnel walls for a solid-wall wind tunnel. Let v represent the volume 
bounded by S, and S2. 
Application of Green's identity18 
shows that the perturbation 
potential within v is expressible as 
The unit normal is taken positive into the region v. If the surfaces SI 
and S2 
were 
given geometric 
surfaces, panel method codes could be used to calculate the potential 
throughout the region, v, and the flow field. For a solid-wall wind tunnel we do 
know the surface Sz 
except for the perturbation due to boundary layers, which we 
will neglect here. We are particularly interested in cases for which the surfaces S, 
is not known due to significant flow separation and the fact that the wake would 
in any case be convected in an unknown manner. Nevertheless, suppose we did 
know the surface S
,
.
 
In that case, Equation (9.11) with the integral extending only 
over the surface S, 
would define the flow field external to the surface S, in the 
absence of the tunnel walls. This is referred to as the "unconstrained" flow and is 
indicated by the equation 


346 
BOUNDARY CORRECTIONS I: BASICS AND TWO-DIMENSIONAL CASES 
Comparing these two equations and defining A+ = + - 
+u provides 
as the potential increment due to the presence of the tunnel walls with two important 
caveats. These are that the surface S1 
is the same shape with and without the walls 
and that the distribution of singularities on S1 representing the flows in the two 
cases are the same. Practice has shown that the method works quite well even when 
at least one of these conditions is not well approximated. On a solid wall the first 
term in the integrand of Equation (9.13) is zero, so the resulting equation is 
This equation indicates that the perturbation potential is a function of quantities 
of the tunnel wall. These quantities can be inferred from pressure measurements on 
the wall, and the equation can then be used to calculate the distribution of the 
velocity induced by the presence of the wall throughout the regions of interest. 
Practice has shown that on the order of 100-200 wall pressures in a typical low- 
speed wind tunnel can give good results for this method. Its great advantage is 
that no mathematical model of the test article need be created. The wall pressure 
measurements are sufficient. There continues to be an active development of 
these methods. 
9 3  RELATEDDEVELOPMENTS 
We have focused entirely on low-speed applications using the definition of suffi- 
ciently low Mach number so that compressibility is not a substantial influence. 
However, there has been a large body of work on wind tunnel wall effects catalyzed 
by the severe problems encountered in the conduct of experiments in the transonic- 
speed range. This work has produced both adaptive-wall wind tunnels and porous 
or slotted-wall wind tunnels along with extensive analysis aimed at determining 
how to configure variable-geometry walls for best advantage and how to assess 
residual interferences from partially open or not completely adapted walls. The 
analyses start from considerations very like those introduced in the preceding sec- 
tions. Useful summaries and references to the literature are given by Wolf'9 and by 
Lewis and GoodyerJO 
A considerable effort at collecting material defining the current state of the art 
in the field has gone into the new AGARDograph 336.21 
Both low-speed and 
transonic developments are included in its scope. 


~~ 
~ 
~ 
9.3 RELATED DEVELOPMENTS 
347 
Minimum- or Zero-Correction lhnnels 
There are three approaches to achieve either zero or small wall corrections for larger 
or V/STOL models with their high lifts. These are an active-wall tunnel where 
blowing and suction through porous tunnel walls is used, an adaptive-wall tunnel 
where the solid tunnel walls are deflected, and ventilated or slotted tunnels. In the 
first two schemes the purpose is to cause the tunnel walls to form a streamline at 
the walls that has the same shape at the walls as would occur in free air. Similar 
concepts have been studied and applied for automotive testing with the purpose of 
reducing the blockage effect to allow the testing of large models in a given size 
tunnel. The active-wall tunnel will be discussed first. 
After demonstrating that the tunnel walls could be represented by vortex lattices 
(see the discussion of Joppa's vortex-lattice method in Section 10.8), 
Bernstein and 
Joppa carried this work forward to the concept of a tunnel using active walls to 
reduce the wall effects for STOL vehicles22 
using the basic assumption that the 
tunnel walls are in the far flow field and thus potential flow will give an accurate 
description of the model's flow. Note that this is the assumption underlying all of 
the methods of computing wall corrections. Since the detailed flow at the model is 
not required, the model can be represented by a simple horseshoe vortex. Then, 
near the walls a control surface is constructed. As solutions to potential 
flow problems 
are unique, and if at all points on the control surface the flow is identical to free 
air, then the model will be in free air. Since the control surface represents free air, 
it can be replaced with a stream tube, and therefore only the normal velocity to the 
control surface needs to be controlled and made equal to zero. The tunnel operates 
in the following manner: 
With the model at some attitude and tunnel velocity the model lift is measured. 
Then, with the simple flow model, the flow conditions at the wall are calculated. 
This calculated flow is used to control flow into or out of the tunnel, which then 
changes the model lift. The new lift is measured and the process repeated until the 
walls (control surface) coincide with the free air at the tunnel walls for the measured 
lift. In an ideal case where injection is continuously distributed, both the mass 
flow and momentum across the control surface will be matched, yielding a perfect 
simulation. For a practicable application the flow injection cannot be controlled to 
yield a continuous distribution. For a given wall porosity a large number of small 
jets were used to match the mass flow and momentum. But both mass flow and 
momentum could not be simultaneously matched. 
To prove this concept, tests were made with a two-dimensional wing. Free-air 
conditions were assumed to be met when the tunnel height was 12 times the wing 
chord. The active-wall tunnel used a tunnel height of twice the chord. This was 
done by the use of inserts that extended 4.5 chord lengths ahead of and behind the 
model and contained 24 plenums to control the flow through the ceiling and floor. 
Tests were made with both 5 and 31% porosity and using injection rates from 
matching mass flow to matching momentum. 
Two-dimensional testing with large wing chords to tunnel heights results in the 
model acting like one with increased camber (see the discussion of streamline 


348 
BOUNDARY CORRECTIONS I: BASICS AND TWO-DIMENSIONAL CASES 
curvature later in this chapter). This increase in camber increases with angle of 
attack and results in a steeper lift curve slope that yields a higher lift coefficient 
for a given angle of attack. The active walls will reduce lift at a fixed angle of attack. 
With these data, Joppa shows that matching mass with a large momentum mis- 
match overcorrects the data, and for momentum match with mass mismatch the 
data are undercorrected. This occurred for both porosities but with a much closer 
match to the free-air curve for 31% porosity when compared to the 5% porosity. 
The experiments by Joppa demonstrate that the active-wall concept works in both 
theory and practice if both mass flow and momentum can be matched and that only 
the flow normal to the tunnel walls need be controlled using the model's measured lift. 
The second approach is the adaptive wall, in which the contour of the walls is 
made to conform to a free-airstream tube. For a two-dimensional airfoil the tunnel 
has a flexible ceiling and floor. With the model installed the wall pressures are 
measured and compared with a calculated pressure distribution at the walls for an 
unlimited flow field external to the tunnel. The wall shape is altered until the two 
pressure fields agree within limits. If the agreement is perfect, then the tunnel flow 
is the same as free air. There are two approaches to calculating the unlimited flow 
field. One used by GanzeP uses wall pressures and wall contour to calculate the 
unlimited flow field. This method requires no knowledge of the model and its local 
flow field. The second methodz4 uses a doublet to represent the model. 
For two-dimensional wings both GanzeP and Go~dye$~ 
have shown that the 
method works in general, although there are some difficulties when either shocks 
or large pressure gradients are present. Goodyer also demonstrated that the method 
works for the blockage of a nonlifting body (cylinder) up to a blockage ratio 
of 29.27%. 
Reference to more recent work has already been given. 
A small tunnel with variable contour side walls and ceiling and a fixed floor 
was used by Whitfield et aLZ6 
to investigate the blockage for automobile tests. As 
the tunnel floor represents the road, it was kept fixed. There were three flexible 
strips in the walls and six in the ceiling. These strips slide on fixed wiper plates 
that extended into the tunnel when the strips deflected away from the model. Three 
similar representative models of automobiles were used to produce blockage ratios 
of 10, 20, and 30%, and tests were made at 0' and 10" yaw. Static pressures were 
measured on the model and the walls and ceilings. The model pressures for the 
three blockage ratios agreed for the contoured walls, and their levels were different 
than straightwalls for 10 and 20% blockage. The wipers did not appear to have any 
effect on the data, but this may not be true for a lifting model with a deflected wake. 
Searsz7 has proposed an adaptive-wall tunnel that prevents the wake of a V/STOL 
- 
~ 
model from impinging on the tunnel walls. 
Slotted Tunnels 
In transonic testing slotted or porous test-section walls with a surrounding plenum 
have long been used to prevent the test section from choking at high Mach numbers. 
There also have been several low-speed tunnels built for V/STOL testing that have 


9.4 BODIES SPANNING THE 
TUNNEL 
349 
slotted walls. This results in mixed tunnel boundary, part solid and part open. The 
mixed-wall boundary conditions have made it difficult to determine the proper wall 
corrections for this type of test section. Work continues on two and three dimensions 
for both blockage and deflected wakes. 
It might be well to review the potential theory methods of determining wall and 
blockage factors for corrections. These are 
1. the image method, 
2. panel methods, 
3. the wall perturbation method, and 
4. methods using measured wall pressures or other variables. 
For slotted- or porous-wall tunnels the image method is not applicable since the 
walls are no longer planes or surfaces of symmetry. The image system has been 
used for tunnels that have either an open or a closed test section. Vortex-lattice 
methods are used for closed test-sections. For slotted tunnels, a vortex lattice is 
used for the solid portion of the walls and source panels for the open portion. Inflow 
or outflow from the plenum determines the sign. Linear small-perturbation theory 
was used by Ganzer 
and IgetaZ4 
for the adaptive-wall tunnel. The wall static pressures 
are used in the adaptive-wall methods also, as well as for blockage corrections with 
fixed solid walls. 
Based on the reversal of sign of the wall correction factor between open and 
closed test sections, it has been reasoned that a ventilated test section could reduce 
both the magnitude and inhomogeneity of the wall corrections for large models and 
high lift coefficients. 
There is a large amount of work using different approaches for low-speed and 
transonic tunnels in attempting to calculate wall corrections for slotted tunnels. The 
basic problem is in predicting how the tunnel air on the suction side of the model 
flows into and out of the plenum through longitudinal slots or porous walls. But at 
the time this edition was written there is still no completely accepted methodology 
for correcting force and moment coefficients 
for lifting models in this type of tunnel. 
It may well be that the problem is to match both the mass flow and momentum 
through the walls simultaneously, as noted by Bemstein and J~ppa.'~ 
The use of slotted walls and ceiling with a solid floor for automobiles has also 
been inve~tigated.~~ 
Again, the purpose is to increase the allowable blockage ratio. 
In this work the model was at zero yaw and its location within a test section, equal 
to twice the automobile length, had to be empirically determined. The reentry of 
plenum air into the diffuser had to be carefully controlled. The slotted tunnel was 
able to test up to a 21.4% blockage ratio. 
9.4 BODIES SPANNING THE TUNNEL 
In order to study effects primarily concerned with airfoils sections, it is customary 
to build models of constant chord that completely span the test section from wall 


350 
BOUNDARY CORRECTIONS I: BASICS AND TWO-DIMENSIONAL CASES 
to wall or floor to ceiling. The trailing vortices are then practically eliminated, and 
the image system for a small wing consists of a vertical row of vortices (having 
alternately plus and minus signs) above and below the model. Usually, however, 
when two-dimensional tests are made, the models are made of large chord to 
obtain 
the highest Reynolds number possible, and the wing must be represented by a 
distribution of vortices instead of a single one. The effect of the floor and ceiling 
of the tunnel is to restrain the naturally free air curvature of the flow so that the 
model acts like one with extra camber. 
The effects of the walls on the model thickness and wake are subject to solid 
and wake blockage, as well as buoyancy if the tunnel has a longitudinal static 
pressure gradient. These effects will be considered separately. 
The wall corrections for two-dimensional testing have been discussed by Allen 
and Vin~enti.~~ 
We generally follow their treatment. Since the trailing vortices that 
escape in the boundary layer are quite weak, no downwash corrections are needed. 
Often the end plates in the wall are equipped with various schemes to remove 
or thin the boundary layer and to avoid separation on the side walls for models 
with high-lift flaps. Terminating the flaps short of the wall will produce a pair of 
shed vortices and destroys the concept of a two-dimensional wing with a uniform 
span load. 
Buoyancy 
Almost all wind tunnels with closed throats have a variation in static pressure along 
the axis of the test section resulting from the thickening of the boundary layer as 
it progresses toward the exit cone and to the resultant effective diminution of the 
jet area. Some tunnels have slightIy expanding test sections to minimize this effect. 
It follows that the pressure is usually progressively more negative as the exit cone 
is approached, 
and there 
is hence 
a tendency for the model 
to be 
"drawn" 
downstream. 
Glauert30 
found that the magnitude of the gradient may be expressed as a nondi- 
mensional factor k defined by 
where I is jet length (ft), p is pressure (lb/ft2), and B is jet width (ft). An ideal tool 
for this measurement is a long static tube. The factor k has been observed in the 
range 0.016-0.040 for a closed square jet of width B but should be experimentally 
measured for a given tunnel. 
The amount of "horizontal buoyancy" 
is usually insignificant for wings, but for 
fuselages and nacelles it is larger and becomes important. For large torpedolike 
bodies, it can be of the order of the minimum drag in some tunnels. 
Corrections may be calculated as follows. Suppose that the static pressure varia- 
tion along a jet is shown in Figure 9.14 and that the model to be tested has the 
cross-sectional area S, as shown in Figure 9.15. It will be seen that the variation of 
static pressure from, say, station 2 to station 3 is p, - 
p, and that this pressure 


 
9.4 BODIES SPANNING THE TUNNEL 
351 
Distance from model leading edge, feet 
FIGURE 9.14 Static pressure gradient. 
differential acts on the average area ;
(
s
2
 
+ S3). 
The resulting force for that segment 
of the fuselage is therefore 
m~ 
= ( ~ 2  
- 
~ 3 ) k s z  
+ &
)
I
 
The expression for the total buoyancy drag is therefore given by 
where 
This equation can be evaluated by plotting local static,pessure against body 
Cross-section area 
FIGURE 9.15 Cross-sectional variation along streamwise direction. 


352 
BOUNDARY CORRECTIONS I: BASICS AND TWO-DIMENSIONAL CASES 
section area, the buoyancy then becoming the area under the curve, or by plotting 
the local static pressure coefficient against body section area divided by wing area 
to get the buoyancy drag coefficient directly. 
For the case where the longitudinal static pressure gradient is a constant, that is, 
p(x) is a straight line, the equation becomes 
-- 
1 
DB = 
plJ: S(X) 
d
.
 
= 
p1 
X Val 
(9.17) 
where S(x) is the fuselage cross-sectional area at station x, x is the distance from 
the fuselage nose and p' is the slope of the longitudinal static pressure curve. 
The existence of a falling static pressure curve implies that the test section is 
getting effectively smaller; in other words, the streamlines are being squeezed by 
the contracting tube. Adding the squeezing effect to the pressure-gradient effect, 
Glauert3' found that the total drag increment for a constant gradient (for a two- 
dimensional body) is 
where t is body thickness and A
,
 is the body shape factor from Figure 9.16. 
0 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
1
0
 
Fineness ratio, tk 
FIGURE 9.16 Shape factors for selected forms. 


9.4 BODIES SPANNING THE 
TUNNEL 
0.05 
0.1 
0.15 
0.2 
0.25 
Thickness Ratio, Vc 
FIGURE 9.17 Values for A for several airfoil families. 
Allen and Vin~enti'~ 
replace h2t2 by 4~3, 
where A is defined by Equation (9.18) 
and the drag from buoyancy is given by Equation (9.19): 
Here h is tunnel height, c the model chord, and w 
= (7~~/48)(clh)~. 
The terms x and y are the airfoil coordinates, c its chord, and P(x1c) its no- 
camber, symmetrical, pressure distribution. 
Values of A for a number of airfoils are shown in Figure 9.17; more are given 
by Allen and Vin~enti'~ 
or by direct integration of the above equation. Abbott, Von 
Doenhoff, and Strivers" may be consulted if the integration is used. Application of 
the buoyancy correction is illustrated in Example 6.1. 
Solid Blockage 
The presence of the tunnel walls confining the flow around a model in the test 
section reduces the area through which the air must flow as compared to free-air 


354 
BOUNDARY CORRECTIONS I: BASICS AND TWO-DIMENSIONAL CASES 
conditions and hence, by continuity and Bernoulli's equation, increases the velocity 
of the air as it flows in the vicinity of the model. This increase of velocity, which 
is approximated as constant over the model for customary model sizes, is called 
solid blockage. Its effect is a function of model thickness, thickness distribution, 
and model size and is independent of the camber. The solid-blockage velocity 
increment at the model is mnch less (about one-fourth) than the increment one 
obtains from the direct area reduction, since it is the streamlines far away from the 
model that are most displaced. The average velocity in the lateral plane of the model 
is proportionately increased. 
To understand the mathematical approach, consider solid blockage for a right 
circular cylinder in a two-dimensional tunnel. The cylinder, which may be simulated 
by a doublet of strength p = 2aVa2, 
where a is cylinder radius, is "contained by 
an infinite vertical series of doublets of the same strength as the one simulating the 
model. Pope34 
(pp. 46,73) or Katz and Plotkin4 
may be consulted. The axial velocity 
due to the first doublet is 
so that 
where V, is uncorrected velocity. 
Since the velocity produced by a doublet varies inversely with the square of the 
distance from the doublet, the two-sided infinite series may be summed as 
It is seen that a large Zft-diameter cylinder in a tunnel 10 ft high would act as 
though the clear jet speed were increased by 3.3%. 
The preceding development was anticipated by our presentation of an idealized 
example. See Figures 9.5-9.9. 
Now, the blockage due to a given airfoil of thickness t may be represented as 
that due to an "equivalent" 
cylinder of diameter 6, 
and with this approach the 
solid blockage for any two-dimensional body may be found from simple doublet 
summation. Glauert3' wrote the solid-blockage velocity increment as 


9.4 BODIES SPANNING THE TUNNEL 
355 
Values of A, may be found in Figure 9.16. For an open jet the constant becomes 
-0.411. 
Allen and Vincenti3' rewrite Equation (9.20) by introducing a as in Equation 
(9.19), and A = 4A2t2/c2. 
Their result is then 
where A and a have the same values as in Equation (9.19). The manner of using 
this increment will be held until a later time. 
A simpler form for the solid-blockage correction for two-dimensional tunnels 
has been given by 
It has the merit of showing the parameters upon which 
the correction depends a little more clearly than (9.21). Thom's solid-blockage 
correction is 
~ s b  
= K,(model volume) 
cn 
where K, equals 0.74 for a wing spanning the tunnel breadth and 0.52 for one 
spanning the tunnel height in the case of 7 X 10-type tunnels. (A good approximation 
for airfoil model volume is 0.7 X model thickness X model chord X model span.) 
Klunker and Harde136 give corrections for very large models. 
The term C above is the tunnel test-section area, which, if a little greater accuracy 
is desired, may be properly taken as the geometric area less the boundary layer 
displacement thickness taken around the perimeter. Usually, the approximation that 
the displacement thickness is one-sixth of the boundary layer thickness works well, 
since it is inevitable that the boundary layer is turbulent. (For the laminar case, as 
a matter of interest, one-third would be a good approximation for the displacement 
thickness.) It is not possible to give an approximation 
for the displacement thickness 
in a wind tunnel, since it varies with roughness, cracks, leaks, Reynolds number, 
and Mach number. Thus, the thickness will have to be measured using a boundruy 
layer mouse, hot wire, total probe, and the like. 
The boundary layer displacement thickness, when it is desired, may be calcu- 
lated from 
where u is the local velocity in the boundary layer at a height y above the surface, 
Y is the boundary layer thickness, and Vo 
is the free-stream velocity. 
Several wind tunnels of the 7 X 10 ft general size seem to have boundary layer 
1 3 .  
displacement thicknesses near the center of the test section of about T-;i in. 


356 
BOUNDARY 
CORRECTIONS I: BASICS AND TWO-DIMENSIONAL CASES 
FIGURE 9
.
1
8
 Schematic of blockage conditions. 
The above method has the advantage that it can be applied with very little 
computational effort. While it makes the tunnel walls streamlines, it does not accu- 
rately make the model surface a streamline. This can be achieved with greater 
accuracy by using a panel code. This option is becoming easier and easier to 
implement as routinely available computer power increases. 
Wake Blockage 
Any real body without suction-type boundary layer control will generate a wake 
that will have a mean velocity lower than the free stream. According to the law of 
continuity, the velocity outside the wake in a closed tunnel must be higher than the 
free stream in order that a constant volume of fluid may pass through each cross 
section (Figure 9.18). The higher velocity in the main stream has, by Bernoulli's 
principle, a lowered pressure, and this lowered pressure, arising as the boundary 
layer (which later becomes the wake) grows on the model, puts the model in a 
pressure gradient, and results in a velocity increment at the model. 
To compute this wake effect, we must first mathematically simulate the wake 
and the tunnel boundaries. The wake simulation is fairly simple. In the two- 
dimensional case a line source at the wing trailing edge emitting, say, "blue" 
fluid will result in a "blue" 
region similar to a wake. This is the reason we introduced 
a "wake body" in our earlier idealized example. Since the only drag existent is 
represented by this wake, the proper quantity Q to be emitted may be determined by 


9
.
4
 BODIES SPANNING THE TUNNEL 
357 
It is said that in order to preserve continuity, a sink of the same absolute strength 
should be added far downstream. A better reason to add the sink seems to be that 
it is required in order that the mathematical model be consistent with an unchanged 
approach velocity in the wind tunnel. 
The simulated wake may be contained with the floor and ceiling remaining 
streamlines by providing an infinite vertical row of source-sink combinations ac- 
cording to the image system concept, as discussed earlier. The image sources produce 
no axial velocity at the model, but the image sinks will induce a horizontal velocity 
in the amount 
where h is the spacing between sources. 
The factor arises since half of the sink effect will be upstream and the other 
half downstream. Thus, an incremental velocity is produced at the model by the 
walls that should be added to the tunnel-clear results to allow for "wake blockage." 
A useful form of the above statement is 
where 
Thorn's pap& yields the same relation for two-dimensional wake blockage. 
Maskel13' has examined the effect of the flow outside the wake and how its 
higher speed results in a reduced pressure over the rearward portion of the model. 
For the two-dimensional case this equals the wake image effect, and he suggests 
that the correction be 
We see here the direct introduction of a "measured variable," the uncorrected drag 
coefficient cdU. 
The wake gradient effect, from Allen and Vincenti?' is 
and is usually quite small. 
Wake blockage may be neglected for the rare case of a two-dimensional test 
section with open top and bottom. Upon evaluation it would be opposite in sign to 


358 
BOUNDARY CORRECTIONS I: BASICS AND WO-DIMENSIONAL CASES 
the correction for closed sections. Also, recent work by Mercker and Wieder~nan~~ 
stimulated by ground vehicle applications has shown that the length of open test 
sections may become important and may introduce corrections of significance that 
are not indicated by the model of an infinite-length open jet section. 
Streamline Curvature 
The presence of ceiling and floor prevents the normal curvature of the free air that 
occurs about any lifting body, and-
relative to the straightened flow-
the body 
appears to have more camber (around 1% 
for customary sizes) than it actually has. 
Accordingly, the airfoil in a closed wind tunnel has more lift and moment about 
the quarter 
at a given angle of attack than it would in free air, and the angle 
of attack is too large as well. This effect is not limited to cambered airfoils, since, 
using the vortex analogy, any lifting body produces a general curvature in the air- 
stream. 
We may gain an insight into the streamline curvature effect, and calculate values 
as well, by assuming that the airfoil in question is small and may be approximated 
by a single vortex at its quarter-chord point. The image system necessary to contain 
this vortex between floor and ceiling consists of a vertical row of vortices above 
and below the real vortex. The image system extends to infinity both above and 
below and has alternating signs. Let us start by considering the first image pair 
as shown in Figure 9.19. It is apparent that they induce no horizontal velocity since 
------------------. 
FIGURE 9.19 First pair of image vortices for a lifting surface. 


9.4 BODIES SPANNING THE TUNNEL 
359 
the horizontal components cancel, but, as will also he seen, the vertical components 
add. 
From simple vortex theory, the vertical velocity at a distance x from the lifting 
line will be 
Substitution of reasonable values for x and h into the above equation reveals that 
the boundary-induced upwash angle varies almost linearly along the chord, and 
hence the stream curvature is essentially circular. 
The chordwise load for an airfoil with circular camber may be considered to be 
a flat plate loading plus an elliptically shaped loading. (See p. 110 of Pope34.) 
The 
magnitude of the flat plate load is determined from the product of the slope of the 
lift curve (2drad) and the boundary-induced increase in the angle of the tangent 
at the half-chord point because for circular camber the curve at this point is parallel 
to the line connecting the ends of the camberline. The load is properly computed 
- 
as an angle-of-attack correction. 
The elliptical loading is determined by the product of the slope of the lift curve 
and the angular difference between the zero-lift line (i.e., the slope of the curve at 
the three-quarter chord point) and the chord line (the angle at the half chord). The lift, 
pitching moment, and hinge moment corrections are due to this elliptic 
component of 
the load. 
Considering the flat-plate loading first, we find that the upwash induced at the 
half chord by the two images closest to the real airfoil is 
Since r = cqVI2, the angular col~ection 
needed for the nearest images becomes 
Assuming that 
is small compared to h2, and again using 
we get 


360 
BOUNDARY CORRECTIONS 1: BASICS AND TWO-DIMENSIONAL CASES 
The second pair-of vortices being twice as far away will be roughly one-fourth 
as effective, and the third pair one-ninth, so that for the images above and below 
the real wing, we have 
since the alternating series shown above equals 
when summed to infinity. The 
additive lift correction is 
and the additive moment correction is 
Allen and VincenP spread the vorticity out along the airfoil chord instead of 
concentrating it at the quarter chord. The lift and moment values of the simple 
analysis remain the same, but the angle-of-attack correction becomes 
If the chord is kept less than 0.7 tunnel height (and it usually is), wall effects 
on the distribution of lift may be neglected. 
Since there is no drag in theoretical two-dimensional flow, there is no streamline 
curvature correction for drag. 
Summary: Two-Dimensional Corrections 
The complete low-speed wall effects for two-dimensional wind tunnel testing are 
summarized here for convenience. The data with the subscript u are uncorrected 
data based on clear stream q, with the exception of drag, which must have the 
buoyancy due to a longitudinal static pressure gradient removed before final cor- 
rection. 
Velocity [from (9.21) and (9.23)] is given as 
where E = qb 
+ curb. 


9.4 BODIES SPANNING THE TUNNEL 
361 
Dynamic pressure [from expanding (9.28) and dropping higher order terms] is 
4 = %(I + 2 ~ )  
(9.29) 
The Reynolds number [from (9.28)] is 
R = R,(1 + E
)
 
(9.30) 
For a, 
CI, and c , ~  
[from (9.25)-(9.27)] we have 
4 
For cd0 
(from the dynamic pressure effect plus the wake gradient term) we get 
Cd0 = cdou(l - 
3~sb 
- 
%
b
)
 
(9.34) 
For the above, 
The case of the free two-dimensional jet (floor and ceiling off but wingtip walls 
in place) requires an additional factor that accounts for the downward deflection of 
the airstream as follows (both flow curvature and downwash 
deflection are included): 
These values should be added to the observed data. 
It is noted that a drag correction is present here 
and further 
that these corrections 
are 
extremely large. Since thejet is free to 
expand, blockage 
corrections are not necessary. 
The case where a wing completely spans a free jet without lateral restraining wall 
is not of much value in practice. Such a setup is rarely used except in small tunnels for 
preliminary tests. The spillage around the wingtip makes the wing less effective, so 
that the coefficients 
as obtained 
should he increased. In this case the two-dimensional 


362 
BOUNDARY CORRECTIONS I: BASICS AND TWO-DIMENSIONAL CASES 
airfoil 
is 
in reality avery low aspect ratio wing. One test 
(unpublished) 
indicates 
that 
for 
clh = 
0.2 the measured lift was 18% lower than the expected two-dimensional values. 
Example 9
.
1
 Find the corrected data for the following two-dimensional test: model 
65-209 
airfoil; test speed 100 mph; test section 2 X 7 ft; model chord 2.5 ft, standard 
sealevel air, 
a
.
 = 
4.0"; lift 61.30 lb; drag 7.54 ib; moment about quarter chord -7.98 
ft-lb; 
tunnel longitudinal 
static 
pressuregradient 
-0.02 lb/ft2/ft. 
Neglect 
area reduction 
by boundary layer. 
From Figure 9.17, A = 0.163, and from (9.19) and following, a 
= 0.0262 and 
the buoyancy is 
The uncorrected coefficients are 
The corrected coefficients are 
Experimental Verification, Ro-Dimensional Corrections 
By testing models of several sizes at the same Reynolds number, data were obtained 
that have yielded an excellent check on the wall corrections presented. These, from 
Allen and Vin~enti,'~ 
are shown in Figure 9.20 uncorrected and in Figure 9.21 
corrected. It is seen that the method given brings the data into agreement. 


9.4 BODIES SPANNING THE TUNNEL 
363 
FIGURE 9.20 Lift characteristics for NACA 0012 airfoil section uncorrected for tunnel- 
wall interference. 
-5 
0 
5 
10 
15 
a 
FIGURE 9.21 Data of Figure 9.19 corrected for tunnel-wall interference. 


364 
BOUNDARY CORRECTIONS I: BASICS AND TWO-DIMENSIONAL CASES 
REFERENCES AND NOTES 
1. Kellogg, 0. 
D., Foundations of Potential Theory, Dover Publications, New York, 1953. 
2. Milne-Thomson, L. M., Theoretical Hydrodynamics, Dover Publications, New York, 
1996 (first edition published by Macrnillan & Co., 1938). 
3. Lamb, H., Hydrodynamics, 6tKed., Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1932 (first 
edition published 1879). 
4. Katz, J., and Plotkin, A,, Low SpeedAerodynamics, from Wing Theory to Panel Methods, 
McGraw-Hill, New York, 1991. 
5. Joppa, R. G., "Wind Tunnel Interference Factors for High-Lift Wings in Closed Wind 
Tunnels," NASA CR 2191, 1973. 
6. Maskell, E. C., "
A Theory of the Blockage Effects on Bluff Bodies and Stalled Wings 
in a Closed 
Tunnel," ARC R&M 3400, 1965. 
7. Hackett, J. E., and Wilsden, D. J., "Determination of Low Speed Wake Blockage from 
Wall Static Pressure Measurements," 
AGARD CP 174, Paper 23, Oct. 1975. 
8. Ashill, P
.
 R., and Keating, R. E 
A., "Calculation of Tunnel Wall Interference from Wall 
Pressure Measurements," Aeronaut. J., 
9 5  
36-52, Jan. 1988. 
9. Hackett, J. E., "Tunnel Induced Gradients and Their Effect on Drag," 
AZAA J., 34(12), 
1172-1183, 1996. 
10. Ashill, P. R., Jordan, R., and Simmons, M. J., "Recent Experience in the Prediction and 
Assessment of Wind Tunnel Wall Interference," Paper 21, in Proceedings Wind Tunnels 
and Wind Tunnel Test Techniques, Royal Aeronautical Society, Cambridge, United King- 
dom, 1997. 
11. Ruerer, M., Crites, R., and Weirich, R., "Comparison of Conventional and Emerging 
("Measured Variable") Wall Correction Techniques for Tactical Aircraft in Subsonic 
Wind Tunnels," 
AIAA Paper 95-0108, presented at the Thirty-Third Aerospace Sciences 
Meeting and Exhibit, Reno, NV, Jan. 1995. 
12. Hackett, J. E., and Boles, R. A,, "Highlight Testing in Closed Wind Tunnels," J. Aircraf, 
12, 1976 (see also AIAA Paper 74-641, July 1974). 
13. Hackett, J. E., and Wilsden, D. J., ''Determination of Low Speed Wake Blockage Correc- 
tions via Tunnel Wall Static Pressure Measurements," AGARD CP 174, Paper 23, 
Oct. 1975. 
14. Hackett, J. E., Wilsden, D. J., and Liley, D. E., "Estimation of Tunnel Blockage from 
Wall Pressure Signatures: A Review and Data Correlation," NASA CR 152,241, Mar. 
1979. 
15. Hackett, J. E., Sampath, 
S., andPhillips, C. G., "Determination 
of WindTunnel Constraints 
by a Unified Wall Pressure Signature Method. Part I: Applications to Winged Configura- 
tions," NASA CR 166,186, June 1981. 
16. Hacken, J. E., Sampath, S., Phillips, C. G., and White, R. B., "Determination of Wind 
Tunnel Constraint Effects by a Unified Wall Pressure Signature Method. Part I
I
:
 Applica- 
tion to Jet-in-Crossflow Cases," NASA CR 166,187, Nov. 1981. 
17. Pozzorini, R., 'Wind Tunnel Corrections 
by the Unified Hackett Method: Selected Results 
for Extreme Attitude Model Tests," Paper 16, in Proceedings of Wind Tunnels and 
Wind Tunnel Test Techniques, Royal Aeronautical Society, Cambridge, United Kingdom 
1997. 


REFERENCES AND NOTES 
365 
18. Katz, J., and Plotkin, A., Low-SpeedAemdynamics, from Wing Theory to Panel Methods, 
McGraw-Hill, New York, 1991, Chapter 3. 
19. Wolf, S. W
.
 D., "Adaptive Wall Technology for Minimization 
of Wind Tunnel Boundary 
Interferences-A Review," 
in Proceedings of International Conference on Adaptive Wall 
Wind Tunnel Research and Wall Interference Correction, Xian, China, June 1991, North- 
western Polytechnical University. 
20. Lewis, M. C., and Goodyer, M. J., "Two Dimensional Wall Adaptation for Three Dimen- 
sional Flows," in Proceedings of International Conference on Adaptive Wall Wind Tunnel 
Research and Wall Intei+erence Correction, Xian, China, June 1991, Northwestern Poly- 
technical University. 
21. Ewald, B., Ed., 'Wind Tunnel Wall Corrections," 
AGARDograph 336, 1998. 
22. Bemstein, S., and Joppa, R. G., "Development of Minimum Correction W~nd 
Tunnels," 
AIAA J. Aircraf, 13,243-247, 1976. 
23. Ganzer, U., "Wind Tunnel Corrections for High Angle of Attack Models," Paper 4, 
AGARD Report 692, Munich, 1981. 
24. Ganzer, U., and Igeta, Y., "Transonic Tests in a Wind Tunnel with Adapted Walls," 
ICAS-82-5.4.5, in Proceedings of the Thirteenth Congress of the International Council 
of the Aeronautical Sciences, Vol. 1, AXAA, New York, 1982, pp. 752-760. 
25. Goodyer, M., "Wind Tunnel Corrections for High Angle of Attack Models," Paper 7, 
AGARD Report 692, Munich, 1981. 
26. Whitfield, J. D., Jacocks, J. L., Dietz, W. E., and Pate, S. R., "Demonstration of the 
Adaptive Wall Concept Applied to an Automotive Wind Tunnel," Paper 82-0584, paper 
presented at the Twelfth AIAA Aerodynamic Testing Conference, Williamsburg, VA, 
1982. 
27. Sears, W. R., "Wind Tunnel Testing of V/STOL Configurations at High Lift," ICAS-82- 
5.4.1, in Proceedings of the Thirteenth Congress of the International Council of the 
Aeronautical Sciences, Vol. 1, A M ,  
New York, 1982, pp. 72&730. 
28. Raimondo, S., and Clark, P. J. F., "Slotted Wall Test Section for Automotive 
Aerodynamic 
Test Facilities," Paper 82-0585, presented at the Twelfth AIAA Aerodynamic Testing 
Conference, Williamsburg, VA, 1982. 
29. Allen, H. J., and V~ncenti, 
W. G., "Wall Interference in a Two-Dimensional-Flow Wind 
Tunnel with Consideration of the Effect of Compressibility," NACA TR 
782, 1944. 
30. Glauert, H., "Wind Tunnel Interference on Wings, Bodies, and Airscrews," ARC R&M 
1566, 1933. 
31. Glauert, H., "Wind Tunnel Interference on W~ngs, 
Bodies, and Airscrews, ARC R&M 
1566, 1933. 
32. Allen, H. J., and Vincenti, W. G, 'Wall Interference in a Two-Dimensional-Flow 
Wind Tunnel with Consideration of the Effect of Compressibility," NACA TR 782, 
1944. 
33. Abbott, I. H., Von Doenhoff, A. E., and Strivers, L. S., Jr., "Summary of Airfoil Data," 
NACA TR 
824, 1948. 
34. Pope, A., Basic Wing and Airfoil Theory, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1951. 
35. Thorn, A,, "Blockage Corrections in a High Speed Wind Tunnel," ARC R&M 2033, 
1943. 
36. Klunker, E. B., and Harder, K. C., "On the Second-Order Tunnel Wall Constriction 
Correction in Two-Dimensional Compressible Flow," TN 2350, 1951. 


366 
BOUNDARY CORRECTIONS I: BASICS AND TWO-DIMENSIONAL CASES 
37. Maskell, E. C., "A Theory of the Blockage Effects on Bluff Bodies and Stalled Wings 
in a Closed Wind Tunnel," ARC R&M 3400, 1965. 
38. Mercker, E., and Wiedemann, I., "On the Correction of Interference Effects in Open Jet 
Wind Tunnels," SAE Paper 960671, 1996. 
39. The moment about the half chord is independent of the camber and has no curvature 
effect. 
.- 


10 Boundary Corrections 11: 
Three-Dimensional Flow 
The concepts on which wall corrections are founded are exactly the same for two- 
dimensional and three-dimensional treatments. The geometry of the models, the 
wind tunnels, and the flow fields are of course more complex in the three-dimen- 
sional treatment. 
We reiterate a key aspect of the discussion in Chapter 9: All wall correction 
methods are based on the idea that the highly rotational flow regions generated on 
the one hand by close contact with the walls and on the other hand by close contact 
with the test article are separated by a significant volume of fluid for which Laplace's 
equation is a useful model of the behavior. 
1
0
.
1
 BUOYANCY 
The philosophy behind the buoyancy correction has been covered in Chapter 9. For 
the three-dimensional case the total correction (pressure gradient and streamline 
squeezing effect) has been given by Glauert' as 
57 
dp 
AD, = --A3t3- 
4 
dl 
where A3 is the body shape factor for three-dimensional bodies from Figure 10.1 
and t is the body maximum thickness. 
Example 10.1 Calculate the drag due to buoyancy for the model of Figure 9.15 
when tested in a closed round tunnel of 9 ft diameter at 100 mph. The static pressure 
gradient is 0.026 1bIWft. 
1. The volume of the body is 16.62 ft3. Neglecting the virtual mass, 


368 
BOUNDARY COIUV3CTIONS n
:
 
THRELDIMENSIONAL FLOW 
FIGURE 10.1 Values of X2. 
0 
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 
Fineness ratio, $ 
2. From Figure 10.1, for llt = 3.98, A3 = 2.2 (estimated), t = 2.26 ft, 
As seen from Example 10.1, approximating the integral too grossly may change 
the buoyancy drag as much as 20%, but this in turn would be about 1% of the total 
model drag for models of ordinary dimensions. 
10.2 SOLTD BLOCKAGE 
The solid-blockage corrections for three-dimensional flow follow the same philoso- 
phy described in Chapter 9 for two dimensions. According to Herri~t,~ 
the body is 
again represented by a source-sink distribution and is contained in the tunnel walls 
by an infinite distribution of images. 
Summing the effect of the images, we have, for the solid-blockage velocity effect 
for a wing, 
AV - 
K,.r,(wing volume) 
&sb.w = - 
- 
V" 
P 
where K, 
is the body shape factor from Figure 10.2, 7, 
is a factor depending on the 
tunnel test-section 
shape and the model span-to-tunnel-width ratio, from Figure 10.3. 


10.2 
SOLID BLOCKAGE 
369 
Thickness r
a
t
i
o
 5 or f 
FIGURE 10.2 Values of K, and Kj for a number of bodies. 
Model pameirk span -2 
Tunnel breadth - 
B 
FIGURE 10.3 Values of T, 
for a number of tunnel types. Use blB = 0 
for bodies of revolution. 


370 
BOUNDARY 
CORRECTIONS 
1
1
:
 THREE-DIMENSIONAL 
FLOW 
For bodies of revolution a similar approach results in 
AV 
K,r,(body volume) 
Esba = - 
= 
v u  
cn 
where K3 
is the body shape factor from Figure 10.2; T, 
is a factor depending on the 
tunnel test-section shape and the model span- (assumed zero) to-tunnel-width ratio 
from Figure 10.3. 
Thom's short-form3 equation for solid blockage for a three-dimensional body is 
* K b - E s  
- 
- - 
K(mode1 volume) 
V" 
b - 
Cn 
where K equals 0.90 for a three-dimensional wing and 0.96 for a body of revolution. 
(A good approximation for the volume of a streamline body of revolution is 0.451d2, 
where 1 is length and d is maximum diameter.) 
Solid blockage 
for a wing-body combination is simply the sum of each component 
as determined from the above relations. 
The velocity ratio method yields the result that the velocity increment at the wall 
of a round closed wind tunnel is 2.2 times that at the tunnel centerline for bodies 
of revolution and about 2.0 for typical airplane models. 
For open jets the solid blockage may be taken as one-fourth the above values. 
Normally this results in a quantity that is negligible. 
103 WAKE 
BLOCKAGE 
Maskell's Method 
Although for many years wind tunnel engineers were satisfied with wake blockage 
corrections based on the single theory of simulating the wake by a source at the 
wing trailing edge (Thom3 and others), Maskel14 has reported the necessity of 
considering the momentum effects outside the wake when separated flow occurs. 
These effects are produced by lateral-wall constraint on the wake and result in lower 
wake pressure and hence lower model base pressures than would occur in free air. 
There are three important contributions in Maskell's paper: First, wake blockage 
yields results similar to those on the same model in a higher speed airstream (i.e., 
the wake does not vary significantly along or across the model); second, the natural 
tendency for the wake to tend toward axial symmetry (even for wings of aspect 
ratio 10) permits a single correction for essentially all three-dimensional models 
(see Figure 10.4); third, the wake induces a pressure gradient in the streamwise 
direction which produces a drag increment on the body. The 
complete wake blockage 
results for three-dimensional models are presented below. 
The correction for wake blockage for streamline flow follows the logic of the 
two-dimensional case in that the wake is simulated by a source of strength Q = 


10.3 WAKE BLOCKAGE 
371 
c," 
FIGURE 10.4 
Drag analysis for a lifting wing. 
Dlpy which is matched for continuity by adding a downstream sink of the same 
strength. However, for the three-dimensional 
case the image 
system consists 
of a dou- 
bly infinite sourcesink system spaced a tunnel height apart vertically and a tunnel 
width apart horizontally in a manner similar to the doubly infinite sequence shown 
by 
Figure 9.12 for horseshoe vortices. The axial velocity induced at the model by the 
image source system is again zero, and that due to the image sink system is 
The incremental velocity is then 
The increase of drag due to the pressure gradient may be subtracted by removing 
the wing wake pressure drag, 
K,.r,(wing volume) 
A C h  = 
C" 
CD. 
and the body wake pressure drag, 
Kg,(body volume) 
A
C
D
B
 = 
C'lZ 
 mu 


372 
BOUNDARY CORRECTIONS 11: THREE-DIMENSIONAL FLOW 
The values of K,, K,, 
and T, are again from Figures 10.2 and 10.3. The values from 
(10.7) and (10.8) are usually negligible. 
The wake blockage for separated flow is as follows: Through considerations 
mentioned above, Maskell added a term to account for the increased velocity outside 
the wake and its consequently lowered pressure. Dividing the total drag coefficient 
into a constant amount Cm, 
one proportional to Cz, and one due to separated flow 
CDs 
(see Figure 10.4), 
he obtains the total wake blockage corrections ~
,
,
,
b
,
 
as 
For angles below separated flow, the last term, which is equal to CDs, 
vanishes. 
Maske114 should be consulted for bluff models that have a substantial separated 
wake at c
t
 = 0, for a correction based on base pressure then becomes necessary. 
Figure 10.5 shows the variation of the "constant" from over 2.5 for high-aspect- 
ratio models down to approximately 1.0 for two-dimensional models. 
In Maskell's correction the basic problem is obtaining the values for Cm and 
CD,. 
' h o  approaches will be outlined. The first approach is to plot C& 
versus CD,. 
The minimum value of CDu 
is picked as Cm and the slope of the linear portion of 
the curve is used to calculate CDi. 
For flap-down models the intercept of the linear 
portion of C& 
versus CDu 
when extended to the C D ,  axis may have a negative value; 
this is accounted for in the following equations as ACh, which is either zero or a 
negative number: 
FIGURE 
1
0
.
5
 
C 
1
1
.
4
 
Variation o
f
 blockage factor with aspect ratio for nonlifting rectangular plates. 


1
0
.
3
 WAKE BLOCKAGE 
373 
A second approach for CDi 
and Cm is based on YoungS in which is found the 
following equation: 
where CL 
is the lift of the unflapped wing, ACL 
is the lift increment due to flaps, 
AR is the aspect ratio, and K is obtained from Y~ung.~ 
It is a function of flap span, 
flap cutout, wing span, wing aspect ratio, and the two-dimensional lift curve slope 
in radians. The values of K are based on the following assumptions: 
1. an unswept wing with an elliptical load distribution or taper ratio of 2 : 
1; 
2. one set of flaps per semispan; 
3. one cutout inboard of the flaps; 
4. a constant ratio of local flap chord to local wing chord along the wing span; and 
5. effect of the flaps that is considered to be the equivalent of a constant change 
in geometric incidence along the flap span, resulting in a local lift increment 
due to the flap independent of the local wing incidence. 
A net flap span ratio is defined for multiple flaps as 
flap spans 
f.=C 
wing span 
The overall flap span ratio is defined as 
total flap span 
f; 
= wing span 
The total flap span is from the outboard end of the outboard flap on the left wing 
to the same point on the right wing. The flap cutout ratio is 
total flap cutout area 
' 
= 
total wing area 
These three ratios along with the wing aspect ratio and two-dimensional lift curve 
slope in radians are used to determine K. Then, two constants are defined: 
Thus Young7 obtains 


374 
BOUNDARY 
CORRECTIONS 
1
1
:
 THREE-DIMENSIONAL 
FLOW 
and Cm 
is found as 
The subscript a = 0 means the 
value of lift and drag at ol = + = 0 is used. It is 
assumed that there is no separated flow at these angles. The value of Cm 
is defined 
as CD,m=o 
minus the terms dependent on the wing lift plus the flap increment. The 
test values for CD 
and CL 
may or may not be corrected for tare and interference. 
The induced drag is then 
This is the same lift increment as used in Equation (10.17). Finally, 
If C
D
s
 is a negative number due to data scatter, it is set to zero. 
This method allows Maskell's correction to be calculated in real time if desired. 
Care should be taken on models with leading-edge flaps if they are separated 
at a = 0. 
There also is some controversy about the 
factor in the velocity correction 
equation. Maskell determined this factor from nonlifting flat plates perpendicular 
to the airstream. This then yields a separation bubble across the whole span of the 
plate. Wings of aspect ratio 5 and greater do not initially stall across the whole 
span. Thus, Maskell's factor may be too large. Another approach to Maskell's 
correction is given by Vassaire? 
Approximate Blockage Corrections 
The total solid and wake blockage corrections may be summed according to 
When all is lost as far as finding blockage corrections for some unusual shape that 
needs to be tested in a tunnel, the authors suggest 
1 model frontal area 
E = -  
I 
4 test-section area 


1
0
.
3
 WAKE BLOCKAGE 
375 
Blockage applies to everything 
in the test section, of course, and hence corrections 
to the free-air conditions must allow for the windshields and struts or other items 
necessary in the test section during a test. If the image system method of evaluating 
tare and interference is used, the blockage contribution of the mounting system is 
automatically evaluated. That is, putting the image system in increases the model 
drag by the tare and interference plus the wake and solid blockage of the image 
windshields and support struts. When T and I 
are subtracted, the windshield effects 
go with them. 
On the other hand, when for some reason an image system is not to be used, E, 
should be taken as 
A maximum ratio of model frontal area to test-section cross-sectional area of 7.5% 
should probably be used unless errors of several percent can be accepted. 
The windshield term will he a constant that can be evaluated with the help of 
Equations (10.2) and (10.5). For tests without yaw, the strut blockage may be 
included in the windshield term. An alternative method is to make a pitot-static 
survey with the windshields in, and use its values for, "free stream," allowing for 
model blockage only in the work-up. 
Blockage in open test sections is of opposite sign and smaller than for a 
closed tunnel. 
Measured Variable Methods 
Until the mid-1970s blockage corrections had been primarily based on simple 
potential flow solutions that yielded solid blockage based on geometric considera- 
tions. These corrections account only for the local flow acceleration around the 
model. In wind tunnel tests there is also a viscous wake for unseparated flow and 
finally a separated wake that includes the viscous wake. The later two blockages 
were more difficult to calculate. In 1957 Hense19 developed a method based on 
measuring a wall pressure opposite the model and using doublets to model the flow. 
Maskell's method: which appeared in 1965, is an empirical relation based on the 
measured drag and a less empirical variant using base pressure. For rectangular 
plates Maskell demonstrated that the drag coefficient is related to the base pressure, 
which is a function of plate aspect ratio. The separation of profile drag, both viscous 
and separated, from induced drag for complete models or the selection of suitable 
base pressure sometimes is somewhat ambiguous when attempting to use 
Maskell's method. 
Hackett-Wilsdan and Ashill-Keating Methods The Hackett-Wilsden and Ashill- 
Keating methods have been discussed in the preceding chapter. These methods 
encompass both solid and wake blockage but generally are most useful when signifi- 
cant and difficult-to-predict wake effects are present. 


376 
BOUNDARY C O R R E ~ O N S  
11: THREE-DIMENSIONAL now 
10.4 STREAMLINE CURVATURE 
The corrections for streamline curvature for three-dimensional studies follow the 
same philosophy as those for the two-dimensional case in that they are concerned 
with the variation of the boundary-induced upwash along the chord. Once again the 
variation turns out to be essentially a linear increase in angle so that the streamline 
curvature effect may be treated as the loading on a circular-arc airfoil. Similarly, 
the loading is treated as a flat-plate effect based on the flow angle change between 
the quarter and half chord and an elliptic load based on the flow angle change 
between half and three-quarter chord. But for the three-dimensional case the image 
system is vastly different from the simple system for two dimensions. 
The three-dimensional image system is shown in Figure 9.12. It consists of the 
real wing horseshoe system with its bound vortex CD 
and trailing vortices C, and 
D, plus the doubly infinite series that by symmetry make the walls, floor, and ceiling 
stream surfaces. The induced flow of the doubly infinite image system at the lifting 
line of the real wing is the main boundary upwash effect, and it may be found in 
the familiar 6 values for any particular condition. Here, as mentioned previously, 
we are interested in the change of upwash along the chord and, in some cases, along 
the span as well. 
The amount of correction needed is most easily handled as a "
T
;
'
 effect (see 
Section 10.8), where the "tail length" is, as in the two-dimensional discussion, one- 
quarter of the wing chord length. The TZ factor represents the increase of boundary- 
induced upwash at a point P behind the wing quarter chord in terms of the amount 
at the quarter chord. The total angle effect is then 
where A a  is the effective correction required for upwash at quarter chord and 7, is 
the streamline curvature effect on the angle. Values of TZ may be found from figures 
in Section 10.8 using ic as the tail length needed to determine TZ. 
Another form of the same correction may be derived by assuming that the TZ 
curves 
are linear for the short "tail length" of the wing streamline curvature corrections. We 
then have 
For a particular tunnel, both B and d~~l[d(l,lB)] 
will be known, so that 
Aa, = kc(Aa)(57.3) deg 


10.5 GENERAL DOWNWASH CORRECTIONS 
377 
and once k is determined, no charts are needed to find Aa, 
for various models. The 
additive lift correction is given as 
where a is the wing lift curve slope. The additive correction to the moment coefficient 
is derived as 
It should be noted that many tunnel engineers prefer to apply the correction 
entirely to the angle rather than to the angle and the lift. To make the correction to 
the angle only, T, should be determined by using i
c
 as a tail length instead of ic. 
The moment correction will then be 
10.5 GENERAL DOWNWASH CORRECTIONS 
Very early in the century experimenters using open throat wind tunnels found their 
tunnels giving very pessimistic results. The measured minimum drag and rate of 
change of drag with lift were too large, and the slope of the lift curve was too small. 
The minimum-drag effect was largely due to the very low Reynolds numbers then 
found in the low-speed tunnels, but the other two effects were due to the tunnel 
boundaries. The discovery of a way to represent the walls mathematically for some 
significant cases allowed a calculation of their effect. We will now present the theory 
and numerical values of the correction factors needed when a three-dimensional 
tunnel is used. 
Consider the free-air streamlines caused by a pair of trailing vortices such as are 
made by a uniformly loaded wing (Figure 10.6). These streamlines extend to infinity 
in free air, but when the wing is enclosed in a round duct, they become contained, 
the wall itself becoming a streamline through which no fluid can pass. As in 
the two-dimensional case, the problem becomes one of finding the mathematical 
device that will simulate the walls by making a streamline that coincides with the 
walls. If we let the wing be small relative to the tunnel size, the problem becomes 
the simplest of all boundary problems; a streamline with the same radius as the 
tunnel test section is created by a pair of vortices placed a distance x = 2R2/b 
on 
each side of the tunnel (Figure 10.7). They must have the same strength as the 
wing vortices. 
These two image vortices violate Helmholtz's vortex theorem; that is, a vortex 
cannot end in the fluid but must go the fluid boundary or form a closed loop. But 


3
7
8
 
BOUNDARY CORRECTIONS n: THREEDIMENSIONAL n o w  
FIGURE 10.6 Flow field of trailing vortices. 
like Prandtl's momentum theory for the induced angle of attack and drag of a finite 
wing, they give the correct answers. 
The streamlines due to the added vortices are shown in Figure 10.8. It will take 
but a moment for the student to trace Figure 10.6 on Figure 10.8 and to see for 
himself or herself how the + = 0 streamline coincides with the tunnel wall. Writing 
FIGURE 10.7 Locations of added "image" vortices, closed round jet. 


10.5 GENERAL DOWNWASH CORRECTIONS 
379 
FIGURE 10.8 Flow field of added vortices. 
the stream function for the four trailing vortices, summing them, and setting the 
sum to zero (Figure 10.9) will show that the spacing of the images must be at the 
distance shown in Figure 10.7. 
Another way to look at the effect of the added vortices is to consider their velocity 
field at the wing, as shown in Figure 10.10. The upflow tends to offset the downflow 
caused by the wing trailing vortices, and the wing then has too little induced angle 
FIGURE 10.9 Total flow field of both bound and added vortices; Jr = 0. 


380 
BOUNDARY 
CORRECTIONS 
LI: THREE-DIMENSIONAL 
FLOW 
FIGURE 10.10 Distribution of upwash due to added vortices. 
and too little induced drag. The exact amount may be found as follows: The lift of 
a uniformly loaded wing may be written as 
so that the circulation is 
svc, 
r=- 
26 
The upwash at a distance r from a semi-infinite vortex is 
and for two vortices at a distance R2/(b/2) 
this becomes 
Substituting for r we get 
and the induced angle due to the boundaries (let the tunnel cross-sectional area 
be C )  
is 


10.5 GENERAL WWNWASH CORRECTIONS 
381 
The induced drag increment due to the boundaries is 
Both these effects reduce the free-air induced angle and induced drag attributable 
to a given CL, 
making the wing appear to have a larger aspect ratio than it really 
has. The true values become 
where 6 = 0.125 for a round closed test section when the wing is small and has 
uniform loading. The subscript W is added to emphasize that corrections are based 
on wing lift only. 
But wings are seldom small and never have uniform loading. We shall have 
to reexamine these assumptions and see whether they induce serious errors. An 
examination of Figure 10.10 will give an insight into the statement that the wing 
span should be less than 0.8 of the tunnel width. 
The factor 6 is a function of the span load disbibution, the ratio of model span 
to tunnel width, the shape of the test section, and whether or not the wing is on the 
tunnel centerline. The factor 6 may be found for almost all conditions somewhere 
in this chapter, and (10.26) and (10.27) are 
general; once 6 is found, it may be used 
to find the boundary effects. For most tunnels, however, only the 6's for uniform 
loading had been provided. This seems odd until one realizes that the shed vortices 
rapidly roll up into a single pair of vortices that closely approximate the trailing 
vortex pattern of uniform loading. They then have a vortex span b, (which is given 
for a large selection of wings in Figure 10.11), 
and it is proper to use the uniform 
loading correction. However, since b, is developed somewhat downstream, it is 
suggested that it is more reasonable to take an effective vortex span 
for use at the wing. (See Swanson and Toll.lo) The values of 6 for elliptic loading 
are rarely used. 
Thus, in summary, to find 6 for a given wing, find be 
from (10.28) and use the 
proper 6 for uniform loading. For wings not covered in Figure 10.11, the approxi- 
mation 
will not result in a serious error. If elliptic loading corrections are to be used, the 
geometric span b should be used in computing k, the span-to-tunnel-width ratio. 


BOUNDARY CORRECTIONS 1
1
:
 THREEDIMENSIONAL now 
Aspect ratim 
FIGURE 10.11 Values of vortex span for elliptic, rectangular, and tapered wings. 
The theory for open test sections will not be outlined other than to mention that 
the condition for a free boundary is that no pressures can be supported (4 = 0, 
where +
I
 is the velocity potential). For open jets, 6 normally has a negative sign. 
Values of 6 for open jets are given in the following sections. 
The special effects of very large models are covered in the next two sections. 
This problem is presumably taken care of in the initial design of the model for a 
given tunnel. But if the model initially has the maximum permissible span, and then 
during its life the airplane is stretched, the wing loading increases to a point that 
more area is needed. A simple solution is to add an extension to the wing tip. This 
increases both the area and the aspect ratio, but it can be disastrous for the wind 
tunnel model. 
10.6 LIFT 
DISTRIBUTION INTERFERENCE 
Round 
Jets 
The variation of spanwise distribution due to the walls of a closed throat wind 
tunnel is small unless the wing has a large span. If this condition exists, the data 
become discouraging, tip stall starting earlier and being more severe than it actually 
would be in free air. 
Lift distribution interference in a round closed tunnel is discussed by Stewart," 
who finds that ratios of span to tunnel width greater than 0.8 will indicate early tip 


10.6 LIFI DISTRIBUTION WTERFERENCE 
383 
stall. An interesting numerical example shows that, for a wing of aspect ratio 7, 
span-to-tunnel-width ratio 0.9, and CL 
= 1.2, an effective wash-in amounting to 
1.44" is caused by the tunnel walls. 
The designer of wind tunnel models cannot correct for this in the model design 
since the effect of the walls varies with CL. 
The amount of twist induced by a round 
closed tunnel on wings of elliptic planform is shown by Stewart" to be 
where Pai 
is the induced wash-in of the wing due to wind tunnel wall interference, 
ui 
= CLImAR 
is the induced angle of attack, R is the wind tunnel radius, and b is 
the wing span. A plot of (10.29) is shown in Figure 10.12. 
Elliptic Jets 
Gavin and Hensel12 have discussed the effect of the tunnel walls on the spanwise 
distribution of lift for closed elliptic jets with wings of aspect ratio 8.0. Though the 
bl(2R) 
FIGURE 10.12 
Wall-induced aerodynamic twist. 


384 
BOUNDARY CORRECTIONS n
:
 
THREE-DIMENSIONAL n o w  
example discusse6is very limited, further calculations using their method are possi- 
ble. Their calculations may be summarized as follows: 
1. At high lift coefficients when the wing tips lie outside the focal points of 
the elliptic jet, the variation of the induced angle of attack along the span 
is no longer negligible. This amounts to apparent wash-in, which becomes 
severe as the wing tip approaches the stall. As a result, when the wing span 
approaches the tunnel major diameter, determinations of stall characteristics 
in the tunnel are conservative; that is, the wing tips will stall at higher angles 
in free air. 
2. Other things being constant, tunnel wall interference 
is less for lift distributions 
in which the lift is concentrated toward the centerline. That is, for untwisted 
wings, those with high taper ratios have tunnel-induced upwash of smaller 
magnitude than wings with low taper ratios. 
3. Tunnel wall interference is less for wings of high aspect ratio, other conditions 
being held constant. 
4. For wings with normal lift distributions, the mean upwash factor is a minimum 
when the wing tips are approximately at the tunnel foci. 
10.7 
DOWNWASH CORRECTIONS 
Circular Jets 
The corrections for uniform loading in a circular 
jet have been completed by Kondo,13 
and those for elliptic loading by GlauertI4 
following a method proposed by Rosen- 
head.ls They are both based on the ratio of span to tunnel diameter k = b/2R, actual 
values being presented in Figure 10.13. Glauert's data have been corrected to more 
modem units. 
Owing to model length or mounting, it is sometimes necessary to place the model 
with its wing not on the jet centerline. This places the trailing vortices closer to 
one wall than to the other, altering the flow pattern and hence the proper value of 
6. This condition has been examined by Sil~erstein,'~ 
who finds the values of 6 
with a displaced wing of uniform loading in a round jet to be as shown in Figure 
10.14. The nomenclature is described in Figure 10.15. 
Rectangular Jets 
Van Schlie~tett'~ 
has discussed basic rectangular jet corrections for very small wings, 
correcting a mathematical error that appears in TR 
461.18 His results are given in 
Figure 10.16. 
The boundary corrections for wings of moderate span compared to the tunnel 
width have been worked out for uniform loading by TerazawaL9 
and for elliptic 


k=(Span/Jet Diameter) 
FIGURE 10.13 Values of S for a wing with elliptic loading and for one with uniform 
loading in a closed round jet. For an open round jet the sign of 6 is negative. 
0.12 L 
0 
0.05 
0.1 
0.1 
5 
0.2 
0.25 
Vertical Distance From Centerline, dI(2R) 
FIGURE 10.14 Values of S when a wing with uniform loading is displaced above or below 
the centerline of a closed round jet; 6 is negative for the open jet. 
385 


386 
BOUNDARY CORRECTIONS 1
1
:
 THREE-DIMENSIONAL FLOW 
FIGURE 
10.15 Nomenature for wing in round tunnel. 
Tunnel j
e
t
 width. heim 
ratio, r 
FIGURE 
10.16 Values of S for open and closed rectangular jets, very small wings only; 
A, closed tunnel; B, free jet; C, jet with horizontal boundaries only; D, jet with vertical 
boundaries only; E, jet with horizontal boundary. 


1
0
.
7
 DOWNWASH CORRECTIONS 
387 
0 
0.1 
0.2 
0.3 
0.4 
0.5 
0.6 
0.7 
0.8 
0.9 
k=(Effective 
Span)l(Jet Width) 
FIGURE 10.17 Values of 6 for a wing with uniform loading in a closed rectangular tunnel. 
loading by Gla~ert.~Figures 
10.17-10.19 
give the values for the boundary correction 
factor 6. The curves indicate results for various values of tunnel aspect ratio: 
tunnel height 
A = tunnel width 
that is, 
1 
- 
= tunnel aspect ratio 
A 
Values of 6 for the square and duplex tunnel when the wing of uniform span 
loading is above or below the centerline are found in Figures 10.20-10.23. 
Circular-Arc 
Jets 
The testing of panels as discussed under "Aileron Panels, Rudders, and Elevators 
in Section 13.2 requires special correction that mathematically simulates the tunnel 
boundaries and the image wing that theoretically exists on the other side on the 


388 
BOUNDARY 
CORRECTIONS 
1
1
:
 
THREE-DIMENSIONAL 
FLOW 
FIGURE 10.18 Values o
f
 6 for a wing with uniform loading in an open rectangular jet. 
mounting plate. This condition has been considered by Kondo13 for a test section 
whose original shape was round before the addition of the mounting plate (Fig- 
ure 10.24). 
The variables are the wing area S, the area of the original circle before the plate 
was added So, the ratio of tunnel radius to tunnel weight 
and the ratio of span to tunnel height 


 - 
- 
- 
10.7 DOWNWASH CORRECTIONS 
389 
0 
FIGURE 10.19 
0.1 
0.2 
Values of 6 for 
0.3 
0.4 
0.5 
0.6 
k=(Span/Jet Width) 
a wing with elliptic loading in 
0.7 
a closed 
0.8 
0.9 
rectangular jet. 
................. 
................ 
.., 
................ 
..: 
................ 
..;.. ................ 
0 
0.05 
0.1 
0.15 
0.2 
0.25 
Vertical Distance From Centerline, dlB 
FIGURE 1
0
.
2
0
 Values of 6 when a wing with uniform loading is displaced above or below 
the centerline of a closed square jet. 


390 
BOUNDARY CORRECTIONS 1
1
:
 THREE-DIMENSIONAL ELOW 
Vertical distance fmm centerline,$ 
FIGURE 1021 Values of 8 when a wing with uniform loading is displaced above or below 
the centerline of an open square jet. 
The additive corrections as usual take the form 
but a word of caution is necessary. The reference is somewhat confusing in the 
definition of "wing area" and "tunnel area." The wing area to be used is the actual 
wing area including the image area, and the tunnel area is the area of the original 
circle not including the image circle. 
Values of 6 for various values of k and A may be found in Figure 10.25 for 
closed-arc jets and in Figure 10.26 for open circular-arc jets. 
It will be noted that these corrections are not strictly applicable to aileron tests, 
since in practice the "image" wing would have the control surface deflected oppo- 
sitely. Further corrections for circular-arc jets are given by Sivells and Salmi?' 


1
0
.
7
 DOWNWASH 
CORRECTIONS 
391 
Vertical distance from centerline,$ 
FIGURE 10.22 Values of S when a wing with uniform loading is displaced above or below 
the centerline of a closed 2 : 1 rectangular jet. 
Elliptic Jets 
The corrections 
for wings with uniform loading in an elliptic jet have been completed 
by Sanuki and TaniZZ 
and those for elliptic loading by Rosenhead." 
Sanuki and TaniZZ base their values for 6 (uniform loading) on the ratio of the 
minor to the major axis of the jet A and the ratio of the span to the major axis k 
(Figure 10.27). 


392 
BOUNDARY CORRECTIONS 1
1
:
 THREE-DIMENSIONAL FLOW 
Vertical distance from canterline,+ 
FIGURE 10.23 Values of 8 when a wing with uniform loading is displaced above or below 
the centerline of an open 2 : 1 rectangular jet. 
FIGURE 10.24 A model b, in a tunnel whose boundaries are circular arcs. 


10.7 DOWNWASH CORRECTIONS 
393 
0 
0.2 
0.4 
0.6 
0.8 
1 
.O 
Eflectiw span 
= Jet height 
FIGURE 10.25 Values of 6 for a wing with uniform loading in a closed 
wind tunnel. 
circular-arc 
FIGURE 10.26 
wind tunnel. 
Efktiw w n  
' 
Jet height 
Values of 6 for a wing with uniform loading in an open circular-arc 


394 
BOUNDARY CORRECTIONS 11: THREE-DIMENSIONAL now 
I 
FIGURE 
10.27 
Nomenclature for wing in an elliptical test section. 
Values of 6 are shown in Figures 10.28 and 10.29. 
The values for the wing not on the tunnel centerline (uniform loading) may be 
found in Figures 10.30 and 10.31; nomenclature is given in Figure 10.27. 
RosenheadZ3 
bases his values for 6 (elliptic loading) on the ratio of the axis 
containing the wing to the other axis of the jet, and for A on the ratio of the span 
to the focal length blc. For presentation here, however, the latter has been reconverted 
to the ratio of span to tunnel width k = bJB (Figure 10.27). The values of 6 are 
shown in Figures 10.32 and 10.33. 
Additional corrections for wings with uniform loading in 1 : fl 
partly open 
elliptic test sections have been given by Riegels." 
In view of the improbability of 
FIGURE 10.28 Values of 8 for a wing with uniform loading in a closed elliptic jet. 


FIGURE 
-0.12 
-
0
.
1
4
 
.a 
8 
d 
, 
-
0
.
1
6
 
0 
'
S
 
z 
8 
2 
-
0.18 
8 
r 
a 
m 
-020 
-
o
n
 
0
 
02 
0
.
4
 
0
.
6
 
08 
1 
.
O
 
- 
w n  
&= J
a
m
 
10.29 Values of S for a wing with uniform loading in an open elliptic jet. 
Vertical distance from centerha,$ 
FIGURE 1030 Values of S when a wing with uniform loading is displaced from the 
centerline of a closed 2 : 
1 elliptic jet. 


3% 
BOUNDARY CORRECTIONS u: THREE-DIMENSIONAL now 
FIGURE 10.31 Values of 6 when a wing 
with uniform loading is displaced above or 
below the centerline of an open 2 : 
1 elliptic 
jet. 
.~~ 
~ 
Vertical distance horn centerline,$ 
FIGURE 
10.32 
t=* 
Values of 6 for a wing with elliptic loading in a closed elliptic jet. 


10.7 DOWNWASH CORRECTIONS 
397 
FIGURE 10.33 Values of 6 for a wing with elliptic loading in an open elliptic jet, 
c3i 
FIGURE 10.34 Wing in an octagonal jet. 


398 
BOUNDARY CORRECTIONS 11: THREEDIMENSIONAL now 
< 
- 
- 
FIGURE 1035 Tempering comers to form an octago- 
nal test section. 
using these values, they are not presented, although their existence and derivation 
are of interest. 
Octagonal Jets 
Wings with elliptic loading in octagonal test sections have been considered by 
BatcheloP and Gent.26 
The conclusion is that, for regular octagonal test sections 
(Figure 10.34), the corrections for circular sections may be used, the maximum 
error being 1.5% in 6 or well under 0.2% in CD 
for the most critical case. 
The octagonal test section formed by tempering the comers of a rectangular jet 
has been discussed only for the case where a 7 X 9-ft rectangular jet is reduced by 
45" flat fillets whose vertical height reduced the amount of side wall exposed by 
one-half (Figure 10.35). The effect of these fillets is to make the basic rectangular 
jet more nearly approach the elliptic jet. The wind tunnel boundary factor is 
hence reduced. 
The correction factors for both the 7 X 9-ft rectangular and the octagonal test 
section are shown in Figure 10.36. As may be surmised, the corrections of the 
octagonal jet are essentially those of an elliptic jet of the same height-width ratio. 
0 
0.2 
0.4 
0.6 
0.8 
1 
.O 
Bn 
k=- .Jot* 
FIGURE 10.36 Values of S 
for wings with elliptic loading in octagonal 
test sections with tempered comers. 
and rectangular 


10.8 now 
BEHIND T
H
E
 WING 
399 
10.8 FLOW BEHIND THE WING 
The method of simulating the boundaries by an image system in a plane taken 
through the wing quarter chord perpendicular to the axis of symmetry of the airplane 
has been covered in Section 10.5. However, the amount of velocity induced by a 
vortex increases rapidly as one moves from the end of the vortex, so that, from the 
three-dimensional picture (Figure 9.12), 
the amount of upwash at the tail of a model 
in a tunnel is very much more than that at the wing. Thus, for instance, at a time 
when the walls are reducing the wing angle of attack by 2", they could conceivably 
be reducing the tail angle of attack by 3". This large discrepancy, proportional to 
the lift coefficient, makes complete models in a closed test section appear very 
much more stable than they would in free air, while in an open jet the opposite 
effect is true. 
This problem has been discussed by L ~ t z , ~  
and the boundary-induced upwash 
velocity at a distance 1, behind the quarter-chord line has been presented as 
where wk 
is the upwash velocity in the plane of symmetry at distance 1, behind the 
quarter chord (wk 
does not vary greatly along the span), C the jet cross-sectional 
area, V the tunnel velocity, and TI 
the downwash correction factor. 
Values of 
for a number of tunnels are given in Figures 10.37-10.42, 
and values 
of 6 for the relevant model may be found in the preceding sections. 
Some doubt exists about the validity of the downwash corrections for open throat 
wind tunnels as regard the values behind the lifting line since they were derived 
for an infinitely long test section and not for one about one diameter long, as is 
typical for actual tunnels. This finite length does change 6 and 72, but, for wing 
corrections and corrections for streamline curvature, the change is not serious. For 
stability corrections for complete models in open test sections it would be in order 
to consult Silverstein and KatzoP if the tail length is more than 0.48, where B is 
the tunnel width. 
A parallel correction may be worked out for the static stability as follows: 
The moment about the center of gravity (CG) 
due to an aft-tail upload is 
where the subscript t refers to the horizontal tail and 1, is the distance from the CG 
to the 4 MAC (mean aerodynamic chord) of the tail. In coefficient form 
- 
c a t  
= -( 
SMAC 
"" )(qq 
q 
= - 
Vq1qa, 


400 
BOUNDARY CORRECTIONS n: 
THREE-DIMENSIONAL FLOW 
By making two tail-on runs at different horizontal tail incidence angles (if = 
a,), 
this term can be evaluated. Then 
From (10.34) the additional correction to the tail angle of attack is 
Hence 
The subscript W is added to emphasize that the correction is based on the wing 
lift, 
as are the corrections to angle of attack and the drag coefficient equations [(9.8), 
(9.9) and (10.26), (10.27)l. 


10.8 now 
BEHIND THE WING 
401 
Tail kngth , It 
Tunnel width % 
FIGURE 10.38 Values of rz 
for open and closed elliptic jets. 
To properly evaluate the correction to the pitching moment [(10.37)] requires a 
minimum of three runs: two tail-on runs at different tail incidence angles and a tail- 
off run. Basically what is being measured is the q at the tail. In many cases, for 
aircraft with both leading- and trailing-edge flaps a plot of a,vq, 
versus a will show 
an increasing value at low a's, a constant value in midrange a's followed by a 
decrease at higher a's. The low values at low a's are caused by the typical leading- 
edge flap stall at low a's, while the decrease at high a's near CLm is the trailing- 
edge flaps stalling. This effect is a function of the vertical location of the horizontal 
tail and the downwash of the wing. A note of caution: When evaluating a , h ,  
for 
models with remotely pitchable tails, these runs should be made at moderate tail 
angles to avoid a stalled tail. Because these runs are required to correctly reduce 
the data, models should be designed to allow the tail incidence angle to be changed 
easily and its angle accurately determined and accurately reset. Many experiments 
have produced ambiguous results because of inability to set and reset angles of 
surfaces and complete models with sufficient accuracy and precision. 
The third run yields the basic information that is required to apply wall corrections. 
This is the wing lift coefficient and should be evaluated any time a model change 
is made to the wing. This is the basis for the suggestions by wind tunnel engineers 
that tests to determine optimum flap settings be done tail-off. The problem with 
this is that flaps produce large negative pitching moments, and these in turn can 
require large downloads by the tail to balance the airplane, which may negate the 


402 
BOUNDARY CORRECTIONS I
I
:
 
THREE-DIMENSIONAL n o w  
Tail length 
1
1
 
. - 
Tunnel width 
B 
FIGURE 
1039 Values of T
,
 for several closed rectangular wind tunnels, wing on tunnel 
centerline, and horizontal tail on wing centerline. Values for X = 0.35 are by extrapolation. 
gain in CL- due to the flaps. There is no easy solution to this problem except to 
require that the model be designed so that the time required to put the tail on and 
off is minimal. Care should be taken with changes to the inboard portion of the 
wing because any change in downwash can effect the tail both through the ddda 
term (Figures 13.36 and 13.38) in the stability equation and the q at the tail. 
The changes in pitching moment curve slope due to wall corrections can be quite 
large but their validity has been amply demonstrated by flight tests. 
If it is impossible to evaluate (q,lq)(dCulda,). 
the relation 
9, 
dCu - 
0.1 AR 
q da, 
AR, + 2 (0.8) 


10.8 now 
BEHIND THE 
WING 
403 
FIGURE 
centerline, 
10.40 Values of 7, 
for two closed rectangular wind tunnels, wing 
but horizontal tail O.lb, above or below wing centerline. 
on tunnel 
may be used. This is an approximate lift curve slope formula reduced by the factor 
0
.
8
.
 
It is common to hear the factor 0.8 spoken of as a loss in dynamic pressure. 
Though there is some loss in average dynamic pressure over the horizontal tail 
produced by the fuselage boundary layer, it is far less than 20%, 
and the correction 
is more properly thought of as the result of the blanketing of the horizontal tail by 
the fuselage and its boundary layer and the resultant loss in lift across the fuselage, 
than as a loss in average dynamic pressure. 


404 
BOUNDARY 
CORRECTIONS 
I
L
 
THREE-DIMENSIONAL 
FLOW 
0 
Tail length 
't 
Tunnel width' 
FIGURE 10.41 Values o
f
 T
,
 for two open throat rectangular wind tunnels, wing on tunnel 
centerline, horizontal tail on wing centerline. 
Nonrectangular Tunnels 
Over the years solid-wall tunnels have been built with a large variety of shapes 
other than rectangular. These shapes have included round, circular arcs, elliptic, 
regular octagonal, regular hexagonal, flat top and bottom with semicircular ends, 
and rectangular with comer fillets. The representation of these shapes by images 
outside of the walls have never been exactly correct. The curves that yield the wall 
correction factors from previous editions have been retained in this edition because 
the errors for moderate-size 
models and lifts are not too large and are further reduced 
by the wing-to-tunnel cross-sectional-area ratio, which is a small number. However, 
with the almost universal availability 
of high-performance 
computers the wall correc- 
tion factors for these tunnels can be determined by vortex lattices in the walls, as 
discussed in Joppa's corrections, without the vortex wake relocation, if desired, or 
by other computational methods now widely available. The same techniques can 
be expanded to handle swept surfaces as well. All of these methods are being 
overtaken by those based on information from wall pressure measurements. 


Tail length 
1 
= 
1 
Tunnel width B 
FIGURE 10.42 Values of T, 
for two open throat rectangular wind tunnels, wing on tunnel 
centerline, but horizontal tail O.lb. above or below wing centerline. 
Heyson's Method: V/STOL Aircraft 
Glauert's classical wall corrections for wings assumed that all of the wing's lift is due 
to circulation and that the vortex wake trails straight aft in the plane of the lifting line 
and the free stream, which yields a vertical interference at the model. This assumption 
is not valid for V/STOL or powered lift systems, where the downwash at low forward 
speeds will produce a wake angle approaching the 90" 
required in hover. HeysonZ9 
at 
NASA Langley began his work on the wall correction problem with rotors. 
Expanding this beginning, Heyson30 
considered a broader class of problems. He 
represented the wake by a semi-infinite string of point doublets with axes tilted 
relative to the model's lift and drag. This wake proceeds linearly to the tunnel floor 
and then aft along the floor. Then images and superposition are used to find the 
effect at the model. Heyson's method yields both vertical 
and horizontal interferences 
rather than the vertical interference only as given by Glauert. The two methods 
agree on interference factors for a wake trailing straight aft. 


406 
BOUNDARY CORRECTIONS 1
1
:
 THREE-DIMENSIONAL FLOW 
Heyson3' calculated interference factors at selected points in the tunnel for a 
point or vanishingly small model. He demonstrated how doublet strings may be 
distributed along a wing or a rotor and showed the results for a tunnel with a width- 
to-height ratio of 2. 
Heyson3' extended the use of superposition using digital computers to obtain 
interference factors for swept &d nonswept wings, tails aft of wings, single rotors 
with tail, and tandem rotors. This work gives numerical results of the affect of many 
variables on the correction factors. Fortran programs are reported3' 
hey so^?^ further extended his work to a general theory of wall interference in 
closed rectangular test sections plus ground effects. In his work large wake deflec- 
tions are addressed, in both vertical and lateral directions. This work includes a 
program to determine interference factors at a point (vanishing small model) and a 
discussion of the program and flow charts for the program. Owing to both lateral and 
vertical wake deflections, there are nine interference velocities. As lateral directional 
testing is concerned with moments, the gradient of the interference velocities are 
needed, which yields 27 velocity gradients. Rather than develop actual correction 
formulas for all possible models, the paper discusses tunnel wall effects as a problem 
in similitude. 
The following discussions of Heyson's corrections will be limited to the plane 
of symmetry of the aircraft and will follow TR 
R-12430 and TR 
R-302.31 
These 
corrections use a linear wake that is deflected downward. The angle of the wake 
deflection is a function of the lifting systems' lift and induced drag. The four wall 
interference factors are a function of the wake's deflection. Hence a new set of 
factors is needed at each test point. In the classical corrections, the wall correction 
factor is constant for a given tunnel and model. Heyson's works have copious 
numbers of figures, which could be used to calculate the wall effects. However, the 
task of determining the wake skew angle, reading eight interference factors for 
the wing and tail as minimum, calculating the interference velocities, and applying 
them to the data would be time consuming with a large chance for error. Thus the 
use of Heyson's methods implicitly assumes that a digital computer will be used. 
To calculate the interference factors at any point in the tunnel, say the centerline 
of the wing, first requires the wake skew angle X. 
This is the angle from the vertical 
to the wake and is the complement of the momentum downwash angle. The skew 
angle can be obtained from charts in TR 
R-12430 
and TN 
D-81434 
or calculated as 
outlined in T
R
 
R- 
The interference factors are based on x effective, not the momentum value of 
X. 
In forward flight the wake of a lifting system changes form and angular deflection 
as it moves aft of the model. The wakes for wings, rotors, and jets eventually evolve 
into a pair of trailing vortices. As these vortices roll up, they do not move downward 
as rapidly as the central portion of the wake; almost all the momentum transfer 
induced by the lift appears in the central portion of the wake. This region is 
constrained to be bounded within the trailing vortex pair after roll up. 
The actual downward deflection of the wake vorticity in the rolled up wake is 
approximately one-half that predicted by momentum. This was first pointed out by 
Heyson and G~unwald.~~ 
This paper established the criteria of an effective skew 


10.8 K O W  BEHIND THE WING 
407 
angle that is used to determine the interference factors. The following definitions 
for downward deflection angle or wake skew angle were chosed6 to handle the 
hover case (although testing in a tunnel may be questionable): 
4 
tan 0, = -tan 
0 
n2 
where 0 = 90" - 
X. Note: 
1. Effective angles are used only for obtaining interference factors. 
2. Induced velocities are obtained directly from momentum theory. 
The second statement is required to avoid an imbalance between the forces and the 
induced velocities engendered by the forces. 
The theory in TR 
R-124'O and TR 
R-3023' and the programs in TM X
-
1
7
4
0
3
'
 
yield four interference factors that are used to determine the interference velocities 
at the chosen point: 
where the 8 factors are similar to the wall correction factor 6 in Glauert's work; A, 
and A
T
 are the momentum areas of the lifting system and tunnel cross-sectional 
area; wo 
and u
o
 are the momentum theory values of the vertical and longitudinal 
velocities at the lifting system due to the lifting system only; AwL 
and AwD are the 
boundary-induced vertical interference velocities (positive upward) resulting from 
lift L and induced drag D,; 
and AuL and AuD 
are the boundary-induced longitudinal 
interference velocities (positive to the rear) from lift and induced drag. 
The interference 
factors a,,, tirL. 
and 6,D 
are functions of the tunnel geometry, 
height of the model in the tunnel, span loading, angle of attack, and wing sweep 
of the model. We will follow TR 
R-1243"and apply the corrections to a vanishingly 
small or point model. 


408 
BOUNDARY 
CORRECTIONS 
n: THREE-DIMENSIONAL 
now 
 an+ 
force 
Chord 
line 
FIGURE 
10.43 Nomenclature for Heyson's wall corrections. 
The four interference velocities are combined to yield the total interference at 
the model: 
The corrections are applied to the data as follows: The subscript c refers to 
values corrected for interference. Figure 10.43 illustrates the corrections of angles, 
velocities, and forces: 
Aw 
= tan-' 
AwIV 
Aci = 
t
a
n
-
'
 V +  
Au 
1 + Au/V 
Note that Heyson does not use the small-angle assumption of classical wall cor- 
rections: 
V, = V ( V  
+ A u ) ~  
+ Aw2 
or, in terms of q 
or dynamic pressure, 


10.8 FLOW BEHIND THE 
WING 
409 
as lift and drag are defined as perpendicular and parallel to the relative wind or the 
corrected velocity: 
LC = L cos Aa - 
D sin Aa 
D, 
= L sin Aa + D cos Aa 
and finally, 
See TR R-302" for the interference distribution over swept and nonswept wings, 
rotors, and the like and interference at the tail. The tail corrections, as with classical 
wall corrections, are based on the difference between the wall-induced angle of 
attack at the wing and wall-induced angle of attack at the tail. This is equivalent 
to a change in tail incidence and, of course, varies with the forces on the wing or lifting 
system. Hey~on'~ 
discusses two methods of correcting the tail pitching moment. The 
first accounts for the difference in pitching moment caused by the tail in the tunnel 
and the moments if the tail had the same wall interference as the wing. The second 
takes the difference in wall-induced angles of attack at the wing and tail and rotates 
the tail incidence by this moment. 
In TR R-3023' there is a detailed discussion of the effect of model size (wing 
and rotor), wing sweep, and location of a swept wing's pivot on the interference 
factor 
It should be realized that although the factor 
will vary, the induced 
velocity AwL 
is also influenced by the model and tunnel momentum areas [(10.45)]. 
There are extensive comparisons in TR R-30231 
and TN 
D-15416~~ 
between Hey- 
son's theory and the conventional corrections after Glauert. The correlation between 
the two methods is quite good at zero-induced drag. At high lift coefficients (low 
skew angles) Heyson's theory indicates vertical interference factors greater than 
conventional theory. For an effective skew angle between 75' and 9
0
"
 
the magnitude 
of tiwsL 
remains about constant at values equivalent to the conventional corrections. 
An effective skew angle of 75" is equivalent to a momentum skew of 57" or a 
momentum downwash angle of about 33". 
If a swept wing's aerodynamic center and pivot point coincide at the center of 
the tunnel, then the average Sw,L 
shows little or no change up to an angle of attack 
of 20" for effective skew angles greater than 65" for a 45" swept wing. If the pivot 
is moved to the apex of the lifting line, there is little effect on a,, at effective skew 
angles above 75" (momentum downwash 33") for a wing with 45" sweep. 
Heyson's corrections would be useful for the occasional odd model, once the 
programs are installed and checked, with the assumption that the available computer 
is of adequate size to carry out the calculations in a reasonable time. 
One more point must be considered when testing models at low skew angles or 
large momentum downwash angles. Flow breakdown caused by an interaction be- 
tween the model wake and the tunnel floor will result in a tunnel flow that does 


410 
BOUNDARY CORRECTIONS 1
1
:
 THREE-DIMENSIONAL 
FLOW 
not reasonably apprbximate the uniform flow of level flight. This limit occurs 
approximately when Xf/b 
= 1.25 where XI 
= h tan X, 
h is the height above the 
floor, and x is the momentum skew angle. 
Joppa's Vortex-Lattice Method. 
Another approach to wall corrections for wings developing high lift was put forward 
by J~ppa.'~O 
Computer programs are included.40 
Joppa's work, like Heyson's, be- 
came practicable with the advent of sufficiently fast digital computers. Rather than 
- 
allowing the wake or vortex to trail straight aft as in classical wall corrections, or 
assuming a deflected linear wake, Joppa took the following approach. 
The wing vortex wake in the tunnel follows a different trajectory in the tunnel 
than in free air. Joppa calculated the wake trajectory and its flow field in free air 
by assuming a simple lift system represented by a horseshoe vortex. This lifting 
system then has its trajectory and flow field calculated in a wind tunnel at the same 
remote velocity and circulation strength. The differences are then interpreted in 
terms of wall interference. 
The free-air trajectory is found using vortex segments that are about 0.10 of the 
vortex span. The wing is taken as having a uniform load with a bound vortex on 
the c/4 and a vortex span of (d4)b. 
This is the usual representation of an elliptical 
load. The first trailing segment lies in the wing from the bound vortex to the trailing 
edge. The angle of the first downstream trailing vortex is determined by adding the 
induced angle of attack and the effective angle of attack at the plane of symmetry. 
The direction of each downstream segment in turn is calculated by the sum of 
velocities due to all other elements at its upstream end. This determines the coordi- 
nates of the downstream end; the following downstream segment is then translated 
to that point, keeping it attached. Then the process is repeated and the vortex 
trajectory is moved into place by sweeping along its length by successive iterations. 
As the vortex curves down, it also curves inward at fmt, reducing the vortex span. 
The final trajectory is determined by first calculating the downward deflections and 
then a second pass for the horizontal or inward deflection. This double iteration is 
necessary to avoid an instability in the path after a few iterations. 
The path converges 
in three or four double passes before the instability develops. It is interesting to 
note that a curved vortex line is itself physically unstable. 
These techniques are 
included in the more recent panel codes such as PMARC, 
VSAERO, and PANAZR. They are referred to as "free wake" options or "wake 
relaxation" options. It is almost always required that the aerodynamicist provide 
good intelligence, 
as the codes 
frequently provide nonsensical 
results if they converge 
at all when these options are applied. 
The tunnel walls could have been represented by curved image vortex systems 
as in the conventional method, but this method only works for rectangular tunnels. 
To make the method applicable to any tunnel shape the tunnel walls are represented 
by vortex lattices. The strength of each element of the lattice is determined by 
simultaneously requiring the normal component of velocity to vanish at the center 
of each lattice. This satisfies the boundary condition of no flow through the tunnel 


10.8 now 
BEHIND THE 
WING 
411 
walls at the control point. By this method the geometry of the image flow field 
does not change during each iteration and the large matrix of coefficients need only 
be inverted once. For each vortex ring an equation at its control point is written 
where the strength of the ring Ti 
is the unknown. To keep the number of equations 
to a tractable level, some judgment must be used. 
When the equations for Ti 
are solved and Ti is known, the wall-induced velocity 
at any point in the test section can be calculated. The interference is expressed as 
an angle, which is the arc tangent of the vertical-induced 
velocity and tunnel velocity. 
For a round tunnel Prandtl used two images (Figure 10.7) to represent the wall. 
This gives the upwash at the wing lifting line. But as the effect of the lifting line 
was not taken into account, it will not yield the downstream variation in wall- 
induced upwash. In fact, the use of two semi-infinite vortices to represent the walls 
violates Helmholtz's vortex theorems. However, at the wing it does give the correct 
answer. Joppa's method can represent a round tunnel by approximating it as a 
multisided polygon. Joppaa compares his work with a nondeflected vortex wake 
with approximate results from Silversteinl%d  lot^.^^ Joppa's value of 6 lies very 
close to halfway between the approximate methods. 
The solution for the wake trajectory in the tunnel is an iterative combination of 
the free-air-trajectory solution and vortex-lattice wall solution. The wake solution 
method for free air is used with the velocities from the wall for an undeflected wake 
added to those of the wing in free air. When the wake trajectory is found, a second 
solution for the T,'s in the wall is found for this wake. Then the cycle is repeated. 
As there is no strong interaction in the two systems for normal models and tunnels, 
only two to three cycles are required. When the solution is complete for the same 
tunnel velocity and wing circulation, they yield the following: 
1. complete velocity field in free air, 
2. complete velocity field in tunnel, and 
3. the separate contribution to item 2 of the wing and tunnel walls. 
The interference velocities are the difference between the velocity in free air and 
the tunnel at a given point. Joppa4' only presented results for the vertical velocity 
components because he limited the work to moderate wake deflections that yield 
small longitudinal components. The vertical interference velocity is felt as an angle- 
of-attack change. Thus 
where subscript y is vertical and x is horizontal, with T the tunnel and FA the free 
air. As the calculations are made for the same circulation and free-stream velocity 
values in the tunnel and free air, then 


where C is the tunnel cross-sectional area. And thus 
- 
Joppa's results are based on circulation lift only and are for a wing of low aspect 
ratio to achieve high values of CJAR and relatively large wake deflection angles. 
The effect of the tunnel's relocation of the vortex wake on the pitching moment 
correction is quite sensitive to the location of the tail relative to the wing. 
The energy wake is also relocated in the tunnel, and this affects the dynamic 
pressure at the tail. The dynamic pressure of the tail may be less than free stream 
owing to wakes from wing flaps or greater than free-air stream due to propulsion 
devices. The values of dC,,,lda, should, because of these uncertainties, be measured. 
If both the vortex wake and the energy wake shift the same amount in the tunnel 
when testing in the STOL flight range, Joppa proposes that the tail on the model 
be made vertically movable. Then, prior to the test the vortex wake shift for each 
value of wing circulation is calculated. Then stability testing would be done at 
several tail heights. This would produce a family of pitching moment curves, each 
one of which would be valid for a given wing lift coefficient. The final moment 
curve would be a composite curve from these curves. This would reduce the energy 
wake shift correction to zero due to the relocation of the tail. The only correction 
then required would be due to wall-induced effects. 
10.9 SUMMARY: CLOSED TEST SECTION 
In this section the complete data reduction process for an experimental evaluation 
of a complete airplane configuration will be summarized. This will include materials 
from previous chapters as well as the present one. The process can be done by hand 
(pocket calculator) as well as by digital computer, and once through by hand for 
any wind tunnel engineer is highly recommended: 
1. Keeping Track o
f
 the Data. A typical pitch run can have 20 or more a's at 
which data are taken. In the data reduction there are either tables or curves that 
must be used to obtain required values; thus there has to be a common variable to 
keep track of the data. 
Quite often when data are acquired by a computer, the computer software will 
assign a sequential number (often referred to as a record number) to acquired data. 
(This is analogous to the old IBM card number. Those were important in case the 
card deck was dropped!) This is not a good variable to use to keep track of the data 
for the following reasons. During a test the values of a or + used may not be the 
same for all runs, nor is it reasonable to require that they be the same. The number 
of angles may be reduced to save running time, they may be increased to define a 
curve better, or some angles may be repeated when checking for bad points. 


10.9 SUMMARY: CLOSED TEST 
SECTION 
413 
Based on the above discussion, the only way to keep track of the model attitude 
when acquiring data is to use a measured value from the model. Thus, the measured 
a and $ or p or roll angle from the model positioning mechanism should be used. 
Modem database software has made this much more manageable in the last few 
years. It allows quicker and more flexible access for cross plotting of data from 
virtually any combination of parameters manipulated during an experiment. 
2. Assumptions. It is assumed that the model angles and the balance forces and 
moments are in engineering units, that is, angles in degrees and forces and moments 
in pounds and inch-pounds (or SI units). This means that the measured quantities 
have been converted from bits or voltages to engineering units through the applicable 
calibrations and unit conversions. 
The discussions that follow will assume that an external balance is used to avoid 
taking into account all of the possible variations that exist for stings and internal 
balances. Since the discussion is general in nature, it can easily be adapted for other 
model support and balance systems. 
3. Tme Balance Loads. The loads read out of the balance are conected to the 
true loads applied to the balance by the balance calibration equations (see Chapter 
7). These are the values required in all subsequent calculations. They will be 
designated by subscript u, 
for example, L,,. The balance calibration is applied to all 
loads, both aerodynamic and tares. 
4. Applying Mechanical Calibrations to a 
and +. If the measured values are 
not the actual model geometric angles, the calibrations from the indicated angle 
should be applied to the geometric angle. This most often occurs for a due to 
location of the trunnion and the pitch arm. 
If corrections are required for balance and model support deflections, these are 
also applied. Generally these deflections are obtained by applying known loads to 
the balance support system and model, so the loads from 3 are used. The true 
geometric angle will be designated by the subscript g, that is, a,, $
,
.
 
5. Basic Corrections to 
Dynamic 
Pressure. Most tunnels are run by an indicated 
dynamic pressure obtained from two measured pressures. The indicated dynamic 
pressure is then corrected for the tunnel dynamic pressure calibration (see Chapter 
6). This dynamic pressure will be designated qA. 
If the data system measures the error in the operator's maintaining the desired 
dynamic pressure, this value will be added to qA 
as a Aq, value. 
Thus, at any data point the dynamic pressure approaching the model is q, + 
Aqop. 
This is not standard practice today since many tunnels have control systems 
for maintaining the tunnel speed. These, however, are not perfect and must be 
monitored. There is still almost always a need to monitor and record both a target 
dynamic pressure and the measured dynamic pressure corresponding to each set of 
balance, pressure, or other data that are acquired. 
6. Summary of Corrections. At this stage of the data reduction process there 
is a table for each run of the "true" test values for model geometric angles, dynamic 
pressure, and balance loads. The foLlowing corrections will be due to the tunnel 
walls. 


414 
BOUNDARY CORRECTIONS 1
1
:
 THREE-DIMENSIONAL FLOW 
7 .  Blockage ~oikctions. 
Solid blockage &b is a function of the model volume 
and the tunnel size. As indicated under Solid Blockage in Section 9.4, it usually is 
in two parts: one for the wing and a second for the body, both of which are summed 
to yield +b. If possible, these values should be determined prior to the start of the test. 
Wake blockage &b (see under Wake Blockage in Section 9.4): If the wake pressure 
drag blockage 
equations [(10.7) 
and (10.8)] are to be used, they should be determined 
prior to the tests. These values are quite small for most models and are often ne- 
glected. 
Maskell's corrections for a separated wake are often applied and to an extent 
include the wake pressure drag blockage terms. Maskell's correction is in two parts 
IEq. (10.9)l. The first is based on the parasite drag Cm and the second on the 
separated wake. The first part includes parts of Eqs. (10.7) and (10.8) and both 
corrections should not be applied. From unseparated flow, CD, 
= CD, 
+ Coo, 
and 
for separated flow, Cm > C
,
 + Cm. Owing to data scatter, using a computer to 
reduce data usually requires a statement that if CD. - 
CD, 
- Cm is negative, it 
should be set to zero. Hackett's blockage must be determined by the wall pressures 
(see the discussion of Hackett-Wilsden and Ashill-Keating methods in Section 
10.3). The final blockage correction is given as 
It should 
also be noted that the 
blockage 
corrections 
are 
required to produce the correct 
dynamic 
pressure that is used to 
calculate 
all coefficients, including pressure and hinge 
moment. Thus, when blockage corrections are used, the force data must be acquired 
and reduced before the pressure coefficients, hinge moments, and so on, are reduced. 
The dynamic pressure is now fully corrected unless Heyson's wall corrections are 
used. In Heyson's corrections there is an additional correction to dynamic pressure 
due to the large wake deflections (see under Heyson's Method: V/STOL Aircraft in 
Section 10.8). 
8. Support Tares and Interferences. In tests where only incremental values are 
. 
. 
of primary interest either the support tare and interferences values are 
not applied or 
a general set that do not take into account the interference 
of the supports 
on the model 
are applied. As the general tares are 
taken from another model, and as the mounting 
struts for an external balance enter the wing, these tares are best applied as a function 
of CLW 
rather than a. 
This is because of possible differences in am 
and the reference 
plane used to measure 
a
.
 
The tares for the appropriate ql or q
,
 should be used. This is 
done to save test time and costs incurred in evaluating all required support tares and 
interferences 
for each model and its various configurations. 
If the tares are taken with the model being tested, the appropriate tares for the 
model configuration at the correct arl or a, and q, or q, are used (Chapter 7). 
The tares are subtracted from the balance force data of item 3. 


10.9 SUMMARY CLOSED TEST SECTION 
415 
9. Weight Tares. The weight tares are a result of the model center of gravity 
not being on the balance moment center. Thus when the model is pitched, there 
will be a pitching moment versus a, 
due to the weight. When the model is yawed, 
there will be both a pitching and a rolling moment due to weight. Similar tares will 
arise with a sting and internal balance. The tare values are subtracted from the 
balance data. The weight tares are a function of model configuration; thus the correct 
tare must be applied to the correct run. 
If additional tares are required, such as internal nacelle forces, they also must 
be applied at this point. There is no order of preference in the order of subtracting 
support, weight tares, and other tares. 
At this point the data have the correct geometric 
angles, correct dynamic pressure, 
and correct aerodynamic forces on the balance (corrected for support, weight, and 
other tares). 
10. Moment Transfer. Now the balance forces and moments are transferred to 
the desired center-of-gravity location on the aircraft. These calculations only affect 
the three moments: pitch, yaw, and roll. The equations required are a function of 
the type of balance, which determines the relationship between the balance moment 
center, the model trunnion, and the location of the desired center of gravity. Thus, 
it is difficult to write the actual equations for all cases. As an example, if the balance 
moment center and the model trunnion coincide, then the following information is 
required. The three distances from the moment center to the center of gravity along 
the three orthogonal tunnel centerlines passing through the balance moment center 
act on each combination of model ry and +. The three lengths will change as the 
model is pitched and yawed since the desired center of gravity moves relative to 
the balance moment center. Because the equations are a function of geometry, they 
must be worked out for each tunnel and model. The pitching moment is affected 
by lift and drag, the yawing moment by drag and side force, and the rolling moment 
by lift and side force. 
The customer or the model builder must furnish the distances between the trunnion 
and the desired center-of-gravity locations. The tunnel group knows the relationship 
between the trunnion and balance moment center. 
Extreme care must be taken to make sure that all tare values (e.g., support weight) 
have been applied before the balance data are transferred from the balance moment 
center to the desired center of gravity. Many of these tares involve lift, drag, and 
side force that are used in the moment transfer. 
11. Uncorrected 
Coefficients. The table of data from item 9 above 
is now reduced 
to coefficient form using the corrected dynamic pressure qc. The dynamic pressure 
due to wake blockage and operator error will vary with cl, 
or +
,
 
The value associated 
with the angles under consideration is used. The lift coefficient as well as yawing 
moment, rolling moment, and side force have no further corrections and thus are 
final corrected values. The drag, pitching moment, and angle of attack need fur- 
ther corrections. 
12. Wall Corrections. The wall correction theories of Glauert, Heyson, and Joppa 
are based on the forces generated by the model lifting system. The spanwise lift 


416 
BOUNDARY CORRECTIONS U: THREEDIMENSIONAL FLOW 
distribution either can be taken as uniform or can be distributed in an elliptical or 
other load for the wing. Which spanwise lift load is used depends on how the lifting 
- 
surface was mathematically 
represented. In general, ~lauert-and 
Joppa use a uniform 
load with a reduction in vortex span and the same circulation at the centerline as 
an elliptical load. Heyson's later work distributes the point doublets along the span 
and thus allows easily for either &hiform or elliptical load for wings and a uniform 
or triangular load for rotors or any other desired loading. If desired, the load can 
be distributed along the span in Joppa's and Glauert's methods also. 
For an airplane model this means that the wall corrections are based on using 
wing lift only. Thus, runs should be made with the wing only for wing and wing- 
plus-flap combinations. For some models this is not possible because the model 
was not designed to be tested with the wing alone. The reasoning behind this is 
that the fuselage is always there and thus should be considered as a unit with the 
wing. Also, the amount of time required to assemble/disassemble the model for 
wing-alone runs may be prohibitive. In these cases runs are made with the horizontal 
tail off (tail-off runs) to obtain the required data for wall corrections. The following 
discussion will use the conventional, 
or Glauert-type, 
corrections, 
where the assumed 
vortex wake trails straight aft of the wing. In this case the correction factor at the 
wing is a constant. The plots in Chapter 6 are for this case. If either Heyson's or 
Joppa's method are used, the wall correction factors would be calculated based on 
the tail-off data for each angle of attack, or CL. 
Angle-of-Attack Correction 
where a
,
 
is the corrected angle of attack, a
,
 
the geometric angle of attack (see item 
4), A%* the tunnel upflow as determined in Section 4.16 by either probes or a 
calibration wing or as a part of evaluating the tare and interference, where 
Aa, = - 
8S 
(57.3) 
C
C
L
W
 
6 being the wall correction factor and a function of the model-span-to-tunnel-width 
ratio [see Eq. (6.55)], span load, location in the tunnel, and tunnel shape and CLW 
the wing or tail-off lift coefficient for the model wing configuration used in the run. 
Drag Coefficient 


10.9 SUMMARY: CLOSED TEST SECTION 
417 
where Pa., is in radians. 
Pitching Moment Coefficient 
where aC,&aG, is 
the 
rate of change 
of the pitching 
moment 
coefficient 
with stabilizer 
deflection, which is proportional to the change in angle of attack for the tail. It is -a, 
- 
Vq, 
[see Eq. (10.37)] and is obtained by making at least two, but preferably three, tail- 
on runs at different stabilizer angles. Care must be taken in evaluating aCmcGI&3. 
to 
make sure that the tail lift is in the linear portion of its Ch curve, that is, the tail is not 
stalled. Measuring aCmcG/dS, 
avoids any error in assuming values for a, and -qr. 
For a 
model with leading- and trailing-edge flaps the value may vary with a .  
At low a's, 
when the leading edge is separated, it will have a lower value than the nonstalled 
region, and again, at high a's, when the trailing-edge flaps stall, the value will again 
decrease. In some cases the aerodynamic engineer prefers to use the variable value. 
The parameter 
TZ 
is the additional correction factor for differences 
in upwash from the 
tunnel walls at the tail and wing (see Section 10.8). Again, this term is a function of 
model geometry and size, tunnel geometry and size, and location of the tail relative to 
the wing. The important parameters are tail-length-to-tunnel-width ratio and vertical 
location of the tail relative to the wing. If desired, the value of TZ 
can be varied to 
account for the vertical motion of the tail relative to the wings as the model is pitched. 
The three wall corrections are usually worked up in the form of KICLw 
for a, 
KlCiw for drag, and K3CLw 
for pitching moment. These constants from Equations 
(10.65), (10.66), and (10.68) are stored versus the geometric angle of attack. There 
will be a set of these corrections for all combinations of the wing, flaps, spoilers, 
and so on, that are in the experimental run matrix. The correct set of wall corrections 
must be specified for each run. 
13. Summary o
f
 Data Corrections. At this point the data have been corrected 
for angle calibrations, deflections, dynamic pressure calibration, operator error and 
blockage, forces and moments for balance calibration, operator error and blockage, 
forces and moments for balance calibration, support and interference tares, weight 
tares, and finally tunnel boundaries. The data are at the desired center-of-gravity 
position or positions on the wind axes for an external balance. 
14. Transfer to Other Axes. There are three axes systems that are used; these 
are wind, body, and stability axes. The axes can pass through either the balance 
moment center or the desired model center of gravity. The axes are 
defined as follows: 
a. Wind Axes. The lift, drag, and cross-wind force are parallel to the test-section 
centerlines. This axis system is used to define the lift as perpendicular to the remote 


418 
BOUNDARY 
CORRECTIONS I
k
 
THREE-DIMENSIONAL FLOW 
velocity, the drag as parallel to the velocity, and the cross-wind force as perpendicular 
to the plane of lift and drag. The moments are about the three axes. 
b. Body Axes. This axis system is attached to and moves with the model. The 
lift is replaced with normal force, drag with axial, or chordwise, force, and cross 
wind with side force. 
c. S
t
a
b
i
l
i
t
y
 Axes. In this axis system the vertical axis, or lift, is perpendicular 
to the remote velocity, and the drag and side force yaw with the model (the yaw 
axis is not pitched with the model). 
It is very useful for wind tunnel engineers to be familiar with the ways the various 
axis systems are used for flight mechanics and performance studies. Etkin and Reid4' 
can be consulted for more details. 
Most external balances measure about the wind axis and most internal balances 
measure about the body axis. Thus it becomes necessary to transfer from one axis 
system to another, depending upon how the data are intended to be analyzed. Since 
the data have already been transferred to the desired center of gravity (item lo), 
the following equations can be used to transfer the data to the desired axes. 
The transformations from wind axes to stability axes are 
where subscript SA designates stability axis. 
The transformations from wind axes to body axes are 
C,, = CLcos 
a + CDcos 
Jr sin a - 
Cysin 
Jr sin a 
CAB 
= CDcos 
Jr cos a - 
CLsin 
a - 
Cysin 
$ 
cos a 
C, = C,cos Jr cos a + 
C,sin Jr cos a - 
C.sin a 
(
:
)
 
C,,, = C.cos 
CY + C,COS 
Jr sin a + 
C,sin Jr sin a 


10.9 SUMMARY: CLOSED TEST SECTION 
419 
The a is the geometric angle of attack and is not corrected for the tunnel upflow 
and walls. The subscripts are body axis B, normal force N, axial force aerodynamic, 
wing span b, and mean A, chord c. 
The transformations from body axes to wind axes are 
CD, = CAcos 
a cos JI + C,sin JI + CNsin 
a cos IJJ 
C
,
 
= C
.
C
O
S
 
JI + (:)c~~~~ 
a sin + + (:)C,,sin 
a sin 
(10.73) 
GI, = C,cos a cos I) - 
C,sin + + C.sin a sin JI 
k) 
C,, = - 
CAcos 
a sin JI + C,cos JI - 
CNsin 
a sin JI 
The subscript W means wind axes. 
15. Final Comments. Although the calculations in the data reduction process 
are simple, a single run of 20 or 30 angles requires a large number of calculations. 
The number of calculations will be even larger if Heyson's or Joppa's wall correction 
theories are used, because they require the wall interference factors to be calculated 
at each test point. 
Furthermore, the support tare and interference values, weight tares, other tares 
such as internal nacelle drag, and wall corrections are all functions of the model 
configurations on a given test run. Thus, before a run is reduced, the proper set of 
these corrections must be selected and the computer instructed to select the correct 
set. Under pressure to get the data out quickly, mistakes can be made. Therefore, 
at the end of the test these items must be checked on a run-by-run basis and any 
error corrected. Because of this, some tunnel operators will only release preliminary 
data during a test. This check on the data reduction process should be made before 
any computer readable set of data is released. If the data for support tares and other 
tares are taken during the test, considerable time will be required to work up and 
check these tares. Thus the data reduction of the final data will also be delayed. 
The data reduction process has many constants that are functions of model size, 
such as wing area and moment transfer dimensions. Therefore, early in the test both 
a pitch and yaw run should be reduced using a pocket calculator (check point) to 
make sure that all the constants are 
installed correctly in the main computer program. 
The check point must be done independently of the computer program and use the 
original sources of model and tunnel values. If the two results do not agree, the 
error must be found and corrected. It is amazing how many constants can have 
numbers transposed or entered in the wrong field. It also should be noted that wall 
corrections usually are not applied to tests with ground planes because you desire 
the effect of the ground or lower boundary. Usually the dynamic pressure calibration 
and the upflow change when the ground plane is installed. 


420 
BOUNDARY CORRECTIONS n: THREE-DIMENSIONAL n o w  
Although each aetail of the data reduction process is straightforward, 
the chance 
for errors is large, so extreme care must be taken in carrying out the process. A 
good data reduction person must be a good bookkeeper. 
Example 10.2 Summary of Three-Dimensional Corrections (Closed Test Sec- 
tion) The model and tunnel iIimensions are as follows: 
The tunnel is 8 ft X 12 ft with four fillets 1.5 ft high. Thus the actual cross- 
sectional area is 91.5 ftz. The model dimensions are as follows: 
Wng: area = 7.1997 ft2, MAC = 12.8933 in., span = 88.182 in., AR = 7.50, 
0.25 MAC is at model station (MS) = 49.980, waterline (WL) 
= 10.379, 
taper ratio = 0.30. 
Horizontal Tail: area = 2.149 ft2, MAC = 9.3346 in., span = 35.184 in., AR 
= 4.0, 0.25 MAC is at MS = 90.240, WL 
= 16.902 at a = 0°, 6, = 0". 
Model Trunnion: MS = 53.480. WL = 10.494. 
The body has an overall length of 90.96 in., a maximum width of 8.88 in., and 
depth of 9.48 in. The maximum circumference is 29.5 in. for an effective diameter 
of 9.39 in. The wing volume is 0.6291 ft3 and the body volume is 2.472 ft3. The 
angle of attack is measured from the chord line of the wing MAC. 
The data in Table 10.1 have been corrected for balance load interactions (item 
3), and the mechanical calibrations have been applied to the angle of attack a. 
There 
were no corrections applied for balance and model deflections. 
Support tares and interference (item 8) will not be applied as the test was run 
for comparative data. 
Blockage corrections (item 7) are in two parts: a solid blockage due to the model 
volume 
and a wake 
blockage 
due 
to the wakes shed from the model. The 
solid blockage 
is from Eq. (10.2) for the wing and Eq. (10.3) 
for the body (see Section 10.2). 
The wing thickness ratio on the average is 14% 
and the airfoil is similar to a 65 
series; thus K, 
from Figure 10.2 is 1.006. The ratio of model span to tunnel breadth 
is 0.61; for the tunnel BIH = 1.50; thus 
= 0.88. The wing volume is 0.629 ft3 
and the tunnel cross-sectional area is 91.5 ft2. 
Thus 
For the body, with an effective diameter of 9.39 in. and length of 90.96 in., 
dl1 = 0.1032. From Figure 10.2, K3 = 0.91. The volume of the body is 2.472 ft3. 
Therefore 
Then the total solid blockage, E , ~  
= 0.002872. 
1 


TABLE 10.1. Data Table 
a
i
 
a
,
 
L 
4 
M
u
 
-
M
w
 
M
u
-
M
w
 
M
m
 
CLC 
C
D
,
 
CMC~ 
Tail O
f
f
 
2 
2.48 
356.0 
41.18 
-366.2 
-28.4 
-394.6 
- 
1642.8 
1.39914 
0.16184 
-0.50076 
4 
4.94 
421.8 
47.53 
-80.2 
-56.8 
- 
137.0 
- 
1622.2 
1.65775 
0.18680 
-0.49428 
6 
7.41 
482.4 
54.39 
183.4 
-85.3 
+98.1 
-1601.8 
1.89592 
0.21376 
-0.48793 
Tail On, 
8, = 0" 
2 
2.48 
339.2 
41.16 
245.9 
-36.5 
209.4 
-980.0 
1.33258 
0.16170 
-0.29873 
4 
4.94 
411.9 
47.41 
292.6 
-70.0 
222.6 
- 
1228.0 
1.16818 
0.18625 
-0.37417 
6 
7.41 
481.6 
54.89 
346.2 
-107.7 
244.5 
- 
1436.3 
1 
A9200 
0.21564 
-0.43752 
Tail On, 
8, = -5" 
2 
2.48 
328.1 
41.39 
1020.6 
-36.5 
984.1 
-131.4 
1.24934 
0.16256 
-0.04005 
4 
4.94 
389.8 
47.07 
1064.1 
-70.0 
994.1 
-379.0 
1.53094 
0.18487 
-0.11548 
6 
7.41 
456.8 
53.64 
1190.4 
-101.7 
1007.1 
-602.1 
1.79329 
0.21067 
-0.18341 


422 
BOUNDARY CORRECTIONS 1
1
:
 THREE-DIMENSIONAL FLOW 
TABLE 
10.2. Resu16 f
o
r
 Wake 
Blockage 
S 
5S/4C 
Configuration 
CDP~ 
1l~rARe 
4CCm 
(CD. - 
C
o
o
 - 
Cn) 
%b, 
Tail off 
0.10068 
0.031411 
0.001980 
0.00 
0.001980 
6
,
 = 0" 
0.11 
108 
0.028890 
0.002185 
0.00 
0.002185 
6
,
 = -5" 
0.1 
1820 
0.028785 
0.002325 
0.00 
0.002325 
Maskell's wake blockage (Section 10.3) will be applied by calculating the equiva- 
lent parasite drag and ll.rrARe (Chapter 13) for each of the three runs. The results 
are given in Table 10.2, where q, = qA(l 
+ &,)I = 35.00(1 + &JZ, 
and the corrected 
dynamic pressures 
for each model configuration 
are in Table 10.3 (qA 
from tunnel cali- 
bration). 
The weight tares (item 9) to the pitching moment versus the angle of attack are 
listed and applied in Table 10.1, in which tare values are corrected for balance inter- 
actions. 
Moment transfers (item 10) will be transferred from the balance moment center 
that coincides with the trunnion to the 25% chord of the mean aerodynamic chord 
using the dimensions given in Table 10.4, taken from the model drawings at a = 
0". The 25% MAC is 0.115 in. below and 3.50 in. forward of the trunnion. The 
slant distance from the trunnion to the center of gravity is 3.502 in. (this distance 
will be called a). The angle y is positive clockwise from the tunnel centerline to 
the desired center of gravity. Thus, 
0.115 
y = 360 - 
tan-'- 
= 360" - 
1.88" (or 358.12") 
3.50 
The horizontal transfer distance is s 
= -a cos(y + a) and the vertical transfer 
distance is t = a sin(y + a
)
.
 
Applying the moment transfers to the lift and drag values gives the moment 
about the aerodynamic center of the wing's MAC in Table 10.1, M
,
 = Mu 
- 
M, 
- 
sL, - 
tD.. 
Using the dynamic pressure corrected for blockage, wing area, and mean aerody- 
namic chord, the coefficients uncorrected for tunnel upflow and wall corrections 
are obtained (item 11). It should be noted that the lift coefficient is fully corrected 
(Table 10.1). 
TABLE 
103. Corrected D
y
n
a
m
i
c
 
Pressure 
Configuration 
E 
1 + E, 
4c 
sbt 
Tail off 
0.002872 
0.001980 
1.004852 
35.3405 
6
,
 = 0" 
0.002872 
0.002185 
1.005057 
35.3549 
6
,
 
= 0" 
0.002872 
0.002325 
1.005 
197 
35.3647 


10.9 SUMMARY CLOSED 
TEST 
SECTION 
423 
TABLE 10.4. Dimensions Table 
Trunnion 
25% MAC (wing) 
Model station 
Model waterline 
For wall corrections (item 12), 
using Equation (10.28) to find the effective vortex 
span for the wing aspect ratio of 7.5 and taper ratio of 0.3, 
b,lb = 0.72 from Figure 
10.11, and thus b
,
 
= 0.86(b) 
= 75.84, and b,lb = 0.53 = k. From Figure 10.17, 6 
= 0.108: 
The values of A
a
,
 
and ACb 
are based on the wing or tail-off lift coefficient and 
are listed in Table 10.5 versus the indicated angle of attack. In the same table the 
corrections due to tunnel upflow are also given. 
The correction to tail-on pitching moment is 
The average value of aC,,,/a6, 
from the data is -0.05143. 
The AC of the tail is 6.52 in. above the wing AC at a = 0"; thus h,lb, = 
0.086. The tail moment arm (between ACs) is 40.26; therefore 1
,
l
B
 
= 0.280. 
An examination of Figures 10.17 and 10.19 shows a large difference in the shape 
of the curve at a 
= 1.0 and a = 0.5. Figure 10.40 for the tail above and below the 
wing only has a = 0.5, 1.0. Linear interpolations will lead to error. Using Figure 
10.39 for the wing and tail on the tunnel centerline, with data for IX = 1.0, 0.207, 
TABLE 105. Wall Corrections 


424 
BOUNDARY 
CORRECTIONS 
11: THREE-DIMENSIONAL 
FLOW 
0.5, an increment can be obtained from 
= 1.0, . . 
. , 
0.67. This increment is then 
applied to the data of Figure 10.40 from a = 1.0 to yield a 
of 0.71, as 
Using charts for a A = 
0.67 tunnel, 6 = 0.108 and 
= 
0.75. Thus the approxima- 
tions were fairly close. Note that most wind tunnels have calculated both 6 and T~ 
for various model sizes (values are in Table 10.5). 
If a measured value is not available for aC,,,la6,, it can be estimated as follows: 
'
C
m
 
- 
-a,Vqt 
- - 
as, 
From Equation (10.42), a,ql = 0.0533. This is based on the assumption that the 
two-dimensional lift curve slope is 0.100 per degree: 
This is within 3.7% of the measured value. It is, however, preferable to measure 
aCJa6,, thus requiring no assumptions on a, and q
,
.
 
The use of total model lift (wing plus tail) rather than the wing lift will lead to 
the following values for a, = 2.0°, 6, = -5.0': 
This is a decrease in a of 0.05" and CD 
of 0.00240 and an increase in C, of 0.00188. 
In percent the errors are a = -1.65, CD 
= -1.3%, and CMAc 
= -15.8%. The 
CMAc 
value is large because CMAC 
is a small number. However, the error is a function 
of the tail lift and would be greater for larger negative stabilizer angles or negative 
elevator angles. Because the wall corrections are functions of the wing circulation, 
it is not rational to use the total model lift. 
At this point, if desired, the data can be transferred to the body or stability axis 
(item 8). In this example the pitching moment was calculated about the aerodynamic 
center of the wing's mean aerodynamic chord. However, in most wind tunnel tests 
the moments are also taken about forward and aft center-of-gravity positions that 


REFERENCES AND NOTES 
425 
TABLE 10.6. Final Valves 
a, 
a c  
CLC 
CDC 
Cmr 
T
a
i
l
 Off 
T
a
i
l
 On, 
8, = 0" 
T
a
i
l
 On, 
8, = -5" 
2 
3.15 
1.24934 
0.17891 
-0.01517 
4 
5.74 
1.53094 
0.20788 
-0.08600 
correspond to the desired limits for center-of-gravity travel. Table 10.6 gives the 
final corrected coefficients. 
10.10 SUMMARY: OPEN JET 
The air stream in an open test section is free to expand; therefore, the wake and 
solid-blockage effects are small but not zero. As suggested in Section 10.3, the solid 
blockage may be taken as one-fourth that of a closed tunnel. An examination of 
figures in this chapter for boundary correction factors (6 at the wing and TT 
at the 
tail) shows that the numerical values are different for open and closed tunnels of 
similar geometry. The boundary correction factor at the wing (6) is negative for 
open tunnels and positive for closed tunnels. Other than the blockage correction 
and the sign change of the boundary correction factor, the same methods can be 
used as for a closed tunnel. 
A word of caution: Many open test-section tunnels with external balances have 
a splitter plate to shield the balance from the airstream. In this case the tunnel may 
have one solid boundary, depending on the splitter plate location. This type of mixed 
boundary is discussed by Heys0n.4~~~ 
REFERENCES AND NOTES 
1. Glauert, H., "Wind Tunnel Interference on Wings, Bodies, and Airscrews," ARC R&M 
1566. 1933. 


426 
BOUNDARY 
CORRECTIONS 1
1
:
 THREE-DIMENSIONAL 
FLOW 
2. Hemott, J. G., "BIockage Corrections for Three 
Dimensional-Flow Closed-Throat Wind 
Tunnels with Consideration of the Effect of Compressibility," NACA TR 995, 1950. 
3. Thorn, A., "Blockage 
Corrections 
in a High Speed Wind Tunnel," 
ARC R&M 2033,1943. 
4. Maskell, E. C., "A Theory of the Blockage Effects on Bluff Bodies and Stalled Wings 
in a Closed Wind Tunnel," ARC R&M 3400, 1965. 
5. Young, A. D., "The Induced Drag of Flapped Elliptic Wings with Cut Out and with 
Flaps that Extend the Local Chord," ARC R&M 2544, 1942 (see Equation 6.25). 
6. See Young's Figures 18, 19, and 20. 
7. See Young's Equation 25. 
8. Vassaire, J. C., "Correction de Blocage dans les Essais en Soufflerie, Effects de deCoIle- 
ments," AGARD CP-102, Paper 9, 1972. 
9. Hensel, R. W., "Rectangular Wind Tunnel Blocking Corrections Using the Velocity Ratio 
Method," NACA TN 2372, 195 
1. 
10. Swanson, R. S., and Toll, T. A,, "Jet Boundary Corrections for Reflection Plane Models 
in Rectangular Wind Tunnels," NACA TR 770, 1943. 
11. Stewart, H. J., "The Effect 
of Wind-Tunnel-Wall 
Interference on the Stalling Characteristic 
of Wings," J. Aeronaut. Sci.. 8, 426-428, 1941. 
12. Gavin, J. R., and Hensel, R. W., "Elliptic Tunnel Wall Corrections," J. Aeronaut. Sci., 
9,533-537, Dec. 1942. 
13. Kondo, K., 'The Wall Interference of Wind Tunnels with Boundaries of Circular Arcs," 
Air Research Institute, University of Tokyo, 126, 1935. 
14. Glauert, H., 'The Interference of the Characteristics of an Airfoil in a Wind Tunnel of 
Circular Section," 
ARC R&M 1453, 1931. 
15. Rosenhead, L., "Uniform and Elliptic Loading in Circular and Rectangular Tunnels," 
Pmc. Roy. Soc., Series A, Vol. 129, 1930, p. 135. 
16. Silverstein, A., "Wind Tunnel Interference with Particular References to Off-Center 
Positions of the Wing and to the Downwash at the Tail," NACA TR 547, 1935. 
17. Van Schliestelt, 
G., "Experimental 
Verification 
of Theodorsen's Theoretical Jet-Boundary 
Correction Factors," NACA TN 506, 1934. 
18. Theodorsen, T., "Interference on an Airfoil of Finite Span in an Open Rectangular Wind 
Tunnel, NACA TR 
461, 1931. 
19. Terazawa K., "On 
the Interference 
of Wind Tunnel Walls on the Aerodynamic Character- 
istics of a Wing," Air Research Institute, University of Tokyo, 44, 1932. 
20. Glauert, H., "The Interference on the Characteristics of an Airfoil in a W
i
n
d
 Tunnel of 
Rectangular Section," ARC R&M 1459, 1932. 
21. Sivells, J. C., and Salmi, R. M., "Jet Boundary Corrections for Complete and Semispan 
Swept W~ngs 
in Closed Circular Wind Tunnels," NACA TN 
2454, 1951. 
22. Sanuki, M., and Tani, I
.
,
 "The Wall Interference of a Wind Tunnel of Elliptic Cross- 
Section," Pmc. Phys. Math. Soc. Jpn., 14, 592603, 1932. 
23. Rosenhead, L., 'The Airfoil in a Wind Tunnel of Elliptic Cross-Section," Proc. Roy. 
Soc., Series A, Vol. 140, 1933, p. 579. 
24. Riegels, F., "Correction Factors for Wind Tunnels of Elliptic Section with Partly Open 
and Partly Closed Test Section," NACA TM 
1310, 1951. 
25. Batchelor, G. K., "Interference in a Wind Tunnel of Octagonal Section," Australian 
Committee for Aeronautics (CSIR) 1, Jan. 1944. 


REFERENCES AND NOTES 
427 
26. Gent, B. L., "Interference 
in a Wind Tunnel of Rectangular Octagonal Section," 
Australian 
Committee for Aeronautics (CSIR) 2, Jan. 1944. 
27. Lotz, I., "Correction of Downwash in Wind Tunnels of Circular and Elliptic Sections," 
NACA TM 
801, 1936. 
28. Silverstein, A., and Katzoff, 
S., "Experimental 
Investigations 
of Wind-Tunnel Interference 
on the Downwash Behind an Airfoil," NACA TR 609, 1937. 
29. Heyson, H. H., "Jet Boundary Correction for Lifting Rotors Centered in a Rectangular 
Wind Tunnel," NASA TR R-71, 1960. 
30. Heyson, H. H., "Linearized Theory of Wind Tunnel Jet Boundary Comtions 
and Ground 
Effect for VTOUSTOL Aircraft," NASA TR R-124, 1962. 
31. Heyson, H. H., "Use of Superposition in Digital Computers to Obtain Wind Tunnel 
Interference Factors for Arbitrary Configurations, with Particular Reference to V/STOL 
Models," NASA TR R-302, 1969. 
32. Heyson, H. H., "Fortran Programs for Calculating Wind Tunnel Boundary Interference," 
NASA 'I'M X-1740, 1969. 
33. Heyson, H. H., "General Theory of Wall Interference 
for Static Stability Tests in Closed 
Rectangular Test Sections and in Ground Effects," NASA TR R-364, 1971. 
34. Heyson, H. H., "Nomographic Solution of the Momentum Equation for VTOL-STOL 
Aircraft," NASA TN D-814, 1961. 
35. Heyson, H. H., and Grunwald, K. J., "Wind Tunnel Boundary Interference for V/STOL 
Testing," Paper 24, NASA SP 116, pp. 409-434. 
36. Heyson, H. H., "Rapid Estimation of Wind-Tunnel 
Corrections with Application to Wind 
Tunnels and Model Design," NASA TN D-6416, 1971. 
37. Heyson, H. H., "Equations for the Application of Wind Tunnel Wall Corrections to 
Pitching Moments Caused by the Tail of an Aircraft Model," NASA TN D-3738, 1966. 
38. Joppa, R. G., "A Method of Calculating Wind Tunnel Interference Factors for Tunnels of 
Arbitrary 
Cross 
Section, Report 67-1, University of Washington, 
Department 
of Aerospace 
Engineering, 1967 (see also NASA CR 845, 1967). 
39. Joppa, R. G., "Wall Interference Effects in Wind Tunnel Testing of S M L  
Aircraft, AZAA 
J. Aircraj?, 6, 209-214, 1969. 
40. Joppa, R. G., 'Wind Tunnel Interference Factors for High Lift Wings in Closed Wind 
Tunnels," NASA CR 2191 1973. 
41. Etkin, B., and Reid, L. D., Dynamics o
f
 Flight, S
t
a
b
i
l
i
t
y
 and Control, 3rd ed., John 
Wiley & Sons, New York, 1996. 
42. Heyson, H. H., "Linearized Theory of Wind Tunnel Jet Boundary Corrections and Ground 
Effect for VTOUSTOL Aircraft," NASA TR 
R-124, 1962. 
43. Heyson, H. H., "General Theory of Wall Interference for Static Stability Tests in Closed 
Rectangular Test Sections and in Ground Effect," NASA TR R-364, 1971. 


11 Boundary Corrections 111: 
Additional Applications 
The principles and many practical manifestations 
of boundary corrections have been 
discussed in the previous two chapters. A number of additional applications are 
discussed in this chapter. 
11.1 REFLECTION PLANE MODELS 
The main purpose for choosing reflection plane models is to get the largest model 
size and hence the largest experimental Reynolds number. In turn, the large model 
size may require special attention to wall corrections. Another effect is that the 
reflection plane "reflects," 
and under some conditions (e.g., aileron down, for which 
the normal situation would be antisymmetric, or a vertical tail for which there is 
no "reflection" 
in the normal configuration), 
the reflection is not exactly the condition 
that is desired. 
Experiments using reflection plane models are conveniently divided into four 
classes: 
1. small symmetrical models (less than 0.6h) such as halves of flapped wings 
or horizontal tails, 
2. small unsymmetrical models such as aileron panels, 
3. small vertical tail models where a reflection is not desired, and 
4. large reflection plane models of all kinds. 
The first three will be discussed in the following, but reference to the work of 
Swanson and Toll' or Hey~on~-~ 
is suggested for guidance on experiments using 
large reflection plane models. Heysons 
gives methods for handling a skewed wake, 
both vertically and laterally. These techniques could therefore handle a horizontal 
and vertical tail with both rudder and elevator deflections. 
Small Symmetrical Models 
The data for a small reflection plane model that is half of a symmetrical model may 
be corrected by treating the upwash and blockage as though the entire model were 
428 


11.1 REFLECTION PLANE MODELS 
429 
FIGURE 1
1
.
1
 Nomenclature for a reflection plane model. 
in a tunnel of double the width, as indicated in Figure 11.1. The values of 6 
for 
such a setup are shown in Figure 10.17, and those for a circular-arc tunnel are in 
Figure 10.25. One normally gets a slightly lower lift curve slope and slightly higher 
induced drag than in the complete-model, complete-tunnel case, owing to some 
streamwise vortex shedding in the root boundary layer. When panel area and MAC 
are used, the final data are directly applicable to the airplane if the split is along 
the plane of symmetry with an added amount of span to allow for the boundary 
layer displacement thickness. Chapter 13 should also be consulted. 
Small Unsymmetrical Models 
When the model is of a part that is unsymmetrical in the actual flight vehicle (e.g., 
aileron deflected), additional troubles accrue since the reflection will act as though 
it is symmetrical. In this case the tunnel data include a small carryover from the 
reflection and will show from one-tenth to one-fourth more increment of lift, drag, 
pitching moment, yawing moment, and rolling moment than would occur for the 
actual asymmetric flight article. Tunnel data for aileron effectiveness is frequently 
higher than is obtained in practice because of failure to simulate aileron cable stretch 
and wing twist. This can be corrected by comparing the span loading with ailerons 
at zero and deflected and subtracting the carryover due to the reflected panel. 
The only time this effect can be misleading in comparing different ailerons on 
the same basic panel is when one aileron has more span than another. As indicated 
in Figure 11.2, the reflection effects increase with span and the aileron of greatest 
span yields the data most erroneously high. 
Difficulties arising from the doubled increment of lift, drag, and moment have 
been covered in Chapter 13, which may be consulted for proper interpretation of 
the results. 
Small Vertical Tail Models 
Small vertical tail models present a number of additional difficulties since the degree 
of endplating given by the fuselage and horizontal tail is very difficult to predict. 
One approach is to consider the vertical tail a completely reflected symmetrical 
semispan wing and, after determination of the slope of the vertical tail lift curve 
from the complete model tests, to reduce the panel test data to conform. Normally 


430 
BOUNDARY CORRECTIONS IIk ADDITIONAL APPLICATIONS 
* 
Reflection 
Measured with reflection 
plane\ 
r p l a n e  
/- 
Reflected aileron 
I 
- 
down 
h e a l  
aileron 
down 
FIGURE 
11.2 Effect of reflection plane on panel with aileron down. 
the vertical tail drag is of so little interest that no increase of panel drag to allow 
for the reduced aspect ratio is required. 
Another approach, and perhaps the best one, is to determine the slope of the lift 
curve of the vertical tail from complete model tests and use the hinge moment data 
from panel tests at the same lift coefficient. This neglects the difference of span 
loading for panel and actual vertical tail installation. Still another alternative is to 
build a complete tail assembly model. Here the model is large enough for high 
Reynolds numbers, and actual endplating is well simulated. The effects of sidewash 
must be obtained from the complete model tests and incorporated into the data, as 
must be done for any isolated tail representation. The tail assembly model should 
have a fuselage stub nose at least one MAC ahead of the tail quarter chord. 
Large Models 
The analysis for large models is complicated fundamentally because the boundary- 
induced upwash cannot be considered constant along either the chord or the span. 
It is therefore necessary to take greater care with the upwash corrections and work 
out the spatial dependences. Variation of the blockage along the model almost never 
is large enough to require detailed evaluation. 
Besides streamline curvature 
effects, variation of boundary-induced upwash along 
the span of the model tends to load up the tips. Some test section shapes intensify 
this effect more than others. 
1
1
.
2
 SWEPT WINGS: NONUNIFORM LIFT 
Corrections for swept wings can be determined for any shape tunnel test section 
by use of panel methods or by the earlier Joppa's method. Heyson's method is 
applicable for rectangular tunnels. When the aerodynamic center of the wing and 
the pivot point coincide and are near the tunnel centerline for a swept wing, the 


11.4 GROUND PROXIMlTY EFFECTS 
FOR AIRCRAFT 
431 
change in the vertical wall correction factor from a swept wing for moderate down- 
wash angles is very small. 
For arbitrary and nonsymmetric lift distributions, the panel methods or Joppa's 
method can be adapted. For rectangular tunnels, Heyson's method appears to be 
easier to use. Heyson includes treatment of a vortex wake that is deflected both 
vertically and laterally, and this should cover almost any case. 
Although these methods are powerful, it is still the case that a significant invest- 
ment is required to acquire the detailed skill with a particular code so that complex 
corrections can be provided. With the classical corrections where the correction 
factor is a constant for a given tunnel-model combination, the wall corrections are 
of the form of a constant times the wing or tail-off lift coefficient. Panel methods 
as well as Heyson's method and Joppa' method, on the other hand, require calcula- 
tions of the wall correction factors based on the wing lift for each test point. These 
values would be used for tail-on runs, as are conventional corrections, using a table 
look-up for the same model attitude and power setting. The panel methods can in 
principle use the complete configuration. 
For a research test the likely increased time to reduce the data may not be critical. 
However, for a developmental test where the results of one run are often used to 
determine the next run, a long time to reduce data may be unacceptable. 
The panel methods and the vortex lattice method of Joppa appear adaptable to 
slotted tunnels. This is an area that still requires significant research to improve tech- 
niques. 
11.3 CONTROL SURFACE HINGE MOMENTS 
It is apparent that the small size of such surfaces on complete models makes hinge 
moment corrections likely to be in the same range as measurement uncertainty. 
Large models, such as those used for reflection plane tests, have their hinge moments 
increased by solid jet boundaries in a manner similar to the increase of pitching 
moment. The increase of hinge moment due to the walls in some such cases can 
be of the order of 8% for a 30% flap on large reflection plane models. 
Hinge moment data must be reduced with the dynamic pressure as corrected for 
both solid and wake blockage, as is true for pressure coefficients. 
11.4 
GROUND PROXIMITY EFFECTS FOR AIRCRAFT 
When an aircraft operates within a semispan or less from the ground, its downwash 
pattern is altered and decreased by the ground. The ground can be considered to 
be a reflection plane and treated in the same way as wall effects have been treated. 
This results in a decrease in the downwash, a corresponding increase in the lift 
curve slope, a decrease in induced drag, and an increase in the slope of the pitching 
moment curve. The latter results in an increase in elevator angle to trim the airplane. 
The flight condition at design forward center-of-gravity position and CLm usually 


~- 
~~~ 
~ 
432 
BOUNDARY CORRECTIONS lIF ADDITIONAL APPLICATIONS 
determines the elevator power required. This condition is simulated in a wind tunnel 
by placing a ground board or ground plane under the model or by lowering the 
model to the proximity of the floor. The ground plane spans the tunnel, and for an 
external balance it must be adjustable in height. The supports under the board must 
have minimum blockage and in larger tunnels will have to support personnel working 
on the model. For a sting supprt, a sting that can change the model height at 
constant angle of attack is very convenient. 
Turner6 determined a limit for testing with a conventional ground board. The 
limit was for models with full-span high-lift configurations. Data are given for 
models with aspect ratios from 6 to 10 using tilt wings, jet flaps, and double-slotted 
flaps. The limit is a function of the ratio of the height above the ground plane to 
model span versus CL. 
When CL 
> 
20 Wb, a moving-belt ground plane should be 
used. As with all such limits the line represented by the equation represents a gray 
area near which the results should be carefully evaluated. The limit in this case is 
similar to flow breakdown for V/STOL models (see Section 11.7). The downwash 
from the model approaching the floor or ground at an angle approaching 90" produces 
a stagnation point on the ground plane. A portion of the flow then moves upstream. 
The presence of the ground plane's boundary layer leads to this event at higher 
clearance values than when there is no ground plane boundary layer present. A 
necklace vortex is formed on the ground plane similar to that formed when a flow 
encounters protuberance from a surface. There is a resulting t u ~ e l  
flow distortion. 
The rule of thumb for V/STOL models with distributed lift is almost exactly the 
same. The effect on tunnel data that is most easily detected is a decrease in the lift 
curve slope when testing the fixed ground planes. 
Some tunnels are equipped with a moving-belt ground plane. These usually 
require sting balances. The boundary layer is usually sucked off at the leading edge 
of the belt. Thus, if the belt moves at the test speed, there is no boundary layer on 
the belt as with a fned ground plane. The speed of a moving belt appears to be 
limited by belt slippage around the drive roller. These units are expensive, and it 
is difficult to make the belt track. The sting must have adjustable, but positive, 
limits to the model a range and the sting lower height. The ground plane should 
extend, as a minimum, from the nose of the model to aft of the tail. 
A second approach to removing the boundary layer in fixed ground planes can 
be achieved either by suction through floor perforations or by blowing through slots 
to create a thin jet parallel to the floor to replace the momentum lost in the boundary 
layer. The thickness of the boundary layer on a ground board can also be controlled 
to some extent by a flap on the trailing edge. This can introduce other distortions 
through the creation of circulation around the ground board. 
Often both the upflow at the wing and the dynamic pressure will be a function 
of ground board height. The data are 
usually corrected for blockage and, if required, 
buoyancy, which is almost certain to be changed upon the installation of a ground 
board. The t u ~ e l  
wall or boundary corrections usually are not applied since the 
model is very close to the floor. If boundary corrections are required, they only 
include the two walls and the ceiling. Note that if "corrections" 
to all four boundaries 
are applied, the ground effect will be removed and results for free air are recovered. 


11.6 BOUNDARY CORREmION: PROPELLERS 
433 
The large General Motors automotive tunnel, where cars are tested on the floor, 
uses suction at the leading edge of the test section to remove the boundary layer. 
This air then enters the tunnel behind the test section to maintain continuity. The 
Glenn L. Martin Wind Tunnel at the University of Maryland uses this system. The 
development of moving belts has been advanced in recent years by the need for 
better simulation of moving ground in race car development. See Chapter 14. 
11.5 DOWNWASH CORRECTIONS: POWERED MODELS 
The slipstream behind a tractor propeller will increase the local dynamic pressure 
over that portion of the wing that is immersed in the slipstream. Depending on 
airplane geometry, the propeller may also change the local angle of attack of the 
wing. Generally lift will be increased but the amount depends on the balance between 
the increase in dynamic pressure and the possibly decreased local angle of attack. 
For other than some V/STOL aircraft these effects are assigned to power effects 
and the power-off values of 6 and 7
2
 are used. However, afvq, 
must be evaluated 
if the tail is in the slipstream. This term may be a function of thrust coefficient Tc. 
See the next two sections for V/STOL corrections when the propellers are tilted to 
provide direct lift. 
For an aircraft where the whole span of the wing is immersed in the propeller 
slipstream there are likely to be substantial wall effects. Use of a panel code such 
as PMARC can be considered for evaluating wall effects. This is a type of experiment 
for which the measured variable methods are the best available choices. 
It may also be possible for some analysts to mathematically model the wing 
propellers and their slipstream, then use the method of images to calculate the effect 
of the tunnel walls. In the determination of the moment correction, a , ~ q ,  
data must 
be obtained with power on as the term is likely to be a function of Tc. 
11.6 BOUNDARY CORRECTION: PROPELLERS 
Glauert7 has examined the problem of experiments on propellers in a wind tunnel 
and suggests that the propeller diameter be kept "small" 
relative to the jet diameter 
and that an open throat tunnel be employed. Under these conditions no boundary 
corrections were considered to be needed. 
For various practical reasons it is frequently not possible to adhere to the above 
stipulations. An approach to the wall corrections for propeller experiments in a 
closed throat tunnel may be made as follows. See Figure 11.3 for nomenclature. 
In a closed jet the propeller slipstream under conditions of positive thrust will 
have a velocity u greater than the velocity V in the jet without the propeller. Since 
the same volume of air that passes section x ahead of the propeller must pass section 
y behind it, it follows that the velocity w outside the slipstream will be less than K 
In free air, w would, of course, equal K 
The lower velocity air outside the slipstream 
has a static pressure that is increased relative to the "free
9'-stream tunnel flow 


434 
BOUNDARY CORRECTIONS III: ADDITIONAL APPLICATIONS 
v 
- 
- 
Velocity s 
V 
- 
FIGURE 1
1
.
3
 Nomenclature for a propeller in a closed test section. 
approaching ahead of the propeller, and it follows that the slipstream also has too 
high a static pressure. This reacts back to the propeller so that it develops thrust 
that is greater than would be developed in an ~ ~ e s t r i c t e d  
flow of the same speed 
with the same propeller rotation rate and blade angle. Or it can also be said that 
the thrust developed would be equal to that which would be expected at a lower 
speed V' in free air. The test should therefore be run at a speed above V' in order 
to develop the forces corresponding to speed V' in unrestricted flow. 
The amount of correction for this "continuity" 
effect may be found from 
where 74 = TIpAVZ, a, 
= AIC, A is the propeller disk area, C is the jet cross- 
sectional area, and T is thrust. 
Values of V'IV are shown in Figure 11.4. It is apparent that Equation (11.1) 
becomes invalid for negative thrust leading to T~ 
approaching -0.5 since the correc- 
tion becomes infinite for that value (CD 
= 1.0 or T, = -0.392). Although we are 
not aware of any particular data sources from studies of the problem, it could be 
FIGURE 1
1
.
4
 Speed correction for thrust- 
ing propeller. 


11.7 BOUNDARY EFFECTS: 
V/STOL EXPERIMENTS 
435 
expected that the wakeblockage corrections using Maskell's approach or the mea- 
sured variable methods would be satisfactory. 
11.7 BOUNDARY EFFECTS: V/STOL EXPERIMENTS 
F
l
o
w
 
Breakdown 
The basic concept for all V/STOL 
aircraft is to create lift by using a propulsion 
device to produce downward-directed momentum. Momentum is of course a product 
of a mass and a velocity. For a given value of momentum there is a hyperbolic 
relationship between the mass involved and the velocity. The two extremes can be 
considered. First there can be a large mass and small velocity (small Av) such as 
is the case for helicopter rotors; second, there can be a small mass and a large 
velocity (large Av) such as is the case for a jet engine. The wake produced by the 
first is "soft" and can be deflected by the tunnel flow, while the second is stiff (it 
goes where you point it) and will be deflected much less by the tunnel flow in the 
transition region. The powered lift system can either be distributed across the span, 
as for a rotor or spanwise jet flap, or it can be a point, as for powered lift jets or 
lift fans. 
As a V/STOL 
model goes through transition slowing from level flight to hover, 
the downwash angle (measured from free stream to the centerline of the wake) will 
change from a small angle in level flight to 90" 
at hover. As the wake angle changes, 
so will the forward velocity, from some relatively large value to zero at hover. When 
the transition flight region from forward flight to hover is simulated in a wind 
tunnel, the model and tunnel combination will encounter a phenomenon called flow 
breakdown as the lift flow begins to impinge on the floor of the tunnel in the vicinity 
of the test article. The resulting flow patterns are not similar to those that occur in 
an unrestricted flow. The point at which flow breakdown occurs imposes a limit on 
the minimum 
forward speed that can be simulated in a wind tunnel experiment. 
Rae8 has provided a treatment of the flow breakdown phenomena. Consider a 
- 
model in a tunnel at a given lift. At high tunnel speed the 
flow is relatively undisturbed 
by the model and its relatively small downwash angle. As the tunnel speed is 
reduced, the downwash angle increases and the model wake begins to interact with 
the tunnel boundary layer below and behind the model. As the tunnel speed is 
decreased, the wake penetrates the floor boundary layer, a stagnation point near the 
center of the wake appears on the floor, and portions of the wake move laterally 
across the floor and slightly upstream. As this condition is approached, the flow is 
unstable and a portion of the wake near its leading edge will intermittently snap 
through, moving forward against the tunnel flow. When the wake snaps through, a 
- 
parabolic-shaped vortex appears ahead of the rotor curving aft toward the tunnel 
walls. This has been called incipient stagnation. A further reduction in tunnel speed 
leads to a stable parabolic vortex that is relatively small and well aft of the model. 


436 
BOUNDARY CORRECTIONS 111: ADDITIONAL APPLICATIONS 
h
-
 
b r b  -
4
 
FIGURE 11.5 Nomenclature sketch of rotor wake in flow breakdown showing floor vortex. 
Figure 11.5 shows a sketch of a cut through the midplane of the tunnel for this type 
of flow structure. This flow has two well-defined stagnations: one near the center 
of the wake and the second forward of the wake centered near the core of the 
parabolic or necklace vortex. As the tunnel speed is further reduced, the forward 
stagnation points move further forward and the vortex becomes larger. At some 
point, as the speed is reduced, the flow is not representative of free-air flow, and 
the data cannot be corrected. This point is called flow breakdown. It should be 
noted that the vortex at low forward speeds trails across the floor up the tunnel wall 
and across the ceiling as it moves aft. 
Rae8 used plywood and plexiglass boxes open at the ends in the tunnel flow 
direction to simulate different-size tunnels for a single-size model. Each of the 
inserts must have its flow calibrated for dynamic pressure and upflow as described 
by Ganzer and Rae9 and by Lee.lo 
As the same model is used in the main test section 
and the inserts at the same conditions, then both the Reynolds number and Mach 
number are matched. Using this technique for a tunnel width-to-height ratio of 1.5, 
a rotor with three disk loadings run at the same rpm and tip speed ratios gave the 
following results. The flow breakdown occurred at different tip speed ratios (tunnel 
speed), but the momentum downwash angle for a given rotor insert combination 
was constant. Thus flow breakdown is only a function of the momentum downwash 
angle for a given ratio of model area to tunnel cross-sectional area. As expected, 
the smaller the model-to-tunnel-area ratio, the 
larger the allowable 
downwash. Down- 
wash for a given model-to-tunnel-area ratio varies with the test-section width-to- 
height ratio. Comer fillets and curved end walls reduce the allowable downwash 
for a given WIH. Furthermore, the allowable downwash at the location of the tail 
is less than at the rotor or wing. As suggested by Hey~on,".'~ 
the flow breakdown 
limit for a model with distributed lift can be estimated in terms of Xflb, where Xf 
is the distance aft of the model at which a theoretically straight wake impinges on 
the floor and b is the full model span, or rotor diameter: 
Here x is the' wake skew angle and x = 90" - 
On, 
where O, is the momentum 


11.7 BOUNDARY EFFECTS: V/STOL EXPERIMENTS 
437 
FIGURE 11.6 Effect of flow breakdown on tail mounted behind a rotor in various size 
tunnels. 
downwash angle as defined in Figure 11.5 and the values of 0
.
 
can be obtained by 
consulting Heyson.".l4 
The flow breakdown limit is more severe at the tail of a model than at a wing. 
In Figure 11.6 (from Rae and Shindo15) 
data are shown from a tail with a 1-ft span 
one diameter aft of a Zft-diameter propeller used to simulate a rotor. The tail was 
isolated from the propeller, had its own internal balance, and could be pitched 
independently of the propeller. The data, as expected, show an increase in the zero 
lift angle of attack with decreasing propeller tip speed ratio (propeller run at fixed 
rpm). As the tip speed ratio is reduced, the flow angle aft of the propeller increases 
very rapidly and then flattens out, as shown by the 8 X 12-ft data, where there is 
no flow breakdown and the data are close to free-air data. In the inserts the flow 
angle follows the same trend to a maximum value and then decreases due to tunnel 
wall effects. As flow breakdown is approached, the flow angle suddenly increases 
again due to the vortexlike flow below the model. 
To illustrate the effect of wall corrections on pitching moment data in the form 
of the zero lift angle of the tail for the 4 X 6-ft insert and the 8 X 12-ft test section 
of Figure 11.6, the data with Heyson's corrections are shown in Figure 11.7. The 
data for the propeller in the 4 X 6-ft insert were corrected to free air, and these 
were used as test points for data in the 8 X 12-ft test section. It should be noted 
that the wall corrections change both the tip speed ratio and the tip plane path or 
shaft angle. The data in Figure 11.7 show the delta in the tail angle of attack 


Corrected (fixed toil) 
Corrected (tip plone) 
.
.
 
0 
- 
0 
No corrections 
A 
U 
? 2- 
01 
.
.
 
0 
- 
0.20 
0 
Tip speed rotio. p 
0 
-2 
- 
-4 - 
A 
FIGURE 11.7 Tail angle of attack corrected for wall effects above and below flow 
breakdown. 
(8 X 12 ft to 4 X 6 ft) with no wall corrections, data corrected for a fixed tail 
location. These data arose because the tail was attached to the propeller fairing; 
hence it was at a fixed vertical location. Because the rotor was run at -3" shaft 
angle, the tail was below the tip plane path. Correcting the 4 X 6-ft insert data 
rotated the shaft angle and thus the tail should have been rotated to maintain its 
relation to the tip plane path. This mislocation of the tail was corrected by the 
methods of Heyson and KatzofP6 
and Jewel1 
and Heyson" to find the change in flow 
angle at the tail due to vertical displacement, yielding the curve labeled "corrected tip 
plane." 
The curve labeled corrected tip plane demonstrates that Heyson's theory will 
correct the tail angle of attack, and hence pitching moment, quite well as long as 
data are not taken below the flow breakdown point (hatched vertical line). Below 
the limit the wall corrections overcorrect the data by large amounts. At a tip speed 
ratio of 0.06, the overcorrection is 7" out of 22" for the 8 X 12-ft tunnel, a 32% 
error. This error increases very rapidly, which implies that the test limit must be 
known and approached with caution. 
The application of Heyson's corrections to the angle of attack, lift, and drag of 
both rigid and hinged rotors will correct the data only above the flow breakdown 
limit. The rigid rotor (propeller) was corrected by assuming a uniform load distribu- 
tion." The hinged rotor was corrected by using (a) a uniform load (9 doublets) 
and (b) a triangular load (20 doublets).18 Both loadings gave similar results. The 
data can be corrected only above the flow breakdown. As Heyson's corrections 


11.7 BOUNDARY EFFECTS: V/STOL EXPERIMENTS 
439 
changeboth the angle of attack and tip speed ratio, it is necessary to cross-plot data 
to obtain a constant-tip-speed ratio. Heyson" gives detailed discussions of wall 
corrections and estimation of test limits for V/STOL vehicles using a distributed- 
lift system. 
Raising the rotor in the tunnel does not increase the test limit; in fact the lowest 
limit was with the model on the  enterl line.'^ 
The location of the vortexlike 
core that occurs when operating in a flow breakdown 
mode can be detected by at least the following seven methods: 
1. pressure variation on the tunnel floor, 
2. smoke, 
3. tuft wands to determine streamlines and hence vortex core or tufts on the 
walls and floor, 
4. vortex meters, 
5. variation of total pressure above the floor, 
6. a laser, and 
7. a PIV. 
The path of the vortexlike floor was traced by methods 1,2, 
and 5 and the results 
agree quite well. An example of the static pressure method is also shown in Figure 
11.8. This is a useful method since it could be installed in the tunnel floor perma- 
nently. The core 
of the vortexlike 
flow is located at the minimum pressure coefficient. 
As the tip speed ratio decreases, the downwash angle increases and the vortexlike 
core moves forward in the tunnel. 
The presence and locations of the floor vortex can also be determined by tufts 
on the tunnel floor and walls. This method does not locate the core, but it is a 
reliable indication of flow breakdown. 
The problem of flow breakdown is much more complicated when a discrete or 
point-type powered lift system, as produced by jets or lift fans, is used. The fist 
problem with these configurations is the wide range of locations at which the engine 
can be located on the aircraft. 
Tyler and W ~ l l i a m s o n ~ ~ ~ ~ ~  
studied flow breakdown for lift jets in the Canadian 
National Research Council (NRC) V/STOL propulsion tunnel. Since they were using 
lift jets, they defined incipient stagnation as a conservative but safe minimum tunnel 
speed. This is the highest tunnel velocity for the formation of the floor vortex. By 
defi~ng 
a thrust coefficient as 
where h is the height of the nozzle exit above the floor, the limit was established 
based on incipient stagnation as C, = 0.62 for both a single jet and a pair arranged 
in tandem over a tilt range of -5" to +20°. When two jets were side by side, the 
l i t  
was CT 
= 0.90. The nozzle spacing for the two jets was 4.3 times their jet 


FIGURE 11.8 Variation of tunnel floor static pressure under a rotor; p = 0.09 is above 
flow breakdown, while p = 0.07 and p = 0.05 are below breakdown. Positive Cp9s 
are 
wake center stagnation; negative Cp's flow breakdown vortex core. 
diameter. They concluded that a tandem pair was the same as a single jet of the 
same total nozzle area centered between the pair. 
Studies were made of local flow in the plane of the nozzle exit. It was concluded 
that the tunnel velocity could be reduced so very little below incipient stagnation 
that incipient stagnation should be taken as the lower test limit. It should be 
noted that the thrust per unit area for lift jets and lift fans is much larger by orders 
of magnitude than a rotor or other distributed-powered lift system. 
A small amount of data for a representative nonswept wing model with two 
nonmetric lift jet engines forward of the wing are reported by Shindo and Rae." 
The model had a 3-ft span and was tested in an insert, the large tunnel, and over a 
ground plane at the same location as the insert floor. Changes in the aerodynamic 
characteristics of the model were measured. These data are only applicable to the 
configuration that was tested. The data showed that the flow breakdown occurs at 
higher ratios of free stream to jet velocity in the insert due to the side walls than 
for the ground plane. The flow breakdown point was within 5% of S l e r  and 
Williamson'sz1 values. 


REFERENCES AND NOTES 
441 
There have been several proposed methods of extending the onset of flow break- 
down. These include a moving-belt ground plane or, as an alternative, floor blowing 
and opening the tunnel floor e~tensively.~~ 
The first two can delay the onset of flow 
breakdown, but once it occurs, they cannot remove it. 
In tests on a 46% span knee-blown jet-flap 
model, Hackett, Sarnpath, and Phillipsz4 
found that it is possible to use floor blowing to reduce the size of this floor vortex 
to a small region near the wake impingement. Static pressure measurements along 
the floor centerline were used to detect the vortex location: Floor blowing was 
increased so as to remove the suction region. Laser velocimeter measurements 
confirmed that the floor vortex was reduced in size and moved aft. The angle of 
attack at the model increased substantially. Inspection of wall pressures and subse- 
quent analysis showed a reduction in tunnel blockage. 
The model gave good agreement with data taken in a larger tunnel at model 
C
,
'
s
 
of 4.0 (CL 
about 11.0) with and without floor blowing. However, at higher 
C,'s the data did not agree with no blowing and only agreed at low a's with blowing. 
This indicates that flow breakdown was still present, as did the laser data. 
The wall pressure signatures used to determine blockage showed a second pres- 
sure peak aft of the main peak and of comparable magnitude at model C,'s 
above 4.0 with and without blowing. Since the second peak was further aft in 
the tunnel, it did not have a major effect on data at the wing, but it may have 
an effect on pitching moment generated by a tail. This second peak is probably 
the result of the flow breakdown vortex moving up the tunnel walls, as discussed 
by Rae? 
The removal of portions of the tunnel floor can also extend the test range. Using 
a rotor in HansfordZ3 
found the allowable downwash before flow breakdown was 
extended from 45" to 75'. When removing the floor of a tunnel to allow the sharply 
deflected wake to escape the tunnel, there is the concern of the loss of tunnel air. 
In this test series there were no indications of the wake reentering the tunnel through 
the floor. The mass of air lost by venting was recovered through a breather ring aft 
of the test section. Pitch and yaw flow angles measured at the start of the test section 
were more uniform with the tunnel vented at low advance ratios. When tests are 
made with a vented tunnel, the effect of venting on the tunnel flow should be 
determined, as well as tracing the exiting air to ensure that a portion does not return 
through the vent. 
REFERENCES AND NOTES 
1. Swanson, R. S., and Toll, T. A., "Jet Boundary Corrections for Reflection Plane Models 
in Rectangular Wind Tunnels," NACA TR 770, 1943. 
2. Heyson, H. H., "Linearized Theory of W~nd 
Tunnel Jet Boundaries Corrections and 
Ground Effect for VTOUSTOL Aircraft," 
NASA TR 
R-124, 1962. 
3. Heyson, H. H., "Use of Superposition in Digital Computers to Obtain Wind Tunnel 
Interference Factors for Arbitrary Configurations, with Particular Reference to V/STOL 
Models," NASA TR R-302, 1969. 


442 
BOUNDARY CORRECTIONS m: 
ADDITIONAL APPLICATIONS 
4. Heyson, H. H., "Fortran Programs for Calculating W i d  
Tunnel Boundary Interference," 
NASA TM 
X-1740, 1969. 
5. Heyson, H. H., "General Theory of Wall Interference for Static Stability Tests in Closed 
Rectangular Test Sections and in Ground Effects," 
NASA TR 
R-364, 1971. 
6. Turner, D. K., "Requirements for Moving Belt in Ground Effect Experiments," Paper 
25 in Proceedings of Conference on VTOUSTOL Aircraft, NASA SP 116, 1966, pp. 
409434. 
7. Glauert, H., 'Wind Tunnel Interference on Wings, Bodies, and Airscrews," 
ARC R&M 
1566, 1933. 
8. Rae, W. H., "Limits on Minimum Speed V/STOL Wind Tunnel Tests," AIAA J. Aircrafr, 
4,249-254, 1967. 
9. Ganzer, V
.
 M., and Rae, W
.
 H., "An Experimental Investigation of the Effect of Wind 
Tunnel Walls on the Aerodynamic Performance of a Helicopter Rotor," NASA TN 
D-415, 1960. 
10. Lee, 
J. L., "An Experimental Investigation of the Use of Test Section Inserts as a 
Device to Verify Theoretical Wall Corrections for a Lifting Rotor Centered in a Closed 
Rectangular 
Test Section," M.S. Thesis, University of Washington, Dept. of Aeronautics 
and Astronautics, 1964. 
11. Heyson, H. H., "Rapid Estimation of Wind Tunnel Corrections with Application to Wind 
Tunnels and Model Design," NASA TN 
D-6416, 1971. 
12. Heyson, H. H., 'Wind Tunnel 
Wall Effects at Extreme Force Coefficients," 
in Proceedings 
of the Znternational Congress on Subsonic Aerodynamics, New York Academy of Sci- 
ences, New York, 1967. 
13. Heyson, H. H., "Linearized Theory of W~nd 
Tunnel Jet Boundaries Corrections and 
Ground Effect for VTOUSTOL Aircraft," NASA TR 
R-124, 1962. 
14. Heyson, H. H., "Nomographic Solution of the Momentum Equation for VTOUSTOL 
Aircraft," NASA TN D-814, 1961. 
15. Rae, W. H., and Shindo, S., "Comments on V/STOL Wind Tunnel Data at Low For- 
ward Speeds," in Proceedings, 3rd CAUAVLABS 
Symposium, Aerodynamics of Rotary 
Wing and V/STOL Aircraft, Vol. 1
1
.
 Cornel Aeronautical Laboratory, Buffalo, NY, 
1969. 
16. Heyson, H. H., and Katzoff, S., "Induced Velocities Near a Lifting Rotor with Nonuniform 
Disk Loading," NACA Report 1319, 1956. 
17. Jewell, J. W., and Heyson, H. H., "Charts of the Induced Velocities Near a Lifting Rotor," 
NASA TM 4-15-596, 1959. 
18. Rae, W. H., and Shindo, S., "An Experimental Investigation of Wind Tunnel Wall 
Corrections and Test Limits for V/STOL Vehicles," Final Report DA-ARO-3 
1-124-G809, 
U.S. Army Research 
Durham, NC, 1973. 
19. Shindo, S., and Rae, W. H., "Low Speed Test Limit of V/STOL Model Located Vertically 
Off Center," AZAA J. Aircraj?, 15, 253-254, 1978. 
20. Tyler, R. A., and Williamson, R. G., "Wind Tunnel Testing of V/STOL Engine Models- 
Some Observed Flow Interaction and Tunnel Effects," AGARD CP 91-71, Dec. 
1971. 
21. Tyler, R. A., and Williamson, R. G., "Experience with the NRC 10 ft. by 20 ft. V/STOL 
hpulsion Tunnel-
Some Practical Aspects of V/STOL Engine Model Testing," Can. 
Aeronaut. Space J., 18, 191-199, 1972. 


REFERENCES AND NOTES 
443 
22. Shindo, S., and Rae, W. H., "Recent Research on V/STOL Test Limits at the University 
of Washington Aeronautical Laboratory," NASA CR 3237, 1980. 
23. Hansford, R. E., "The Removal of Wind Tunnel Panels to Prevent Flow Breakdown at 
Low Speeds," 
Aeronaut. J., 75, 475479, 1975. 
. 
24. Hackett, J. E., Sampath, 
S., and Phillips, 
C. G., "Determination of Wind Tunnel Constraints 
by a Unified Wall Pressure Signature Method. Part I: Applications to Winged Configura- 
tions," NASA CR 166,186, June 1981. 


12 Additional Considerations for 
Aerodynamic Experiments 
The conduct of aerodynamic experiments in a broad sense is the subject of this 
book. The various chapters address a number of aspects essential to successful 
aerodynamic investigations but there are some others that we feel need to be ad- 
dressed but that are not accommodated elsewhere. These include basic guidelines 
for design of experiments, methods for assessing data quality, model design and 
construction, and general comments on arrangements for use of facilities. 
12.1 WIND TUNNEL EXPERIMENTS 
There is an extensive literature on design of experiments that can provide valuable 
guidance for design and conduct of wind tunnel experiments just as for other areas 
of study and development. Montgomery' and Dietrich2 are primary sources for the 
discussion that follows and can be consulted along with the bibliographies they 
contain for much more extensive coverage of these issues. 
A block diagram representation of a wind tunnel experiment is shown in Figure 
12.1. The elements of the input vector are variables such as angle of model pitch, 
roll, or yaw and the pressure drop across the tunnel nozzle. The elements of the 
controllable vector will be variables such as model size, tunnel size, model materials, 
model construction process, time of conduct of the experiment, model nominal 
configuration, and choice of mounting arrangements. Some variables may appear 
in either the input vector or the controllable factor vector depending on immediate 
purpose. The elements of the output vector will be responses such as force and 
moment components 
as indicated by the balance, pressure readings 
from the pressure- 
measuring 
system, still or video 
images of smoke or other flow visualization 
methods, 
and noise measured from microphone arrays. Elements of the uncontrollable factors 
vector will include such variables as turbulence level of the incoming stream, 
temperature in many facilities, relative humidity, model deformation under load, 
and surface deterioration with time. 
In any particular case, a parameter may not be controllable, even though it 
may in principle be controllable. Examples are tunnel size and incoming stream 
temperature. The scope of the parameters that are "controllable" depends on the 
resources available to the experiment planner. A group of students at a particular 
university will have to plan their experiments within the limitations of the facilities 
immediately available. A chief engineer of a large aerospace company or automobile 
444 


12.2 UNCERTAINTY OF MEASUREMENTS 
445 
I 
Controllable Factors 
or Parameters, x 
Input(s) 
or 
Experimental 
Object of 
Output(s) 
or 
Variablefs), u 
Expenment 
Response(s), Y 
UncontroUable Factors 
I 
or P a m e ,  
z 
FIGURE 
12.1 Conceptual model o
f
 an experimental setup. 
company may have the possibility to conduct experiments at any facility on earth 
and may even be able to do experiments at several facilities in the development 
cycle for a major new vehicle. 
We consider the output to be a functional 
of the input, controllable, and uncontrol- 
lable factors. All variables 
represent vector quantities in the nongeometric mathemati- 
cal sense. The symbol t represents time: 
1
2
.
2
 UNCERTAINTY OF MEASUREMENTS 
An underlying axiom in the conduct of experiments is that no measurement 
can be known to provide an exactly true result. 
Consideration of this axiom quickly leads to a conclusion that the utility of any 
measurement depends strongly on an assessment of its accuracy in some meaningful 
way. Assessment of the accuracy of any given measurement is quite difficult. It 
requires careful consideration of all aspects of the particular experiment being 
contemplated or analyzed. 
'Qpes of Uncertainty 
The uncertainty associated with any measurement is conceived to be made up of a 
variety of "components." A particular contributing component is generally consid- 
ered to be a member of one of two types: "randomWor 
"s~stematic."~hese 
classifica- 
tions are also referred to as "precision" and "bias" components of measurement 
- 
* 
error. We will use the terms random and systematic as being more descriptive in 
our view. These terms will now be discussed. 
An idealized view of the two types of error components 
is the following. Random 
components upon repetitive observations produce varying values that are distributed 


 
- 
446 
ADDITIONAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR AERODYNAMIC EXPERIMENTS 
Obsewed 
Value 
ObrreW Vdue 
(d) 
FIGURE 12.2 Representation of distribution of measurements. 
in some fashion about the unknowable true value, but if an accurate average of the 
population could be obtained, 
it would provide the unknowable 
true value. Systematic 
components upon repetitive observations produce the same values, but those values 
differ from the unknowable true value. A schematic representation is typically given 
in Figure 12.2. The plots are probability distributions for the observations. Plots (a) 
and (b) 
have a systematic or bias error equal to 2 while the systematic error shown 
by plots (c) 
and ( d )  
is zero. The cases indicated by (b) 
and (d) are said to be more 
precise than (a) 
and (c). 
The practical impact 
of this is that the number of observations 
for cases like (b) and (d) 
to achieve a given precision of the mean will be fewer 
than for cases like (a) 
and (c). 
Note that none of the values shown on the plots of 
Figure 12.2 are 
known or can be known exactly for any experimental data population. 
In Figure 12.3 we give a plot of four sets of 20 data points that correspond to a 
typical realization of each of the cases of Figures 1 2 . 2 ~ 4 ,  
where we have assumed 
that the probability distributions are of the Gaussian class. The points are connected 
by lines to give an easier visual identification of the sets, not to indicate a time 
history. Each point is an average over some time interval. Compare the sample 
means and standard deviations to the indicated values for the populations from 
which they have been obtained. We will develop ideas about these aspects further 
in the next section. 


12.2 UNCERTAINTY OF 
MEASUREMENTS 
447 
The systematic or bias error contributions are the sources that are 
most difficult 
to deal with in a wholly satisfactory way. It is common to consider all components 
that are not random to be bias error components. There is a sense in which bias 
errors are simply additional random errors of a nature such that there is no practical 
possibility of obtaining a significant number of empirical observations that represent 
a significant sample of the relevant population of observations. For example, the 
deviation of as-built geometry of models from the specifications will produce some 
changes in the aerodynamic characteristics. To obtain a direct empirical evaluation 
of the effects of such deviations would require the construction and testing of many 
models that are made identical to the extent that the design and manufacturing 
processes allow. Since the cost of a single model is often the greatest single outlay 
in an aerodynamic experiment, it is not feasible to make 10 or more. There are 
many examples that are logically equivalent to this. Some other way must be used 
to estimate the effects of such deviations. 
Random (or Precision) Components 
A random uncertainty is present when repeated measurements of a particular physical 
quantity, that to the best approximation is held constant, produce differing results. 
The quantity itself may actually be varying or the differing results may be due to 


448 
ADDITIONAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR AERODYNAMIC EXPERMENTS 
characteristics of thcmeasuring system or to variations in the environment. Sorting 
out which of these is responsible and to what degree is always a goal, but there is 
always a residual variation that must simply be observed and characterized to the 
degree that possible repetitions allow. The key feature of a random sequence of 
measurements is that it is not possible to anticipate the size of each succeeding 
measurement with respect to the-immediately preceding one. With sufficient data, 
a pattern with respect to frequency of occurrence can be determined. This pattern 
is called the probability distribution. The most commonly considered probability 
distributions are the normal, or Gaussian, distribution and associated distributions 
that arise from sampling of Gaussian populations. The previously cited sources can 
be consulted for extensive discussions. 
The predictability of random measurements is that with known probability distri- 
butions the probability that a measurement will fall within specified limits can be 
given or the proportion of measurement results that will fall within a specified range 
can be given. 
The treatment of uncertainty of random components is rather well specified by 
the many works on statistical methods. The systematic components are actually 
more troublesome. 
Probability Dismmbutions The quantities measured in an experiment and any de- 
rived result that thereby becomes a function of the measured quantities are considered 
to be random variables. 
They are quantities for which exact values that will occur 
in any future experiment cannot be predicted. Their variability can in principle be 
given in terms of probability density functions. The expected value of any function 
of a random variable can be obtained by integrating over all values the product of 
the function and the probability density function of the random variable. Most 
common examples are the expressions for the mean and variance of a random 
variable y with probability density function fCy), mean p, and variance u2 
as given 
by Equations (12.2) and (12.3): 
A probability distribution function has the property that its integral over the 
infinite range is unity. We introduce four probability density functions here. They 
are the normal, or Gaussian, distribution, the t distribution, the chi-square dis- 
tribution, and the uniform distribution. There are others of great importance even 
to our subject, but we refer readers to the references for discussions of those. We 
use the symbol p for mean value and the symbol a for standard deviation in 
the following. 


12.2 UNCERTAINTY OF 
MEASUREMENTS 
449 
1. Normal or Gaussian Probability Distribution. 
The normal probability distribu- 
tion is given by Equation (12.4). It has two parameters, the mean and the stan- 
dard deviation: 
2. Uniform Probability Distribution. The uniform distribution is given by Equa- 
tion (12.5). It also has two parameters, the mean and the half range: 
0 
y < p - a  
The standard deviation for the uniform distribution is related to the range by the 
equation 
3. Chi-square Probability Distribution. The chi-square distribution is the proba- 
bility density function for the sum of the squares of k random variables each of 
which is normally distributed with mean equal to zero and variance equal to one. 
The following relations give the chi-square distribution function. The symbol r(u) 
indicates the gamma function with argument u. The chi-square distribution has one 
parameter, k, which is the number of terms in the summation and is called the 
degrees of freedom: 
where 
The chi-square distribution is obviously one sided as a sum of squares is necessarily 
greater than or equal to zero. The mean p = k, and the standard deviation u = 


450 
ADDITIONAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR AERODYNAMIC EXPERIMENTS 
flk. We introduce the chi-square distribution here only because of its role as a 
constituent 
in the formation of the t distribution, which is described next. For specific 
applications of the chi-square distribution see the references. 
4. The Student t Probability Distribution. The t distribution is the probability 
distribution of a quotient formed-by a numerator that is a normally distributed 
random 
variable with mean equal to zero and variance equal to one with a denominator that 
is the square root of a random variable with a chi-square distribution. It is given 
by Equation (12.10). There is one parameter, k, called the degrees of freedom, as 
it is inherited from the constituent chi-square distribution: 
The mean of the t distribution is zero and its standard deviation a 
= v
m
 
for k > 
2. Although it is not obvious from the functional form, the t distribution 
approaches the normal distribution as the number of degrees of freedom increases. 
It is essentially indistinguishable from the normal distribution for k > 100. The 
graph of Figure 12.4 shows the t distribution for four values of k. This curve for 
k = 
100 also serves to illustrate 
the normal distribution. 
We note that the computation 
of these functions with available tools such as MATLAB@ 
and a Pentiurn@ 
PC 
is straightforward. 
FIGURE 12.4 
Student t distribution. 


12.2 UNCERTAINTY OF MEASUREMENTS 
451 
Estimating the Mean from Measurements Suppose we have a set of data that 
are the repetitive measurements 
for a particular 
quantity. To be concrete, 
let's consider 
a set of measurements from the drag component of an external wind tunnel balance. 
Figure 12.5 shows three scatter plots and a typical histogram for 1
0
0
0
 
values taken 
at a rate of eight samples per second for three different types of objects in a wind 
tunnel. Note the differing ranges on the vertical scales of the scatter plots that are 
labeled in pounds. The distribution appears within the bounds that can be considered 
normal, although no consistency checks have been conducted. We assume that the 
populations from which these observations have been made are normally distributed. 
The values of the means and standard deviations shown are for the sets of 1000 
observations. An important question is the degree to which the average of any 
number of randomly drawn points approximates the mean of the population. We 
assume we have only the data and general knowledge of how the experiment was 
arranged. The objective is to mange the experiment so that it is as repeatable as 
possible within our resources. The relationship between the confidence limits for 
the mean 
and the confidence probability P
,
 as estimated from n observations is 
obtained in the following way. 
120 
mean = 
4 8 . ~ 1 .  
dd - 
0
.
5
0
 
100. 
8 0 .  
60. 
.
.
.
.
 
4 0 .  
2 0 .  
0 
2 0 0 4 0 0 8 0 0 8 o O l 0 0 0 0  
I
I
 
L
L
 
(b) 
44 
45 
48 
47 
48 
FIGURE 12.5 Scatter plots and typical histogram for external balance data. 


452 
ADDITIONAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR 
AERODYNAMIC EXPERIMENTS 
First compute the-sample mean Z and the sample standard deviation s, 
as indicated 
by the equation 
The probability statement is given by the equation 
Probability {jt - 
k3s 
< 
p < 
2 + k3s) = &
,
 
or alternatively 
Probability ( j E  - 
Ax < 
p, < 
jl + Ax] = Pep 
(12.13) 
This statement gives a relationship between the "confidence interval" +Ax and 
the "confidence probability" P
,
.
 
The coefficient k3 
is called the confidence factor. 
Obviously it is the factor relating the sample standard deviation to the confidence 
interval. Since the observations are assumed to have been drawn from a normally 
distributed population, the probability distribution function neededis the t distribu- 
tion of Equation (12.10) with k = 
n - 
1 
degrees 
of freedom. The equation describing 
the needed relationship is 
This equation provides the functional relationship between the confidence proba- 
bility and the confidence interval for given number of samples and sample stan- 
dard deviation. 
Table 12.1 gives values for k3 
= A d s  
for several confidence probabilities. This 
table can be computed with a very few lines of code using MATLAB or some 
similarly capable tool. 
For our three sets of data, we will apply the above relations using the confidence 
probability of 0.95 to obtain the corresponding confidence intervals on the mean 
and see how it depends on the number of sample observations used in the calculation. 
We have computed the means, the standard deviations, and the confidence limits 
for each of the three sets of data for n ranging from 8 to 1000. Our sense is that 
taking less than eight observations in these types of situation is not often a good 
choice. The results are shown in Figures 12.6-12.8. 
The differences in the standard deviations of the above data sets are due to 
differing time dependence of the aerodynamic forces on the three different objects. 
There is interaction with the balance, and it must be kept in mind that balances are 


12.2 UNCERTAINTY OF MEASUREMENTS 
453 
TABLE 
12.1. Confidence Factors k
,
 = AXIS 
for Three Confidence Pmhabilities and a 
Range of Number of Observations n 
Confidence Probabilities, 
a
,
 
Confidence Probabilities, 
P
,
 
n 
.95 
.99 
.999 
dynamic systems with their own transfer functions. For objects that exhibit periodic 
shedding at frequencies that can drive the balance, the histogram will differ consider- 
ably from a normal form. In such cases, a dynamic analysis needs to be conducted 
and any sinusoidal time series removed from the data to obtain residuals that are 
more nearly normally distributed. 
Example 12.1 The desired uncertainty in the mean is 0.02 lb at the 95% 
confidence 
level. How many samples must be taken in each of the above cases? 
The confidence factors for the three cases are: 0.666, 0.143, and 0.036. From 
the table, it is seen that 12 samples will be sufficient for the first cases, 200 will 
be required for the second case, and the third case would require several thousand 
samples. This last case is likely impractical. 
It can be seen from the above data that substantial reduction in the confidence 
limits for the mean can be obtained by including a sufficient number of observations 
in a data set. Taking larger data sets increases costs and must be evaluated against 


454 
ADDITIONAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR AERODYNAMIC EXPERIMENTS 
Runnlna 
Delta Mean. ~tandhrd 
Dev. 6 85% Confidence U
r
n
l
t
e
 
. 
.'. 
......................................................... 
.- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
---------- 
.. 
- 
- 
............... 
: Mean - 
1 X.124 Std. D
e
b
.
 = 
0.03 
: 
0.03 
o 
100 
200 
300 
a 0  500 
eoo 
700 em 
eoo 
iooo 
Number of Obsmvatlona, n 
FIGURE 12.6 Confidence limits on the mean for n 
= 8, ... 
, 
1000, overall mean 11.124, 
standard deviation 0.03, p
,
 = 0.95. 
the economic benefits expected from the decreased confidence limits for given 
confidence probability or increased confidence probability for given confidence 
limits. 
Systematic (or Bias) Components 
When a set of observations or measurements of a physical quantity is obtained, any 
random variations are obvious and require treatment, as we have already discussed. 
Runnlng Dona 
Mean. Standard Dev.. and 05% Conlldence U
r
n
l
t
s
 
li 
i 
: Maw 
.. 
24.233 ~ f d .  
DW; O . ~ S  
0.1 
0  
1 0 0 2 0 0 3 0 0 4 0 0 5 0 0 6 0 0 7 0 0 8 0 0 6 0 0 1 0 0 0  
Number of Observetlon8. n 
FIGURE 12.7 Confidence limits on the mean for n = 8 to 1000, overall mean 29.233, 
standard deviation 0.14, P, = 0.95. 


12.2 UNCERTAINTY OF MEASUREMENTS 
455 
In addition it is reasonable to assume that the results are being influenced by a 
Running Delta 
Mean. Standard Dev. & 95% Confidence Urnb 
constant amount by the environment [uncontrolled and unrecorded changes indicated 
as z(t) 
in Figure 12.11 or by the instrument calibration constants differing from their 
true values. The determination of the constants would not have been exact and 
0.8 
0.8 
0.4 
the instrument properties almost certainly have changed somewhat since the last 
calibration. 
Stanaad Devlation(n) 
: 
_f- 
............................................................. 
- 
L A "  
,
-
.
 - 
* 
-.- 
-
.
-
 -- 
-- 
- 
- 
- 
I 
J.. ............................................................ 
.- 
I 
\ 
: 
We must conduct an analysis of each set of measurements and make an assessment 
using all applicable knowledge in our possession of the influences likely to affect 
the outcomes. The maximum effect of each identified source of uncertainty must 
be assessed. If the maximum effect of a particular source is estimated as a, then its 
effect on the resulting mean of the set will be ?a as we cannot know in general 
the direction of the influence. It is not reasonable to assume that the uncertainty 
always is the maximum estimated. Instead it is assumed that the actual value may 
lie anywhere in the interval. In other words, we are treating the systematic uncertain- 
5% *
&
 
~ l * & .  
- - - . - 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
---------------- 
..... 
L 
..... 
0.4 -1- .... 
1 
...... 
: 
...... 
: 
..... 
: 
..... ...... 
: 
...... 
: 
...... 
: 
..... 
: 
- 
I 
I 
: ~ e a n  
- 
46.221 Stnridani D&. - 
0 . b  
: 
0.8 - 
0 
100 
200 
300 
400 
SO0 
600 
700 
800 
900 
1000 
Number of Obsowatlona. 
n 
FIGURE 12.8 Confidence limits on the mean for n = 8, ... 
, 
1000, overall mean 46.221, 
standard deviation 0.56, P
,
 = 0.95. 
ties in the same conceptual way we treat the random uncertainties, but we are forced 
to invoke assumptions about their values since direct empirical evaluation is simply 
not available. A further assumption is required for each systematic component 
uncertainty. This is the probability distribution function that will be used to describe 
the distribution of the uncertainty within the interval *a. Two common assumptions 
- 
are Gaussian or uniform. Assuming a uniform distribution is more conservative 
or pessimistic. 
The systematic errors are therefore to be treated as a number of variables, each 
with an assumed probability distribution and each with an estimated maximum 
influence on the mean of a set of measurements. The fact that each time we combine 
their influence the effect is the same shift in the mean is of no statistical significance. 


456 
ADDITIONAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR AERODYNAMIC EXPERIMENTS 
We cannot know the Value of the shift so we must treat it according to the estimated 
maximum value and the assumed probability distribution. When effects of various 
components of uncertainty are combined, it is common to assume they are indepen- 
dent in the statistical sense. There are, however, a number of instances in which 
this assumption is clearly not valid and different sources are said to be correlated. 
We will discuss correlated error Sources in the sequel. 
Combined (or Total) Uncertainty 
For a single variable that has what we shall term direct uncertainty components of 
both systematic, U,, 
and random, U ,  
types, the combined uncertainty is given by 
the Pythagorean relation 
In addition to this type of single-variable combination, there are always require- 
ments to determine uncertainties of quantities related to uncertain variables through 
functional expressions. The expressions relating dimensional forces and moments, 
dynamic pressure, and reference lengths to the force and moment coefficients are 
the most common examples in aerodynamic experiments. The generic relation has 
been indicated in Figure 12.1 and Equation (12.1). The different classifications of 
the arguments of the functional f are mathematically irrelevant so we will use the 
simpler but still general representation with the single vector argument x for this 
discussion. We will also consider f to be a function of x rather than a functional 
of x(t) for the present discussion. There are many cases in aerodynamic experiments 
in which this assumption is not valid. Examples abound in which hysteresis effects 
are evident. Putting those aside for the moment, we consider outputs y related to 
inputs, controllable factors, and uncontrollable factors, all represented by x: 
The elements of x are random variables with uncertainties that may have both 
random (precision) and systematic (bias) contributions to their uncertainties. The 
task here is to obtain the uncertainty in y when the function f and uncertainties in 
x are given. It is typically assumed that the uncertainties are of magnitudes such 
that the first-order terms in a Taylor series expansion of the function f provide a 
sufficient approximation of the changes in y corresponding to changes in x. An 
equation for the Taylor series to first order is Equation (12.17), where the mean of 
f and f are zero: 


12.2 UNCERTAINTY OF MEASUREMENTS 
457 
Then 
The bracketed quantity is the Jacobian matrix. The expected values of the squares 
of the elements of vectory are by definition the standard deviations 
of the elements of 
y. These are the quantities we need to determine the uncertainties in the means (the 
elements o f 9  
using the relations 
developedearlier. 
Wenow need to obtain therelation- 
ship between the squares of the elements of y and the elements off. Obtaining the 
results in matrix form is convenient both in the ease of manipulation of the symbolic 
result and because the results can be considered pseudocode for writing a program in 
a system such as MATLAB. 
The needed result is obtained by formingthe 
outer product 
of yand its transpose, 
yT, 
and then taking the expected value of the matrix. The 
diagonal 
terms are the standard deviations of the elements and the off-diagonal terms are the 
cross correlations of the elements. Following this procedure yields 
The elements of the Jacobian matrix are derivatives of the function f evaluated 
at the mean value Z. Equation (12.19), upon taking the expected values of both 
sides, provides the relationship between the correlation matrix for the output vector, 
([yy]), and the correlation matrix for the input vector, ([fi?). 
The angular brackets 
indicate the exuected-value ooeration. 
A 
Expressing the uncertainty as the sum of random and systematic contributions, 
f = f, + fS, 
and foregoing the explicit matrix brackets yield 
A correlation matrix is diagonal if the elements of the vector are independent 
random variables. This is assumed to be the case for the random contribution so 
the first term on the right-hand side of Equation (12.20) is a diagonal matrix. The 
random and the systematic contributions are also assumed to be independent random 
variables, so the second and third terms are zero. There may be some correlated 
elements in the systematic contributions, so the fourth term may not be diagonal. 
Off-diagonal terms may be positive or negative and of course combine according 
to Equation (12.19), so these terms may increase or decrease the variances in the 
elements of the output vector. Using the notation [f,] for the Jacobian matrix, 
Equation (12.21) is obtained for the total uncertainty of the output when the functional 
relation and the uncertainty of the input are known: 


458 
ADDITIONAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR AERODYNAMIC EXPERIMENTS 
Experimental Aem 
arnic Coefficients 
* 
Model Deformation 
Boundary & Support 
Wind Tunnel Environment 
I 
FIGURE 12.9 Representative data flow. 
Applying this result to a wind tunnel experiment can require extensive time and 
effort. AGARD AR 3
0
4
'
 
contains an extensive example of an application to a force 
and a pressure test. We include in Figure 12.9 a diagram of data flow that is 
representative of a wind tunnel test. 
12.3 ASPECTS OF DESIGN OF EXPERIMENTS 
Statistical methods provide very useful tools in efforts to provide quantitative state- 
ments of measurement accuracy. In order to realize the best advantages, the design 
and conduct of the experiment must be done in concert with the choice of the 
methods chosen for analysis and interpretation of the resulting data. Here we are 
focusing on the issues related to utility of statistical methods rather than the issues 
of a general aerodynamic nature that are addressed throughout this book and in 
other related literature. It is to be kept clearly in mind that statistical methods are 


12.3 ASPECTS OF DESIGN OF EXPERIMENTS 
459 
useful in making correct data interpretations, but they do not provide any significant 
guidance in the larger scope of planning and decisions required to select an experi- 
ment that will be most useful in obtaining data to support design decisions or in 
improving general understanding of some aerodynamic phenomena. However, it is 
our opinion that statistical methods have not been brought to bear on planning and 
interpretation of data in wind tunnel experiments to a degree commensurate with 
their potential utility. This is being addressed by professional groups as indicated 
by the publication of AGARD Advisory Report 304' and subsequently an essentially 
identical document as a standard by the AIAA.4 
Some Principles of Design of Experiments 
Montgomery' identifies replication, randomization, and blocking as the three basic 
principles in the design of experiments. 
Replication refers to the requirement for multiple repetitions of the basic 
experiment. This is needed in order to obtain directly the variability in the 
results of the measurements involved. It is very difficult to replicate complex 
experiments in their entirety. Some lower level measurements such as the 
readings from a pressure transducer 
can easily be replicated. 
Statistical methods 
such as have been presented are directly applicable to data for which sufficient 
replication is feasible. These methods often provide direct guidance on the 
value of increasing the number of replications by giving a quantitative measure 
of the impact on precision. 
FOT 
aspects for which sufficient replication is not possible, judgment and 
prior experience provide the tools that must be applied. This is the case for 
the systematic or bias contributions that must almost always be evaluated 
without the benefit of significant replication. 
Randomization refers to the goal of producing replications of conditions for 
which the resulting experimental observations are independently distributed 
random variables. A result of effective randomization can be to average out 
the effects of uncontrollable factors. Just as replication is often not possible 
for complex experiments, randomization will also be compromised. However, 
there are common examples of aerodynamic experiments in which the order 
in which conditions are set can have an effect on the resulting data. The facts 
that call for randomization insofar as is feasible need to be kept in mind during 
the planning and execution of experiments. 
Blocking is in a sense a counter to randomization that is applied when the 
experimental conditions can be manipulated to isolate a particular effect. This 
is in fact a primary practice in wind tunnel experiments. Many incremental 
effects are measured such as tail-on and tail-off measurements for airplanes 
or mirrors on and mirrors off for automobiles. It is recognized that these 
increments will be more precise if these subparts are added and removed while 


460 
ADDITIONAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR 
AERODYNAMIC EXPERIMENTS 
the main parts femain installed in the experimental setup. These are examples 
of "blocking" that provide data on incremental effects that are more precise 
than would be obtained if the complete model with and without the subelements 
is removed and reinstalled in the wind tunnel. 
The three concepts of replication, randomization, and blocking are important 
principles that should be kept clearly in mind during the design of an experiment 
and the associated data analysis. 
We have collected here a bare minimum of results and suggest that most readers 
will need a ready reference on probability, statistics, and design of experiments. We 
have treated only the most common case that arises in wind tunnel experiments, 
which is the estimation of confidence intewd-confidence probability pairs for a 
particular measurement. We do not address the broader issue of the application of 
principles of design of experiments to planning wind tunnel programs that en- 
compasses selection of configuration modifications. This is, however, an area that 
can likely benefit from a more formal application of the methods for design of 
experiments. 
Guidelines for Wind lbnnel Experiments 
This is a rather commonsense listing of requirements for initiating and executing a 
successful aerodynamic experiment. Failure to include some of the necessary steps, 
however, is too common. 
1. Clearly state the problem being addressed and define the purpose of the 
experiment. This rather 
obvious point is often overlooked 
because the initiators 
may begin with a small homogeneous group for whom the purposes are indeed 
clearly known. But successful completion will often require contributions 
from a number of people for whom a particular experiment is only one of 
many important activities. A clear statement of the problem being addressed 
will often be critical in obtaining efficient application of their professional 
knowledge and skills or in avoiding a serious misunderstanding about what 
will be needed. This clear statement of the problem should be provided to all 
persons involved in the planning and execution of the experiment in sufficient 
time so that they can be mentally and physically prepared. The day before 
an experiment is to begin is too late to give a software engineer the specifica- 
tions for the data gathering even if someone else has said, "Oh we'll just use 
the same program we used last month." 
The expected results from an experiment must have associated expected 
accuracy and precision that are the minimum goals in order that the objectives 
can be met. These accuracy and precision requirements should be a part of 
the problem statement. Maximum advantage must be taken of results from 
previous experiments, theories, and computations as they are 
available in the 
professional literature or from corporate records. 
Keep in mind that learning from experiments, as with other approaches, 


1
2
.
4
 MODEL 
DESIGN 
AND 
CONSTRUCTION 
461 
is iterative. Usually, a series of experiments that build on each other rather 
than one all-encompassing experiment is a more effective use of resources. 
2. Identify the outcomes needed, including the ranges of values of parameters 
that wilt provide the information to resolve the problem. This will imply a 
range of operating states and configuration geometries. There will be required 
accuracies and precisions associated with each variable or parameter that 
should be identified. 
3. Identify feasible model provisions and compatible facilities. This will require 
conceptual and preliminary design of the models and fixtures. It will require 
identifying any wind tunnel boundary corrections to be applied along with 
tare, interference, and other data corrections. It will require assessment of the 
impact of these choices individually and in sum on the accuracy and precision 
of the outputs. Keep in mind that statistical significance and practical signifi- 
cance of the accuracy and precision of any outcome are entirely different 
issues. Each is to be considered in its own sphere of importance. 
4. Prepare run schedules and configuration change implications. Embedded in 
these decisions will be the degree to which replication, randomization, and 
blocking can contribute to the enrichment of the data to be obtained. 
Compare the resources needed and resources available. Iterate steps 1-4 
until a match is obtained. 
Prepare a clear guide for the conduct of the experiment. Make sure all 
persons involved understand the required actions and procedures. Make sure 
all persons, materials, models, instrumentation, and software will be available 
at the time and place for executing the experiment. 
5. Initiate the experiment. Provide for monitoring of all processes and data 
gathering. Include process evaluation of achieved accuracies and precisions 
of measurements. 
6. Conduct data analyses to provide quantitative evaluation of the achieved 
accuracies and precisions. This information should be provided to the aerody- 
namicists and other project personnel as a part of the data package so that 
the product decisions can include appropriate consideration of outcome 
uncertainties. 
We include here as Figure 12.10 another block diagram adapted from AGARD 
AR 3 M 3  
that depicts a planning process for an experiment with emphasis on the 
inclusion of uncertainty evaluation. 
12.4 MODEL DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION 
General Considerations 
The type and the construction of the wind tunnel model are dictated by the purposes 
of the experiment and the tunnel in which the experiment is to be conducted. After 
the obvious and paramount necessity of safety considerations for the personnel 


462 
ADDITIONAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR AERODYNAMIC EXPERIMENTS 
1 Define ~urooses 
of Exoeriment and Required Accuracies of the Results I 
lndude 
final evaluation of 
uncertainty with random and 
FIGURE 12.10 Experiment planning and execution process diagram. 
and the facilities comes sufficient accuracy, accessibility, and maintenance. All are 
essential. Sufficient accuracy almost always translates to extreme requirements. 
Working conditions in a wind tunnel are at best very trying. The temperature may 
vary from 30°F in winter to 140°F in summer. The model is usually so placed that 
accessibility is at a premium and repair facilities may or may not be available. All 
these factors demand that changes be as simple as possible and the model with all 


12.4 MODEL DESIGN AND 
CONSTRUCTION 
463 
its parts and additions be thoroughly tested outside the tunnel before tests are 
commenced. Provisions for rapid configuration changes are very important. Provi- 
sions for variable geometry to be reset reliably to fine tolerances is even more 
important. 
Model design and construction has traditionally been a relatively long and tedius 
process. It is often the pacing activity that determines whether an appropriate experi- 
ment can be timely and cost effective. A recent paper by Gionet and Yandrasitss 
has drawn attention to some of the issues being addressed with some effect. Rapid 
prototyping methods and processes are being brought to bear on model design and 
construction. Techniques such as stereolithography and its several close competitors 
have been applied with good results. As more and more advantage is obtained by 
reducing cycle time for design processes, the shortening of the model design and 
fabrication cycle becomes more and more important. Much of the material in this 
chapter is a reflection of many decades of experience. Some of the particular 
processes 
are 
no 
longer a cost-effective 
way to attack high-value 
commercial projects. 
We have decided to retain most of the discussions with some caveats introduced 
because there is much to be learned from them as we t
r
y
 to shorten the time and 
reduce the costs associated with model design and construction. 
Choice of Materials 
In general, models made of laminated mahogany or other wood laminates will be 
adequately strong without steel or aluminum reinforcement for tests up to 100 mph. 
Above that, and to about 300 mph, wood or various epoxy models with steel load 
members are satisfactory; for the higher speeds metal is needed. These speed criteria 
are, 
of course, very rough and general. A very thin model might easily require solid 
steel construction although testing is to be at only 100 mph. The criterion for model 
strength is deflection rather than yield load limits, as great rigidity is desirable. 
Although the practice varies with tunnels, for low-speed tests either four factors 
based on yield strength or five factors based on ultimate strength tend to be used 
for margins of safety. It is advisable to provide metal beams for any control surfaces 
in order to maintain the best accuracy of the hinge alignment. All parts of wood 
models that must be removed and replaced must be attached with machine screws. 
This usually requires that a threaded metal block be bonded into one part of the 
model and the other part have a metal block for the screw head. Wood screws are 
intended to be used only once. Care must be taken in design and construction to 
ensure that the parts fit together with a method such as alignment pins to ensure 
proper and repeatable alignment. 
Historically, shops attached to wind tunnels would prepare the laminated mahog- 
any blocks. Today it is more effective to purchase commercially available laminated 
die materials when a woodlike m a t e d  is the best choice. These materials are not 
only more cost effective at the outset but also more dimensionally stable than the 
results achieved without the capability to completely saturate the wood with sealer 
or glue. 


464 
ADDITIONAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR AERODYNAMIC EXPERLMENTS 
Some of the new plastics, epoxy resins, fiberglass, and carbon filter are often 
very useful in model building. Where weight is a problem (as on flutter models) 
fiberglass can be used for external stores, slipper tanks, and the like. Even the low- 
melting-point alloys can be used in many ways. For example, fillets can be made 
of Cerrobend, which works easily and takes a good polish. 
.
- 
Fabrication 
Basically, the choice of model construction methods is a function of the available 
shop facilities and skills. For projects built by students, wood (including die makers' 
laminates) is an excellent choice, while for a large corporation that has computer- 
aided design (CAD) available, the loft lines from the CAD system can be transformed 
into a set of instructions for numerically controlled machine tools, as illustrated in 
Figure 12.11. In this case, depending on loads, steel or aluminum is ideal for lifting 
surfaces and flow-through jet nacelles. The 
fuselage can be built on a steel-aluminum 
spar with aluminum bulkheads that are threaded to take thick (0.125-0.250-in.) 
fiberglass-epoxy pieces of shell that form the body. 
Wings and tails can also be built of large flat plates (spar) of aluminum-steel to 
which epoxy or wood is bounded and contoured. For sharp trailing edges and for 
plastic contour material the leading edge should also possibly be metal. In any case, 
the model designer must design the model to fit the capabilities of the people and 
shop that will produce the model. 
FIGURE 12.11 Contouring a swept wing with a numerically controlled milling machine. 
(Photograph courtesy of Boeing Aerodynamic Laboratories.) 


12.4 MODEL DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION 
465 
A simple way to build a model to be used for configuration trade-off studies is 
to build the load-carrying capability into the model out of metal. Styrofoam is 
bonded to these metal spars and cut to contour with a hot wire. The styrofoam is 
then covered with thin fiberglass or Mylar sheets (about 2 mils) to provide a smooth 
contour. The fiberglass and styrofoam are not considered to be load bearing, as in 
sandwich construction used for radio-controlled models. In general, these are one- 
shot models and do not lend themselves to major modifications, but their cost is 
relatively low. 
Usually models have many component parts, each to be made separately. If 
models are to be made of wood that is not impregnated with a stabilizer, it is 
advisable 
to make each part oversize by 0.0625 
or 0.125 
in. and allow some additional 
seasoning. This permits any strains in the laminated block to relieve themselves by 
warping. The last fraction of an inch is then worked down to female templates by 
files, scrappers, and sandpaper. The day should be so planned that time remains to 
spray at least one coat of clear lacquer after the piece is done to seal it and prevent 
warping due to changes in moisture content. This is not the type of process that is 
often a good choice in a commercial project today. But it can be a good learning 
process for student teams and may be the way for an amateur team to produce a 
quality model. 
Hinged surfaces present a problem for the model designer largely because the 
smallest hinge possible to construct is far too large in scale. In view of the hope- 
lessness of accurate reproduction, the designer just does the best he or she can. 
Several basic types of hinges are in general use. The first is a set of brackets for 
each angle setting. This is a slow method with respect to model changes, and it 
slows model construction as well. A serious factor is that if, during the program, 
test results indicate that additional angles are required, the new brackets usually 
require shop work above the level of tunnel engineers and tie up the tunnel during 
fitting as well. This type of approach has become less acceptable as design cycle 
time has become more of an issue. 
A second method is to furnish the surfaces with hinges and to use an exterior 
sector with drilled holes for each angle setting. This is a good positive method that 
at least yields the same setting for repeat points, and it is only the work of a moment 
if additional settings become necessary. One must assume, of course, that such a 
sector in the "breeze" will not cause appreciable trouble. However, brackets for 
control surfaces give a repeatable angle setting. Brackets, often with fairings, are 
about the only way to attach leading-edge slats, slots, and trailing-edge slotted flaps, 
especially if they have a Fowler-type action. A third method is to furnish hinges 
and an interior setting lock. We have had too many of these slip and broken too 
many to be enthusiastic about this type except when it is designed by someone with 
much experience. The engineer using this type of hinge should check the setting at 
the end of each run. 
A fourth method for metal control surfaces is to use hinges near the tip. The 
inboard end has a reamed hole that slides over a large pin. For each angle a hole 
is drilled and reamed through the control surface and the large pin. The holes are 
spaced spanwise. The surface angle is then held with a straight or roll pin. 


466 
ADDITIONAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR AERODYNAMIC EXPERIMENTS 
Model makers still-differ in their opinions of suitable finishes. For wood models, 
the choice is usually between three types, all quick drying: shellac, clear lacquer, 
or pigmented lacquer. Shellac and the clear lacquers seem to yield a slightly thinner 
coat (0.002-0.005 in.) than the pigmented lacquer (0.003-0.008 in.). On the other 
hand, many model makers believe that the smoothest finish is obtained only with 
the pigmented lacquer. Regardlessof the choice, an adjustment in the templates 
should be made to allow room for the finish. Finishes put on and sanded back to 
zero thickness are not believed to offer sufficient protection and moisture seal. 
For metal or plastic models, either sprayed enamel or lacquer can be used. Usually 
a primer coat is applied first. This is necessary for a metal model to obtain proper 
bond, and then pigmented finish coats are added. Generally a flat finish rather than 
high gloss is preferred to avoid highlights in both configuration 
and flow visualization 
photographs. Tough and somewhat thick aircraft epoxy paints should be avoided. 
They can only be removed by sanding in many cases, and often a model must be 
refinished when it is used for more than one test. It is amazing how chipped and 
pocked a model becomes during a test. One source of the nicks is razor blades used 
to cut tape for sealing joints or applying tufts on the model surface. The tape should 
be cut away from the model surface. 
Dimensional Tolerances and Fine Details 
An aircraft model for a 7 X 10-ft tunnel (i.e., with a span of 6-8 ft) should have 
the wing contour accurate to 0.005 in. to the true contour and the fuselage to within 
0.01 in. No perceptible ridges or joints should be permitted. If a metal model is to 
be employed, a surface finish of rms 10 (25 microinches) may be attained by using 
No. 600 wet emery paper. If this discussion of model accuracy and finish seems 
nonsensical in the light of the common additions of roughness to trip the boundary 
layer, it is not quite as bad as it seems. The drag of a turbulent boundary layer on 
a smooth surface is both different and more repeatable than that on a questionable 
surface, and the smoothness behind intentional roughness thus makes sense. Dimen- 
sions may seem harder to justify, except to note the large difference in pitching 
moment associated with small changes in camber or camber distribution. It is in 
fact easy to see the extreme sensitivity to small geometry changes in critical areas 
by using one of the currently available good airfoil design computer programs. 
Air passages, radiator openings, and cooling entrances may be simulated by an 
indenture of the entcy without any completed flow passages. Such passages, if 
completed, could have Reynolds numbers too low for satisfactory testing. A parallel 
situation exits for all small excrescences: antennae, bomb racks, pitot-static tubes, 
and the like. They too would show such scale effect that their true effect could not 
be measured, and hence they are left off. Quite often jet engine nacelles are of the 
flow-through type. In some cases the nacelles are 
equipped with four or more static 
orifices. The nacelles are calibrated so that the internal aerodynamic forces can be 
calculated from the static pressures and can then be subtracted from the force data 
or a nacelle wake rake is used to obtain nacelle forces. 


12.4 MODEL DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION 
467 
Pressure Models 
Pressure models for tests of the type described in Chapter 14 require additional care 
in design and construction. Pressure taps on the wing are located at least at 0.125, 
2.5,5.0, 10.0, 15.0,20.0,30.0,40,50,60,70,80,95, 
and 100% of the chord onboth 
upper and lower surfaces at several spanwise stations. This obviously necessitates a 
large number of tubes, which should be brought out from the model under circum- 
stances least influencing the flow. There are never enough pressure taps, which is 
a major impetus for the evolving pressure-sensitive paint described in Chapter 4. 
Figure 12.12 shows how much space inside a model is required for routing tubes. 
Remember the surface accuracies that must be maintained along with this type 
of accessibility. 
The design of the pressure orifices themselves is very important. If static-pressure 
orifices are kept small (say about ft in. in diameter), negligible difference is found 
between drilling them perpendicular to the surface or perpendicular to the chord. 
But it is certain that they must be absolutely flush. A metal tube in a wood model 
has a tendency to form a slight ridge as the softer wood is finished around it. Some 
designers use metal strips at the section where the orifices are to be, thus avoiding 
the difficulties of finishing dissimilar materials. An artifice practiced by the Canadian 
National Research Council seems a satisfactory arrangement. This embraces a solid 
FIGURE 12.12 Model with scanivalves and tubing for surface pressures in aft body and 
high-pressure air lines for nacelles in forward body. (Photograph courtesy of Boeing Aerody- 
namic Laboratories.) 


468 
ADDITIONAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR AERODYNAMIC EXPERIMENTS 
transparent plastic phg leading down to the buried metal tubes. After the airfoil is 
shaped, holes are drilled down to the tubes through the plastic. 
Since the plastic offers finishing characteristics similar to those of wood, remark- 
able smoothness is attained. If the wings of the model are exceedingly thin, it is 
sometimes advantageous to put the upper surface orifices on one wing and those 
for the lower surface on the other. Wings of metal and epoxy over metal usually 
have milled slots cut into the wing. Thin-wall stainless steel tubing is then laid in 
the slots and brought to the model surface. The slots are then fillet with epoxy and 
tubes and epoxy returned to contour. On steel wings soft solder can be used to fill 
slots. Often it is desirable to cut a large chordwise slot for tubes about 0.5 in. from 
the chord line of the pressure taps. Then the individual tubes are brought from thin 
slots to the larger slot. This larger slot then intersects a spanwise slot that it used 
to get the tubes into the fuselage. 
- 
- 
When sanding or filling 
surfaces with pressure orifices, 
care must be taken to 
avoid 
plugging the tubes. One way this can be accomplished is to blow dry compressed air 
through all of the tubes when sanding or filing. 
Though many satisfactory pressure models have been built using copper tubing, 
scanivalve 
or manometer 
fill time can usually be saved by going to annealed 
stainless 
steel tubing since, for a given (and usually critical) outside diameter, its inside 
diameter is a maximum. The stainless steel tubing is less likely to kink than copper, 
but it is harder to solder without an acid treatment. 
Manometer fill times, which run as much as 2 min under some circumstances, 
may be estimated with good accuracy from the data given by Sinclair and Robins6 
and an early NOL memo.' This is no longer of such interest for long tubing runs 
since almost all pressure instrumentation is inside the model, which provides short 
tube lengths. The time lags are still of importance precisely because the data systems 
are very fast and quite capable of recording data before the pressure equalizes over 
even a short piece of tubing. 
Since automatic data acquisition equipment has become generally available, two 
trends have occurred with pressure or load models. First, the number of pressure 
ports has increased. Second, pressures are recorded by the use of electronically 
scanned transducers. Since the electrical cables required are much smaller than a 
plastic tube for each port, the massive problem of getting tubes out of the model 
is gone. At the same time, data accuracy requirements are being pushed to more 
extreme limits so even small disturbances are sometimes critical. 
Model Handling and Material for Quick Filling 
Though perhaps not a wind tunnel model design criterion per se, the fact remains 
that wind tunnel models have to be moved about, and, depending on their size, this 
may become a ticklish problem. Most tunnels have a lifting crane for moving the 
model into the test section, and in turn whenever possible model designers should 
provide an attachment near the center of gravity of the model. Some tunnels provide 
canvas sandbags for supporting the model when it is resting on the floor or a table. 


12.5 PLANNING THE 
EXPERIMENT 
469 
TABLE 12.2. Recipe for a Good Filler Wax 
Tunnel wax formula 
Beeswax: 
Venice turpentine: 
Powdered rosin: 
about 80% by weight 
about 20% by weight 
about 4% by weight 
Bring 
turpentine to a boil, add the rosin, and stir. Add the beeswax 
in small chunks and allow to melt. Stir thoroughly. Remove from 
the heat and pour into trays for cwling. 
Many engineers and technicians have sustained cuts from sharp model parts due to 
inadequate provisions for handling. 
Some sort of modeling-clay-type material is frequently needed for filling cracks, 
covering screw holes, and making minor contour changes. Children's modeling clay 
or, better, sculptors' Plastalina No. 4 will suffice for low-speed work. When extra 
strength or high temperatures must be considered, a stiff wax made according to 
the formula given in Table 12.2 will be found excellent. The acetone and pyroxylin 
putties are also very good, although they require a few minutes drying time. Automo- 
tive car body fillers made of a two-part epoxy are excellent for filling holes. They 
cure rapidly and are easy to shape. If the filler covers a screw or bolt, paper or tape 
should be put into the hole first. It is a difficult job to dig filler out of the head of 
a screw. A heated Allen wrench can be used to clean the filler from the head socket, 
but it is best not to fill the head socket. These fillers do not work too well for 
removable fillets as they tend to be brittle and will break very easily when the cross 
section is thin. 
12.5 PLANNING THE EXPERIMENT 
A wind tunnel experiment should be run only if (1) some new knowledge is desired 
and (2) the experiment as planned has a reasonable 
chance of obtaining the knowledge 
sought with the necessary accuracy. In view of the cost of models and tunnel time, 
it should be determined that the "new knowledge" does not already exist. In many 
cases-
too many cases-
a good library search could have saved time and money. 
It is hard to write specific rules for setting up an experiment and taking data, 
since there are such a multitude of types. However, the following procedures do 
stand as accepted and respected. If some seem obvious to the experienced engineer, 
we hasten to add that at one time or another we have seen all the rules stated below 
completely disregarded. This list includes a number of items that are specific to 
aircraft tests, but any good engineer can adapt it to his or her own application. 
1. Check all calibration curves of new equipment before, during, and after a test. 
Always calibrate for the 
full-load range, and always use a number of loads-
not 
a single load with the assumption that the calibration is linear. 


470 
ADDlTIONAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR AERODYNAMIC EXPERIMENTS 
2. Take enough points so that the loss of any one point will not hurt the fairing 
of the curve. 
3. Always repeat the wind-off zero and the wind-on first point at the end of the 
run. Have acceptable balance "drift" limits up before the program starts (0. 
I 
or 0.2% maximum reading is a reasonable drift allowance). 
4. Take points on base runs devery degree plus 0.5" readings at the stall or other 
points of interest. Take routine runs with 2' plus readings and lo 
increments at 
the stall. 
5. Check all models against their templates and check the templates. Do not 
hesitate to cancel a program and pay the cancellation fee if the model is not 
within acceptable limits. If you do this, the new person responsible for model 
fidelity will have future models right. 
6. Be very careful when you shorten a program by omitting "irrelevant" 
compo- 
nents and continue to monitor irrelevant components as a test progresses. For 
instance, changes that primarily affect only the pitching moment might lead 
one to monitor only the pitch balance. If there is trouble with the lift balance, 
this omission would make it impossible to plot the data completely since the 
angle-of-attack correction is affected by the lift, and if later a change to a 
new center of gravity seems desirable, the drag values must be available and 
their accuracy known to be adequate. Similarly reading less than six compo- 
nents in the interest of saving time on yaw runs can lead to serious work-up 
troubles of a similar nature. 
7. Plan model variations of wide enough scope to bracket needed data so that 
interpolation rather than extrapolation is possible. 
8. Whenever possible find out how others do the type of test you contemplate 
and profit from their experience. 
9. Be clear in all instruction and data presentation. Never use the word pressure 
when it might be confused with static pressure or total pressure. Always use 
a subscript for pitching and yawing moments to indicate the axis about which 
they are measured, and specify the desired center-of-gravity location. Also, 
if multiple entries are made with a model, make sure that the statement "the 
same as the last test" is really true before you use it. This caveat also applies 
to "repeat" runs within an experiment. 
12.6 ARRANGING FOR USE OF FACILITIES 
Each tunnel has a somewhat different procedure for use, and no exact rules can be 
written to cover them all. Nevertheless, a description of a tunnel procurement may 
be useful in giving a general familiarity with the system. The following description 
is of course not accurate in total for any specific program. The elements, however, 
must be included as any project unfolds. The description can be used by new 
engineers or prospective users to develop some reasonable anticipation of what 
to expect. 


REFERENCES AND NOTES 
471 
Most of the large wind tunnels may be scheduled months in advance, and hence 
an inventor seeking to prove some new idea may be very disappointed in the delay 
he or she may find necessary. Aircraft companies avoid this problem by maintaining 
their own facilities and having priority even if some other user has a scheduled 
entry. During heavy development times they will regularly schedule entries of 
100 h
t
 duration every few weeks. Then, as their time approaches, they select from 
needed experiments the one with the greatest urgency. As an entry time approaches, 
the following procedure is common: 
1. About 2 months before a planned experiment, the tunnel manager is informed 
of the tunnel configuration desired: for example, external balance, swept strut, 
and two-dimensional test section. If the desired setup does not meld with the 
other programs scheduled about that time, a shift of a week or so may be 
necessary to avoid excessive tunnel changes. 
2. Three weeks before the scheduled beginning of the experiment complete 
model drawings, stress analysis, desired tunnel operating conditions, and a 
preliminary run list are sent to the tunnel manager. 
3. Two weeks before the experiment a meeting is arranged between the engineers 
who will directly oversee the conduct of the experiment for both the tunnel 
and the airplane company. At this meeting any points not apparent in the 
pretest information may be ironed out. Agreement on the special equipment 
needed is reached: pressure measurements (number of tubes and expected 
pressure ranges) and cameras, both still and motion picture. All constants 
required for data reduction should be provided, including model reference 
dimensions such as wing area, span, mean aerodynamic 
chord, transfer dimen- 
sions for center-of-gravity positions desired, and reference for angle of attack. 
The realistic 
definition 
of desired accuracy should 
include 
forces and moments, 
angle settings, pressures, and model location; the acceptance of reduced accu- 
racy where it actually is sacient 
may result in considerable savings in time 
and money. A list of plots needed and the form of the tables of data are 
presented for both printed and other media. Agreement is reached on a date 
for the presentation of preliminary data and for the final report. 
4. One week before the scheduled start the company representatives anive with 
the model and commence as much of the setup and weight tares as feasible 
outside the tunnel. There may still remain some questions about the program, 
which must be settled before running. The representatives must do a certain 
amount of legwork to ascertain that all the items previously agreed upon have 
actually been accomplished. 
5. During the last day before the test, company representatives remain on 1-hr 
alert, ready to move into the tunnel and start their test. 
REFERENCES AND NOTES 
1. Montgomery, D. C., Design and Analysis of Experiments, 3rd ed., John Wiley & Sons, 
New York 1991. 


472 
ADDITIONAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR AERODYNAMIC EXPERIMENTS 
2. Dietrich, C. E, Uneertain~y, 
Calibration, and Pmbability, 2nd ed., Adam Hilger, Philadel- 
phia, 1991. 
3. AGARD Fluid Dynamics Panel Working Group 15, "Quality Assessment for Wind Tunnel 
Testing," AGARD Advisory Report 304, 1994. 
4. AIAA, "Assessment of Wind Tunnel Data Uncertainty," 
AIAA standard S-071-1995,1995. 
5. Gionet, C., and Yandrasits, F., "Developments in Model Design and Manufacturing Tech- 
niques, Six Day Model," Paper 9, presented at Wind Tunnels and Wind Tunnel ~ e s t  
Techniques, The Royal Aeronautical Society, Cambridge, United Kingdom, April 14- 
16, 1997. 
6. Sinclari, A. R., and Robins, A. W., "
A Method for the Determination of the Time Lag in 
Pressure Measuring Systems Incorporating Capillaries," NACA TN 
2793, 1952. 
7. Naval Ordnance Laboratory (NOL), "Time Lags Due to Compressible Poiseuille Flow 
Resistance in Pressure Measuring Systems," NOL Memo 10,677, 1950. 


13 Aircraft and Aircraft 
Components 
13.1 GENERAL TEST PROCEDURE 
Depending on the innovations incorporated and the terms of the development con- 
tract or program, a new model airplane may require from one to six models (or 
more) and up to six different wind tunnels. A typical program is as follows: After 
the preliminary layout of the proposed new airplane has been made, a "complete" 
model is designed and constructed. This first model,' usually of 616% scale, is a 
breakdown model; that is, the different configurations of the airplane may be 
built up progressively through additions to the wing alone, making possible the 
evaluation of the relative effect of each component. Testing this model requires 
measurement of all six forces and moments: lift, drag, and side force and rolling, 
yawing, and pitching moments. The important criteria of maximum lift (stalling 
speed), minimum drag (high speed), and static stability are evaluated. 
The breakdown 
model aids in determining the exterior configuration of the airplane so that the 
specialized models can be designed. An example of a breakdown model is shown 
in Figure 13.1. 
The breakdown model is useful for much more than simply satisfying the aerody- 
namicist's curiosity about the contributions of each component. One instance comes 
to mind where much of the breakdown was omitted. ("We can only fly the whole 
airplane"). When the performance fell far short of that predicted, and after the tunnel 
and tunnel crew had been duly excoriated, a breakdown model disclosed that the 
horizontal-jet pod supports were lifting "nearly as much as the wing" and in the 
opposite direction! 
The second model (after the first breakdown model there is no specific order for 
the additional ones) may be a small-scale spin model for determining the spin- 
recovery characteristics in a spin tunnel. Heie the model is put into a tailspin in the 
vertical airstream of the tunnel, and a remotely operated mechanism moves the 
control surfaces as desired to bring the plane out of the spin. Motion pictures of 
the recovery can be examined to see whether the procedure is satisfactory (see 
Chapter 18). 
A third model, also light and fragile, may be flown in a free-flight tunnel such 
as the Langley V/STOL tunnel where motion pictures record its stability and maneu- 
verability. 
A fourth model, so constructed that its structural rigidity is carefully related to 
the full-scale airplane, may be tested for critical flutter speed (see Chapter 18). 
473 


474 
AIRCRAFr AND 
AIRCRAFr COMPONENTS 
FIGURE 13.1 Breakdown of wind tunnel model of Beech 1900 turboprop airliner. (Photo- 
graph courtesy of Raytheon.) 
If the design appears satisfactory or can be made so after these preliminary tests, 
larger models of component parts may be tested. Aileron panels and tail surfaces 
to perhaps 40% scale may be tested, and nacelles to a similar scale for propeller 
aircraft may be investigated for cooling and drag. 
Compressibility effects are investigated with high-speed models in high-speed 
tunnels. Sometimes additional section tests of the airfoils to be used are made in a 
two-dimensional tunnel, and if the design is entirely untested, pressure distributions 
over the flap, flap vanes, and the l i e  may be taken to determine loads for the 
structural design. 
Finally, for smaller aircraft, when the first actual airplane is finished, it can be 
tested in a full-scale tunnel for aerodynamic "clean-up" changes. Here also the 
manufacturing 
irregularities can be examined and improvements 
suggested. Military 
airplanes can be subjected to simulated battle damage so that studies can be made 
of possible catastrophic effects. 
The costs of such development programs are not small, of course. Yet, compared 
to the cost of building the actual airplane, testing it, and changing it, the model- 
testing cost is miniscule. Rarely would a single concern have the entire facilities 
required for a complete testing program. The customary solution is for the complete 
model and the control surface panels to be tested in the company's own wind tunnel, 


13.1 GENERAL TEST PROCEDURE 
475 
leaving the spin, stability, flutter, and high-Mach-number work to tunnels specially 
designed for them. 
The basic parameters of the tunnel that need direct attention before the wind is 
turned on include considerations of the average angle of flow, the average q, 
and 
the balance loads. 
The average angle of flow need not be considered before the full test of a three- 
dimensional wing. As shown in Chapter 7, it is accurately determined by the model 
normal and inverted tests of the alignment determination. A two-dimensional model 
should also be run normal and inverted. However, when inversion is not to be 
employed for any of a number of reasons, or when it is actually impossible, as for 
a panel model, the procedure outlined in Chapter 7 may be followed for finding 
the average angle for a given model. A rough check may be made from the first 
run by comparing the expected and obtained angles of zero lift. Indeed, particularly 
for the panels, much advantage accrues in the analysis of later data from assuming 
the models to be absolutely accurate and hence making expected and obtained angles 
of zero lift identical, which is the usual procedure. 
The average dynamic pressure must be calculated for each model of different 
planform by a method like that for obtaining the average angle. That is, the product 
of local q (from the dynamic pressure survey of the test section) and the model 
chord at the same station is plotted against the model span. If the area under the 
qc-versus-span curve is then divided by the total wing area, the resulting quotient 
is the average dynamic pressure. This average dynamic pressure is not used to find 
the various coefficients until it is increased by the blocking factor obtained from 
methods of Chapter 10. 
Last, but not least, a check of expected loads should be made to ascertain that 
ample provision has been made to run the entire program at one speed. Changing 
the tunnel speed during a program adds one more effect to the data unless, of course, 
Reynolds number effects are required: 
1. After the first run has been made, check it thoroughly against expected results. 
If possible, arrange the setup so that the first run is simple enough for compari- 
son with previous tests. Items to be checked include a
,
,
 dCJda, CLmm, 
CmMin. 
and Cmo 
2. Determine the testing accuracy as follows: 
a. Run a test twice without any change in it. This checks the reproducible 
accuracy of the balance and the speed control. 
b. Reset and repeat a run made previously after there have been several 
intervening runs. This determines the reproducible accuracy of setting the 
flaps, tabs, and the like, as well as the accuracy of the balance and speed control. 
3. Keep a running plot of all data as they come out. Any uncertain points can 
be substantiated immediately by taking readings at small increments above 
and below the uncertain ones. Many tunnels have the capability of plotting 
the data on a point-by-point basis as they are acquired. These data may or 
may not have all of the required data reduction steps; however, they show 


476 
AIRCRAFT AND 
AIRCRAFT COMPONENTS 
any bad data points, unexpected results, and usually give A's that can be used 
to plan the next run. 
4. Occasionally repeat a basic run. This will indicate any gradual model warpage 
or other alternations occuning with time. It must be realized that the surface 
condition is gradually degraded in a long test and a repetition of baseline 
configuration monitors this-effect. 
5. Always repeat the first reading at the end of each run. This will indicate any 
control surface slippage, for example. Inspect the model frequently, checking 
all control settings, and wherever possible make angular measurements of 
controls, with the inevitable slack taken out in the loaded direction. 
Besides checking the control settings one must check that the setting quad- 
rants are right. An example comes to mind of a model whose stabilizer 
quadrant markings were an even 10" 
off. Fortunately the model had been run 
before and the wide difference in trim conditions started a search for trouble. 
One can imagine much difficulty arising later if a test pilot is told to set the 
stabilizers 10" wrong for the first flight! 
6. Make every data sheet self-contained. Avoid using expressions such as "Same 
as run 6," for this necessitates looking up run 6. Every data sheet must contain 
the model designation, configuration, test speed, date, tunnel temperature, 
and pressure. Further data, such as effective Reynolds number and model 
dimensions, are valuable. In tunnels with computerized data systems these 
directives apply to the manner of presentation of data. 
7. Keep an accurate log of everything that happens. When analyzing the data, 
the exact point at which changes were made will be of paramount importance. 
- 
8. Always keep a run list in chronological order; never assign a number like run 
3b just because the later run is a check of run 3. 
The size and design of the tunnel determine the size of the model that can be 
accommodated and, sometimes, other important criteria such as model weight or 
power arrangements. Occasionally a gasoline engine can be operated in the tunnel.' 
The tunnel itself also determines the complexity of the model and hence its cost. 
The cost of a model is a function of both size and complexity. A simple wing for 
student experiments built by the students will be minimal, usually just material 
cost. 
The cost of a complete low-speed tunnel model shows in both the model designer's 
time and shop time. Models with complex leading- and trailing-edge flaps to be 
tested at several angles, gaps, and overlaps are very expensive. The same is true of 
a powered or jet lift V/STOL model. A good policy is to try to keep the model as 
simple as possible with careful consideration of its intended use. For example, 
. 
. 
incorporation of movable control surfaces early in the preliminary design of an 
aircraft may not be necessary, but the model should be designed so that these features 
may be added as required in later tests. There is a strong tendency to grossly 
underestimate the time required to build a complete airplane model at the first 
attempt. The amount of remotely operated model equipment is a function of the 
number of tests to he made and the type of tunnels in which the model will be used. 


13.2 COMPONENTS 
477 
13.2 COMPONENTS 
The testing of larger scale models of parts of an airplane offers many advantages 
provided that the data can be properly applied to the airplane. Nacelles, tail surfaces, 
dive brakes, and ailerons are parts belonging in this group. 
To take a concrete example, models of 8-ft span are 
about the maximum usually 
tested in a 10-ft tunnel. If the full-scale aircraft has a wing span of 80 f
t
,
 the largest 
model that can be tested will be 
scale. This reduction in size makes it nearly 
impossible to reproduce small items accurately; their Reynolds number will be very 
small; and it will be exceedingly difficult to measure the hinge moments of control 
surfaces. A 30% model of the vertical tail could be tested as well as a 30% aileron 
model, but, if such large-scale panel models are to be employed, they must, of 
course, be tested under flow conditions that simulate those on the complete airplane. 
Mounting the panel like a complete wing (Figure 7.45) permits an endflow about the 
inboard tip that does not actually exist on the real airplane. Such flow may easily 
invalidate the test results, and unfortunately 
even the addition of an endplate will not 
provide sufficient sealing to produce complete flow conditions. It also can be difficult 
to account for the forces and moments of the endplates when balance data are taken. 
Two arrangements are 
satisfactory: mounting the panel on a turntable or mounting 
it with a small gap (less than 0.005 span) between its inboard end and the tunnel 
floor. Illustrations are 
given in Figures 7.44 and 13.2. Either of these arrangements 
will seal the inboard end of the panel and subject it to 
nearly the same flow conditions 
as would occur on the actual aircraft. Usually the effective aspect ratio 
then developed 
will be about 0.95(2b)'/(2SP), where b is the panel span and S, is the panel area. 
An important and sometimes insoluble problem may arise for aileron panels from 
sweptback wings. Here the flow over the aileron is affected very strongly by the 
remainder of the wing and cannot be simulated by any simple reflection plane. It 
is therefore suggested that a thorough study of spanwise loadings be made and 
adequate correlation ensured before attempting panel tests of such ailerons. A full 
half-span model is satisfactory. 
A minor point in panel testing of the type shown in Figures 7.44 and 13.2 is 
that, though the hinge moments should be reduced to coefficient form by using the 
tunnel dynamic pressure, the force coefficients should be based on tunnel dynamic 
pressure corrected to allow for the diminished velocity in the boundary layer. The 
corrected q is usually about 99% of the centerline q. If the boundary layer velocity 
profile is known, it can be used to adjust the q. 
Minimum confusion in applying the test data will result if the panel is selected 
so that positive tunnel directions are positive airplane directions. Thus a left panel 
should be mounted on a right wall3 and a right panel on a left wall. Floor-mounted 
models should be left airplane panels. In the selection of the panel span the inboard 
juncture of aileron or flaps should not occur at the floor but a few inches above it. 
Owing to asymmetry, much of the panel data will require that the loads from 
the panel with flap or aileron z
e
r
o
 
be subtracted from those with surface deflected 
in order to determine the contribution of the control. Obviously, since the surface 
zero data are to be repeatedly used, only very good data should be used for the 


478 
AIRCRAFT AND AIRCRAFT COMPONENTS 
FIGURE 13.2 Reflection-plane tail test. (Courtesy of San Diego Aerospace Museum.) 
base run, but good data are not always obtainable. For instance, the deflection of 
the surface will cause a change of lift and hence a change in wall correction angle. 
The proper basic coefficient should be obtained from curves of surface zero data 
plotted against corrected angle of attack. The problem is further confused by the 
fact that the surface deflected may allow greater angles of attack than the surface 
zero run and no basic data can exist for the entire range. 
Details of the calculations necessary for refemng panel tests of ailerons, rudders, 
and elevators to the complete aircraft are given in later sections. 
Three-Dimensional Wings 
The first wind tunnel tests ever made were concerned with the behavior of wings 
(Figure 13.3). The wing is still the most critical item in the success of any aircraft. 


13.2 COMPONENTS 
479 
FIGURE 13.3 Three-dimensional wing being tested with image system in. Omission of 
the image pitch strut reduces the total drag of the system with little error in data. (Courtesy 
Wichita State University.) 
Computers have given the aerodynamicist powerful tools in wing design. Airfoils 
can be designed to yield a desired chordwise pressure distribution. Vortex lattice 
methods can determine the distribution of loads along the span. The variables in 
wing design are airfoil section, taper, twist, and sweep. The wing is usually designed 
for minimum drag at cruise lift coefficients. To obtain takeoff and landing perfor- 
mance the camber is increased to obtain large values of maximum lift and acceptable 
stall patterns by use of leading-edge flaps, slots, droop, and trailing-edge 
flaps. This 
large number of variables requires extensive wind tunnel experiments to obtain an 
optimum wing. Computational methods using Euler equations or Reynolds averaged 
Navier-Stokes solvers are widely pursued but have not yet made large inroads into 
designers' processes. Their efficiency cannot yet match the experimental tools 
available. 
Some aerodynamicists prefer to run the wing and fuselage rather than the wing 
alone. The argument for this choice is based on the possible effect of the fuselage 
on the wing stall pattern and the fact that the aircraft will fly with a fuselage. 
A tunnel installation for a wing experiment is shown in Figure 13.3. 
This installa- 
tion makes use of a widely used fixture known as a trunnion (shown in Figure 
- 
13.4). It provides an attachment for a dummy bayonet. Two sealing blocks are 
needed for both upper and lower surfaces, one with a slot to allow a strut to pass 
and one solid to be used when the dummy system is not employed. (Recall that 
during the process of testing the model may be mounted both normal and inverted, 
with and without the image system.) The second set of blocks may be omitted and 
the slot sealed with tape, clay, tunnel wax, or epoxy-filling compounds. The material 
used depends on the desired surface condition. Tape may not follow the contour, 
clay and wax are soft, and the epoxy filler can be difficult to remove. 
Tests of a wing should be run at as high a Reynolds number as possible to aid 
extrapolation to flight Reynolds number. The achievement of large test Reynolds 
numbers is constrained by tunnel size and aircraft size. As a rule of thumb, the 


480 
A I R C W  
AND AIRCRAFI' COMPONENTS 
Slotted filler block 
1
1
 
Clearance for angle 
of attack 
IJ-L 
FIGURE 13.4 Trunnion model attachment fitting. 
model span should be less than 0.8 of the tunnel width. This constraint on model 
span determines the maximum model scale. The wing aspect ratio will then determine 
the model chord. The Reynolds number may be increased by increasing the velocity 
of the test, but test velocity may be constrained by both the balance load limits and 
the fact that the lift curve slope is a function of Mach number. To see the latter, as 
a first approximation using the Prandtl-Glauert correction to a two-dimensional lift 
curve slope yields 
A test Mach number of 0.20 will yield a change in the incompressible lift curve 
slope of 2%. Therefore, tests in which the maximum lift is desired should be run 
at speeds near the full-scale takeoff or landing speed. 
As tare and interference drag can be as large as the wing minimum drag, flaps 
up, the tare and interference must be carefully evaluated. 


13.2 COMPONENTS 
481 
In general the aerodynamicist or student will be most interested in dCLlda, 
az, 
CLmar 
and how stall develops, Cm,~,, 
e, the location of aerodynamic center, C-, 
and possibly the center of pressure. The following comments will give a student or 
tunnel engineer some feel for these items: 
(a) dCJda. The theoretical lift curve slope for a nonswept wing based on 
Glauert's solution for the span load is, for wings with AR > 
5.0, 
Glauert's solution takes into account twist (both geometric and aerodynamic), chord 
distribution along the span, and downwash by using a series of horseshoe vortices, 
the bound vortices on the quarter chord. The factor T is a small positive number 
that increases the induced angle of attack over the minimum value for a wing with 
an elliptic distribution of lift. For a first approximation T 
is often taken as zero. For 
swept wings the lift curve slope decreases roughly with the cosine of the sweep 
angle of the quarter chord. From NACA TN 2495 the following equation, which 
agrees with experimental data, may be used: 
a = 0.95 
a0 
(1 + (57.3& 
AR) 
Quite often swept wings, especially those with leading- and trailing-edge flaps, do 
not have a linear lift curve. 
There are more elaborate methods for predicting the lift curve slope and wing 
performance using vortex lattice methods that will distribute the load both spanwise 
and chordwise, but they are beyond the scope of this book. The equations given 
here are intended to be used to check wind tunnel results to determine if they are 
approximately correct. If results of a more elaborate analysis are available, they 
should be used. 
(b) CLm. 
The maximum lift coefficient for airfoils varies from 0.6 for very thin 
profiles to about 1.7 for highly cambered thick profiles. In general it increases with 
Reynolds number (see Section 7.4). 
The wing maximum lift coefficient usually runs 
from 85 to 90% of the airfoil values and is never more than the airfoil values. Swept 
wings show a loss considerably more than the above values. 
Besides determining the value of CLmax. 
the shape of the stall portion of the stall 
region is important. In general, it is desired to have a gentle stall. This means that 
the curve should be gently curved near a maximum value without abrupt drops in 
values of CL 
just past the maximum value. 
The location of the start of the stall is also important. It is desirable that the stall 
start inboard of the ailerons so that lateral control can be maintained. A stall that 
starts at the root of the wing may cause excessive tail buffet. To study the stall 


482 
AIRCRAFT AND AIRCRAFI COMPONENTS 
pattern, flow visualiiation techniques such as oil flow and tufts are used (described 
in Chapter 5). 
(c) aZb 
The angle of zero lift in degrees is roughly equal to the amount of 
camber in percent for airfoils and untwisted wings of constant section. It requires 
a considerable amount of calculation to determine azL 
for a twisted wing. 
(d) Cw,,,. The minimum coefficient of drag decreases with increasing Reynolds 
number (see Chapter 8) and usually has a value between 0.0050 and 0.0085 in the 
tunnel after the tare and interference have been subtracted. The values given may 
be higher for wings equipped with lower surface trailing-edge fairing for flap tracks 
(Fowler action flaps) or hard points for external stores. 
The value of C
D
,
,
,
,
 
is sensitive to the transition point between laminar and 
turbulent flow. The location of transition 
can be determined by the flow visualization 
methods of Chapter 5. Often it is desired to fix the transition by boundary layer 
trips. These are at various locations on the model and they will increase CD,,,,,~,. The 
effect of trip strips on CD,, 
can be determined (see Chapter 8). 
(e) The CL-versus-CD 
curve or drag polar below the start of flow separation is 
often approximated by Equation (13.4). This curve fit is used for two purposes. 
First, it can simplify performance calculations in cruise and climb. Second, by 
dividing the drag into parasite and induced parts, the effects of configuration 
changes 
can be more easily monitored: 
where CD,,, is the equivalent parasite drag coefficient and e is Oswald's efficiency 
factor. For a wing only it accounts for a drag increase 
due to nonelliptic 
span loading. 
For a whole model it accounts for the change in span loading caused by, for example, 
the fuselage and nacelles and the increase in tail drag with CL. 
The values are determined by a plot of C
E
 versus CD, 
as shown in Figure 13.5. 
Over a range of CL 
approximately between 0.2 and 0.8-1.0 the curve is linear. At 
low values of CL 
it is curved, and at large values of CL 
separation causes the curve 
to deviate from a linear relationship. Often the curve is slightly nonlinear for swept 
wings and judgment will have to be used. The value of CDSe, 
is less than CD,,-. 
Equation (13.4) is of the form 
where 
Thus the slope K is used to determine e and the intercept on the CD 
axis to deter- 
mine CmE. 


13.2 COMPONENTS 
483 
CLP 
FIGURE 13.5 
C, versus Ct for a NACA 23012 w
i
n
g
.
 
Often during wind tunnel experiments on either wings or complete aircraft it is 
desirable to find the effect of configuration changes on the level of parasite drag. 
This is done by setting e = 1.0 in Equation (13.4) and then calculating the induced 
drag coefficient. This value is subtracted from the measured CD 
to yield an approxi- 
mate Cm, 
which is plotted versus CL. 
Example 13.1 Values of CL 
and CD 
are given in Table 13.1. Find Oswald's efficiency 
factor e if AR = 7.0. 
- 
From a plot of CD 
versus Ci the slope K = 0.05173; CD,,, 
= 0.0081, C , , ~  
- 
0.0090, and e = 0.879. 
(f) Location of the aerodynamic center may be computed as follows4: Consider 
a wing mounted so that the axis of rotation is at some point behind and below the 
TABLE 13.1. Wing Data 
CX 
CL 
CD 


484 
AIRCRAFT AND AIRCRAFT 
COMPONENTS 
FIGURE 13.6 Force system, Example 5.1. 
probable location of the aerodynamic center (see Figure 1
3
.
6
)
.
 
(The aerodynamic 
center is defined as the point about which the moment coefficient is constant.) Let 
the distance along the chord from the trunnion to the aerodynamic center be x, and 
let the distance above the trunnion by y. Both x and y are measured in fractions of 
the MAC.S 
It will be seen that 
M, = Mu 
- 
XC(L 
cos a 
+ D sin a) 
- 
yc(D cos a 
- 
L sin a) 
(13.6) 
where M, 
is the moment measured about the mounting trunnion. Hence 
Applying the condition that C,, does not vary with CL. 
we get 
The data may easily be used to find CL, CD, 
a, 
and the slopes dC,JdCL and 
dddCL 
since they are straight lines. The determination of dCJdC, is difficult, for 
it is a curve. 
If the wing efficiency factor has been determined, dCD/dCL 
may be found di- 
rectly from 
If information for the above equation is not available, the slope of the drag curve 
at the proper point may be obtained by the familiar mirror method. In this method 


13.2 
COMPONENTS 
485 
a small hand mirror is set directly on the plotted curve and adjusted until the reflected 
curve appears as a smooth continuation of the original. Under these conditions the 
plane of the mirror will be perpendicular to the drag curve at the selected CL, 
and 
the drag curve slope may then be computed. This type of manual data analysis has 
become a lost art as our computers have become more and more capable and 
decreased the need for such skill. New and more abstract skills are required to stay 
on top of the processes that are entrusted to our machines. 
Equation (13.8), having two unknowns, requires the substitution of two points 
and then the simultaneous solution of the resulting equations. The approximation 
of measuring dCddCL 
may be eliminated for one of these points by selecting for 
the point the angle at which CD 
is a minimum. At this point, obviously dCddCL 
= 
0. 
Example 13.2 Find the aerodynamic center of an airfoil whose tests yield the data 
in Table 13.2. The mounting trunnion is at the 49% chord point and 17.9% below 
the chord line. 
Plots of the data yield dC,,,/dC 
= 0.254: 
-- 
dCL - 
0.1025 per degree = 5.873 per radian 
da 
At a = 2,3O, CL 
= 0.34, C m , ~ ,  
= 0.0087, and dCddCL 
= 0. At a = 8.8", CL 
= 
1.00, C, = 0.0210. By the mirror method dCddCL 
= 0.048. 
Substituting into Equation (13.8), the equations simplify to 
The aerodynamic center is 0.490 - 
0.252 = 0.238, or 23.8% of chord or 1.2% chord 
ahead of the quarter chord, and -0.179 + 0.148 = -3.1% below the chord line. 
In order to simplify the process of locating the aerodynamic center, the assumption 
is sometimes made that the moment 
is due entirely to the lift and that the aerodynamic 
TABLE 1
3
.
2
.
 Airfoil Data: Examole 1
3
.
2
 


486 
AIRCRAFT AND AIRCRAFT COMPONENTS 
I
+-
 .
.
 
.-I 
FIGURE 13.7 Force system, Example 13.2. 
center is on the chord line (see Figure 13.7). Since the lift and drag act through the 
aerodynamic center, the moment about the trunnion is (Figure 13.7) 
where MPC 
is the moment about the aerodynamic center and tr the chordwise location 
of the balance trunnion. 
Rewriting Equation (13.10) in coefficient form, we have 
C , ,  
= C,, + C&r - 
ac) 
and differentiating and transposing (dC,,/dCL = 0) yield 
The aerodynamic center is theoretically a small amount behind the quarter chord. 
In practice, it is found ahead of the quarter chord for the older profiles and behind 
for many new profiles. 
Example 13.3 Calculate the location of the aerodynamic center for the data of 
Example 5.2 using Equation (13.11). 
1. From a plot of C,, versus CL, 
2. Substituting the trunnion location and dC, JdCL 
in Equation (13.12), we have 
ac = 0.49 - 
0.236. This compares with 0.238 by the method of Equation 
(13.8). 
Equation (13.11) indicates that when CL 
= 0, 
= CmW. 
In other words, 
the value of the moment coefficient at the point where the curve strikes the 


13.2 COMPONENTS 
487 
C, axis is approximately the value of C,,. Rather than call it that, the usual 
practice is to label the above intersection Cd. 
(g) After the location of the aerodynamic center has been obtained, the moment 
coefficient about it may be found from 
c,, = C,, - 
~ ( C L  
cos a + CD 
sin a) - 
y(CD 
cos a + CL 
sin a) 
The value of C,,, varies with the amount and shape of the camber line. For wings 
using symmetrical airfoils, it is zero; for nonswept wings, the value is -0.10 or 
less. For swept wings it becomes larger and more negative and is a function of 
sweep and aspect ratio. For wings with flaps on the trailing edge the values of - 
1.0 
can be exceeded. It should be noted that large negative values of C,, can often 
reduce the airplane CLm at some center-of-gravity positions due to large downloads 
on the trail. 
Example 13.4 
Calculate the C,,, for Example 13.2. 
Substituting each point into Equation (13.7) we have the data shown in Table 
13.3. 
It is not unusual to find some small spread in the values of C,,, 
although strictly 
speaking the definition states that it must be constant. The small nonlinearity in the 
values of C,,, is due to the vertical displacement terms of the aerodynamic center 
in Equation (13.7). This can easily be verified by plotting the x and y displacement 
terms versus CL 
or a. It is a surprising fact that the location of the aerodynamic 
center is practically unchanged by flaps. The explanation lies in the manner in which 
the moment is generated: 
As indicated by theory, the C,,, due to changing a is constant about the quarter 
chord. The Cm 
due to camber is a constant about the half chord. Hence adding 
TABLE 
13.3. Calculated Moment Coefficients 


488 
AIRCRAFT AND AIRCRAFI COMPONENTS 
FIGURE 13.8 Force system, Example 5.3. 
camber in the form of flaps merely increases the values of C,, without changing 
the location of the aerodynamic center as determined by changing a. 
(h) The center of pressure is defined as that point on the chord of an airfoil 
through which the resultant force acts. Though its usefulness has declined with the 
introduction of the concept of the aerodynamic center, it must occasionally be 
determined from force tests. The procedure is as follows: The forces measured 
appear as a lift force L, a drag force D, and a moment about the mounting trunnion 
M, (see Figure 13.8). At the point through which the resultant 
force acts, the moment 
vanishes. Hence 
MCP 
= 0 
= Mtr 
+ L(p cos a )  + D(p sin a) 
where p is the distance from the trunnion to the center of pressure, positive to the 
rear of the trunnion. 
We then have 
-C,,= 
CL - cosa + CD 
- sina = 0 
t) 
t) 
and 
!
?
 = 
- 
c
,
t
r
 
c 
CL 
cos a + CD 
sin a 
The location of the center pressure from the wing leading edge is then 


13.2 COMPONENTS 
489 
Example 13.5 
A wing is mounted with the trunnion at the 23.5% chord point. At 
a = 7.3, we have CL 
= 0.6, CD 
= 0.0320, and C
,
,
,
 
= -0.011. Find the center 
of pressure: 
t!, 
- 
cm, 
- 
- 
0.011 
c 
CL 
cos C
Y
 + CD 
sin a 
(0.6)(0.9919) + (0.0320) + (0.127) 
Two-Dimensional Wings 
Alternations to airfoils sections are frequently investigated in two-dimensional tun- 
nels wherein a short constant chord section of a wing completely spans the jet width, 
as shown in Figure 13.9, simulating infinite aspect ratio. The jet is usually 2;-4 
times higher than it is wide. In some tunnels of this type the drag is read by the 
momentum survey method and the lift by the pressure on the tunnel walls. The 
pitching moment may also be read from the pressure on the tunnel walls, but in 
many cases the wing is mounted on trunnions and the moment is read with a simple 
beam balance. The proportionately large drag of two endplates prohibits accurate 
drag measurements by the usual force tests and complicates the endplate seal. 
Since the models customarily used in two-dimensional tunnels are larger in 
proportion to jet size than others, corrections for constriction, buoyancy, and camber 
FIGURE 13.9 Airfoil model in two-dimensional tunnel. (Photograph courtesy of NASA.) 


490 
AIRCRAFT AND AIRCFUFT COMPONENTS 
must be considere& 
(Chapter 9). Excessive errors due to wall effect will arise in 
cl,, 
if the model chord exceeds 0.4h and in ca,,, 
if it exceeds 0.7h, were h is the 
tunnel height. 
The information obtained from two-dimensional tests will be reducible to section 
coefficients el, ca, and c
,
,
,
:
.
 These coefficients (unlike wing coefficients C,, CD, 
and 
cm$, 
which are an average of conditions including varying Reynolds number and 
effective angles of attack across the span) consider only a section under constant 
load and hence constant effective angle of attack. It is customary to consider the 
minimum profile drag coefficient Cm as equivalent to ca when both are at the same 
Reynolds number. Likewise, it is assumed that C,, = em,,. 
The location of the aerodynamic center and the center of pressure may be calcu- 
lated as discussed above. The lift coefficients c, and CL 
may also be considered 
equal except at their maximum, where the spanwise lift distribution usually results 
in a diminution in lift of at least 10-15% for straight wings. Expressed symbolically, 
CLMX 
= 0.90cl,- 
(approximately) 
(13.15) 
Two-dimensional testing is used to obtain data for aerodynamic comparison of 
various airfoil shapes. Comparisons would include c
,
,
 
and the shape of the lift 
curve at maximum lift, minimum drag, and the variation of cd 
and c,, with cl or 
a
.
 
The lift curve slope usually decreases from the two-dimensional value to a three- 
dimensional wing and is slightly affected by Reynolds number and increases with 
Mach number for Mach numbers less than 1. There is some question about the 
validity of two-dimensional drag data. 
Low-Aspect-Ratio Wings 
The advantages of using a low aspect ratio for supersonic airplanes are quite impres- 
sive, and not infrequently the tunnel engineer finds himself or herself testing such 
configurations for low-speed characteristics. 
Low-aspect-ratio lift curves may look quite different from those at high aspect 
ratio. Below AR = 2.0 the curve is usually concave upward (see Figures 13.10 and 
13.11). The lift curve slope at zero lift may be approximately by 
~ C L  
-- 
d
c
l
 - 
0.008 + 0.018 AR) (per degree) 
(13.16) 
below AR = 3.0. Between AR = 3.0 and AR = 5.0 the following equation may 
be used: 
For greater aspect ratio, Equation (13.2) should be employed. 


13.2 COMPONENTS 
491 
FIGURE 13.10 Lift of rectangular flat plates. 
Angle of attack, a, 
degrees 
FIGURE 
13.11 Lift coefficients for delta wings of various aspect ratio, NACA 0012 profile. 


492 
AIRCRAR AND AIRCRAFT COMPONENTS 
Aileron Panels 
< 
The airplane designer is interested in three items connected with proposed ailerons. 
First is the rolling moment he or she is seeking. The other two, the yawing moment 
and the hinge moment, represent the price that must be paid. In addition, the tunnel 
engineer is concerned with referring the data to the complete airplane. The problem 
first apparent is that the panel model will not have the same lift curve slope as the 
complete wing. Actually, however, this is of small import as long as the roll due 
to a given aileron deflection is at a known wing lift coefficient. This, it will be 
shown, requires that the complete wing be previously tested and its lift curve known 
and available. The procedure for then referring the aileron panel angles of attack 
to the complete wing is as follows: 
1. From the estimated performance of the airplane, note the speeds that corre- 
spond to various important flight conditions, such as minimum control speed 
and climb speed. Calculate the complete wing lift coefficients that correspond 
to these speeds. 
2. Plot the span loading curve, which is usually known before the test (for a 
nonswept wing, Schrenk's method can be used for an approximation). The 
total under thiH curve, An divided by the total wing area, SV 
is a measure of 
the wing lift coefficient. Likewise, that part of the span loading curve above 
the panel span, Ap, when divided by the area of the wing panel, Sp, is a 
measure of the panel lift coefficient. The ratio of these two ratios, then, is 
the ratio of the complete wing lift coefficient CL, 
to the panel lift coefficient 
C,. That is, 
Equation (13.16) may be used to find the panel lift coefficients that correspond 
to the selected wing lift coefficients. 
3. Test a panel with aileron zero and obtain a plot of CI, 
versus a,, 
where a
.
 is 
the angle of attack uncorrected for tunnel wall effect. 
4. From 3, read the uncorrected angles that should be set to read the desired 
panel lift coefficients. The tunnel operator may then set these uncorrected 
angles with arbitrary aileron deflections and maintain a proper panel model 
to complete model correlation. 
The span loading as required above may be simply found by a method proposed 
by Schrenk6 
or by one proposed by Pearson.' Schrenk's method for untwisted wings 
without flaps is as follows: 


13.2 COMPONENTS 
493 
Plot the wing chord against the span. If the airfoil section varies, then a 
weighted chord 
should be used. The term with a bar over it is the average 
section slope, given by 
2. On the same graph, plot a quarter ellipse whose area is equal to half the wing 
area and whose span equals the wing span. 
3. The span loading will be represented by a line midway between 1 and 2. (See 
Figure 13.12.) 
The data for an aileron test require some special consideration for three reasons: 
the structural problems due to cable stretch and wing twist; the simulation of a 
symmetrical case as a result of the carryover arising from the wall reflection (see 
Chapters 9 and 10); and the doubled force increments arising from the same source. 
Cable stretch and wing twist are problems that must be evaluated by the structural 
engineers for a particular airplane. Assuming that the carryover is small, one is fully 
justified in using the measure force data (corrected for wall effects and blockage) 
for computing the rolling and yawing moments about the aircraft centerline. But if 
one is interested in the complete wing lift, drag, and pitching moment, the measured 
data, including as they do the fuU reflection, are too large. In other words a 50-lb 
lift increment (ACL = 0.1, say) for one aileron down is not a 100-lb increment 
Span, feet 
FIGURE 13.12 Interpolation for span loading. 


494 
AIRCRAFI' AND AIRCRAFT COMPONENTS 
(ACL 
= 0.1) when the whole wing is considered, since the image aileron should 
not be down. Thus, letting a subscript d mean aileron down, and 0 mean control 
neutral, wing data for an asymmetrical model may be found from 
The roll and yaw data may be mated as outlined below. 
In testing one panel of a wing, it is seen that a yawing and rolling moment about 
the aircraft centerline is produced that in actuality would be canceled by the panel 
on the other side. Thus it is necessary to subtract the moments due to the panel 
with aileron zero from the moments with the aileron deflected. The subtraction also 
acts to remove the tare effects of the turntable, the net result being the yawing and 
rolling moments due to the deflection of the aileron only. The only requirement is 
that the test conditions must simulate the proper spanwise loading over the aileron. 
In working up the data, the coefficients must be corrected to complete wing areas 
and spans so that the results will be usable. The definitions are as follows (the 
subscript p indicates "panel"): 
LP 
C - 
- 
panel lift coefficient 
- 
9S.D 
D
'
 
Cob 
= - 
panel drag coefficient including mounting 
qSp 
plate drag 
YM, 
C, = - 
panel yawing moment coefficient 
9Sw 
bw 
Clp 
= - 
R
"
,
 
panel rolling moment coefficient about balance 
9Swbw rolling axis, based on wing area and span 
To get the rolling moment at the aircraft centerline, we have (see Figure 13.13) 
RM. = RM, + La' 
where a' is the distance from the balance rolling moment axis to airplane centerline 
(the subscript a indicates "aircraft"). 
However, this represents the moment of one panel plus the aileron about the 
aircraft centerline; to find the part due to the aileron only, we subtract the rolling 


13.2 COMPONENTS 
495 
FIGURE 13.13 Panel rolling moment and its relation to the rest o
f
 the airplane (front view). 
moment coefficient of the panel with aileron zero, Cm. 
Hence the rolling moment 
coefficient of one ailerons about the airplane centerline is 
By a similar process, the yawing moment coefficient due to one ailerona is (see 
Figure 13.14) 
where C
,
 
= YMJqS,J,, b' is the distance of the balance yaw axis to the aircraft 
and C
,
,
,
,
 
is the yawing moment coefficient of one panel about the aircraft centerline, 
aileron zero. 
FIGURE 13.14 Panel yawing moment and its relation to the rest of the airplane (plan view). 


4% 
AIRCRAFT AND AIRCRAFF COMPONENTS 
* 
FIGURE 13.15 
Roll ratehelix angle relation. 
For structural purposes or a check of the spanwise load calculations, the lateral 
center of pressure may be found by dividing the semispan rolling moment about 
the airplane axis of symmetry by the lift. 
Although not directly apparent, the rolling moment coefficient also determines 
the helix angle (see Figure 13.15). 
At a given rate of steady roll the rolling moment is opposed by an equal and 
opposite damping moment. In the usual symbols, the rolling moment 
where DM is the damping moment. Dividing through by the helix angle, 
pbI2V @ is the rolling velocity in radians per second), 
The term d(CJld(pb12V) is called the damping-in-roll coefficient (frequently 
written Cb) and is a function of wing taper and aspect ratio, both of which are 
constant for a given airplane. For unswept wings, values of Clp 
may be found from 
Figure 13.16. The helix angle is then9 
and the rolling velocity is 


13.2 COMPONENTS 
497 
Aspect ratio 
FIGURE 13.16 
C+ for various values of aspect ratio and taper. 
The maximum rolling velocity for airplanes with reversible controls is usually 
limited by stick force considerations rather than by the airplane's actual ability to 
roll. Power-driven controls as well as aerodynamic balances to decrease the hinge 
moments are used to increase the rolling velocity; however, wing twist will decrease 
rolling velocity. 
Example 13.6 Data from a test run at q = 25.6 lb/ft2 
on a wing panel of 12 ft2 
yields CL 
= 0.789, CD 
= 0.0599 at a 
= 5.44", left aileron down 15". (Data have 
been corrected for tunnel wall effect.) Here ClP 
= -0.0102, C, = -0.0010. Find 
the rolling and yawing moments about the aircraft centerline if the distance from 
the balance roll axis to the aircraft centerline is 8 ft. The rolling moment for aileron 
zero is Cm 
= 0.0191, and the yawing moment is C,, = -0.0028. Also, S, = 
70 ft2, 
b, = 25 ft: 
Example 13.7 Assume that sufficient control force exists to develop the above C, 
at 150 mph. Calculate the helix angle and rate of roll. The wing taper ratio is 2:1 
(A = 0.50) and the model is 40% scale. 


498 
AIRCRAFT AND AIRCRAFT COMPONENTS 
1. AR = b2/S = 252/70 
= 8.93. From Figure 13.16 at AR = 8.93 and h = 0.50, 
Typical data that might be expected from tests of an aileron are shown in Figures 
13.17-13.19. The roll-versus-yaw plot is particularly useful when figuring ratios 
for differential ailerons. 
Perhaps at this point it would be fitting to discuss the lateral axis more fully in 
order to explain the reaction obtained before and during a roll. Consider the case 
when the ailerons are deflected but no roll has yet had time to develop or perhaps 
an asymmetrical span loading is being resisted. The down aileron creates more lift 
and induced drag and usually more profile drag, whereas the opposite effect is noted 
for the up aileron. The net result is a yawing moment opposite in sign to the rolling 
Yawing moment coeftici#lt. C. 
FIGURE 13.17 
Aileron adverse yaw. 


13.2 COMPONENTS 
499 
-
30 
FIGURE 13.18 
moment: left yaw for right aileron. Since nose left yaw is negative and right roll 
positive, the yaw is adverse when it has an opposite sign to the roll. Many methods 
are suggested for balancing this adverse yaw, among them an artificially increased 
profile drag of the raised aileron, which tends to pull the lowered wing into the 
turn. Such a profile drag increase can be obtained either by a special aileron design 
or by gearing the aileron controls so that the raised aileron has a greater deflection 
than the depressed one. The latter system is referred to as "differential ailerons." 
Differential ailerons reduce adverse yaw but are usually accompanied by an overall 
reduction in maximum rate of roll. 
The designer, therefore, notes not only the maximum amount of roll (CLmu) 
from 
graphs such as Figure 13.19 but also examines data such as those shown in Figure 
13.17 to observe the amount of adverse yaw, a minimum being desirable. 
Now we come to a point important to the tunnel engineer. Referring to Figure 
13.17 again, we note that when the curve appears in the first and third quadrants, 
favorable yaw is indicated, but it will actually exist only when the airplane does 
not roll. When rolling occurs, the direction of the relative wind over each wing is 
so altered that a strong adverse yaw is developed, and the results of the static tunnel 
test may be entirely erroneous. 


AIRCRAFT AND AIRCRAFT COMPONENTS 
UP 
Left aileron deflection. 4, 
degrees 
Down 
FIGURE 
13.19 Left aileron power. 
Under most conditions, the air loads on the ailerons oppose their deflec- 
tion, producing a moment that must be supplied by the pilot or by some outside 
means. Methods employed to help the pilots include powered "boosters" and 
mass and aerodynamic balance. The mass balances may only balance the weight 
of the surface or they may be arranged to provide an inertia force while the ship 
is rotating. The aerodynamic balances control surface areas of various cross-sectional 
shapes ahead of the hinge and area disposition such as horns, shielded horns, and 
internal, medium, and sharp nose aerodynamic balance. They may also include 
various devices aft of the hinge line, such as balance tabs, spring tabs, and beveled 
trailing edges. 
Aerodynamic balances are simpler and lighter than mass balances or power boost 
and hence are to be preferred as long as icing need not be considered for general- 
aviation-type aircraft. Large aircraft and fighters almost always need power boost. 
Unfortunately, most aerodynamic balances are effective for only a portion of the 
aileron travel, as may be seen by the extent of the decreased slope in Figure 13.18. 
A measure of balance superiority is then the range of decreased hinge moments as 
well as the slope of the balanced part of the curve. Complete aileron data must, of 
course, include the effect of the other aileron as well as the amount of the differential 
decided upon. 


13.2 COMPONENTS 
501 
The aileron hinge moment coefficient CH, 
is defined as 
where HM is the aileron hinge moment, positive when it aids control deflection; S, 
is the area of the aileron aft of the hinge line; and c. is the average chord of the 
aileron aft of hinge line. 
Another definition of the hinge moment is based on the use of the root-mean- 
square chord aft of the hinge as follows: 
where c/ is the root-mean-square chord flap or aileron aft of the hinge and bf the 
flap or aileron span. 
The quantity q b f  
is most easily obtained by integrating the area under the curve 
of local flap chord squared against flap span. 
Figure 13.20 shows a hinge moment calibration setup. 
The variance of definitions again demonstrates the necessity of clear and complete 
definitions of every item in the wind tunnel report. 
Complete consideration of hinge moments must include the gearing ratio of the 
controls. Depending on the purpose of the aircraft, various limiting conditions are 
imposed by both the military and the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). 
FIGURE 13.20 Setup for calibrating hinge moment strain gages on a panel model. For 
quick checks a good spring scale is convenient. 


502 
AIRCRAIT 
AND 
AIRCRAFT 
COMPONENTS 
Example 13.8 An-airplane has the specifications given in Table 13.4. 
Calculate the wheel force (one hand) necessary to deflect the ailerons 10" at 262 
mph indicated air speed. 
For the total hinge moment coefficient resulting from both ailerons, we have 
Cfi 
= 0.0188 - 
(-0.0089) = 0.0277 
Md 
= qS,c,CH0 
= (175.2)(17.43)(1.426)(0.0277) 
= 120.5 lb-ft 
120.5 
Wheel moment = - 
= 36.2 lb-ft 
3.33 
36.2 
Wheel force = - 
= 58.0 lb 
0.625 
Rudders 
The rudder produces a side force that in turn produces a yawing moment about the 
center of gravity of the airplane. This may or may not produce yaw, for the lateral 
loading may be asymmetrical and the rudder employed only to maintain a straight 
course. Some drag, a small moment about the quarter-chord line of the tail itself, 
some roll, and a rudder hinge moment will also be created. The fact that the drag 
moment is stabilizing is no argument in favor of a large vertical tail drag, since, in 
maintaining a straight course with asymmetrical loading, drag is decidedly harmful. 
The designer of a vertical tail seeks the following: 
1. A large side force with minimum drag. 
2. The steepest slope to the side force curve so that small yaw produces large 
stabilizing forces. 
3. The smallest hinge moment consistent with positive control feel. The maxi- 
mum pedal force is defined by the FAA and the military. 
4. Proper rudder balance so that under no conditions will the pilot be unable to 
return the rudder to neutral, and preferably it should not even tend to over- 
balance. 
TABLE 13.4. Airplane Properties: Example 13.8 
W = 40,000 Ib 
S = 755 ff 
S, = 17.43 f
t
Z
 
Wheel radius = 0.625 ft 
Aileron differential = 1 
: 
1 
At + 
10" aileron 
C
"
.
 = -0.0089 
At -10" aileron, CH. 
= 0.0188 
b = 71.5 f
t
 
Aileron chord aft of hinge = 1.426 ft 
Wheel throw 
= 3.33 
Aileron deflection 


13.2 COMPONENTS 
503 
5. A zero trail angle'' so that control-free stability is the same as control-fixed 
stability. It will be seen that the zero trail angle permits smaller pedal forces 
and rudder movements to return a yawed aircraft to zero. 
6. The largest yawing moments about the airplane's center of gravity. This 
moment is due almost entirely to the side force. The proportions due to the 
yawing moment of the vertical tail about its own quarter chord and the yawing 
moment of the vertical tail surface due to its drag are quite small but not 
always insignificant. 
The rudder calculations, unlike the aileron panel tests, will require the absolute 
value of the drag coefficient. 
[See Equation (13.30).] This is not easily obtained 
with a panel test, but in view of the small contribution of the drag effect, an 
approximation may be made by reading the section drags with a wake survey rake 
at stations along the vertical tail with the rudder angle zero and by summing them 
to get the total drag coefficient. This may be subtracted from the minimum drag as 
read by the balance to get the drag of the endplate. The method as outlined makes 
the very questionable assumption that the tare drag is unaffected by rudder angle, 
which is justified only by the peculiar conditions of this setup in which tare accuracy 
is not vital. 
The sign convention for control surfaces and tabs is as follows: A positive angular 
deflection yields a positive force on the main surface. A positive hinge moment 
produces a positive deflection. 
The rudder setup for finding n (and hence C,,) is shown in Figure 13.21. The 
contributing parts are (1) the moment due to the vertical tail side forces, (2) the 
moment due to the vertical tail drag, and (3) the moment due to the vertical tail 
moment about its own quarter chord. 
In symbols these factors become 
n
,
 = (n,), - 
YJ, 
cos + - 
DJ, sin JI 
= qS,&C,,L - 
qS,CK, 
cos + . 1, - 
qS& 
sin + - I, 
4 
(13.30) 
SZ" 
S" 
1
"
 
C",, 
= - 
C&" - 
- 
c 
S
"
1
"
 
Sb 
4 
Sb 
fi cos + - 
-Ch 
sin I
J
 
bS 
where n
,
 = yawing moment of vertical tail about center of gravity 
s
,
 
= vertical tail area 
C A  
- 
4 
= vertical tail moment coefficient about its own quarter chord 
CV 
= mean aerodynamic chord of vertical tail 
S 
= wing area 
b 
= wing span 
1, 
= tail length (distance from tail quarter chord to center of gravity) 
cfi 
= YJqS, 
4J 
= angle of yaw 
wv 
= moment of vertical tail about its own quarter chord 
0, 
= drag of vertical tail 


504 
AIRCFL~FT 
AND AIRCRAFT COMPONENTS 
FIGURE 13.21 Plan view of yawed airplane. 
Sometimes it is desired to estimate the tail contribution to yawing moment; in 
this case some simplification of Equation (13.30) is possible. The tail drag term 
and the tail moment about its own quarter chord are small, and for moderate yaw 
angles cos + = 
1.0. Letting SJJSb equal the tail volume coefficient v, 
and putting 
C, = C,, = a,+, we have 
where a, = dCLvlda,. 
This equation does not include the sidewash 
effect discussed in the next paragraph; 
it also assumes that the ratio of dynamic pressures qJq is unity. 
It was mentioned earlier that span loading must be considered in order to apply 
data properly from an aileron panel test to the complete airplane. In the next section 
on elevators attention is drawn to the proper method of applying the data from an 
isolated horizontal tail. The vertical tail is less affected by the remainder of the 
airplane, but some sidewasb does exist when the airplane is yawed. Hence 15" yaw 
by no means results in a vertical tail angle of attack of 15". Proper evaluation of 
the sidewash can be made by equipping the complete model with a vertical tail 
whose incidence is variable and by going through a procedure similar to that outlined 
for the horizontal tail in Section 13.3. 


13.2 COMPONENTS 
505 
Example 13.9 A vertical tail model whose area is 12 ft2 is tested at 100 mph. The 
model MAC = 3.0 ft. The actual airplane, of which the model is 40% scale, has a 
wing area of 750 ft2 
and a span of 78 ft. The tail length is 30 ft. Find the tail yawing 
moment coefficient about the center of gravity if C, = 0.794, C
,
 
= 0.0991, and 
C,,L" 
= -0.1067 for IJJ = 6". The rudder is deflected 10": 
4 
Elevators 
The elevators may also be tested by the panel mounting method. With this arrange- 
ment, one-half the horizontal tail is usually mounted as shown in Figure 13.2 and 
the results are 
doubled to get the data for the entire tail. 
It will be noted that for airplanes of conventional 
dimensions, 
the pitching moment 
of the horizontal tail about its own quarter chord and the pitching moment about 
the airplane center of gravity produced by the horizontal tail drag are negligible 
when compared to the moment produced by the tail lifting force. Hence it will 
probably be necessary only to measure the lift of the panel model along with the 
elevator hinge moments to evaluate the desired qualities. Occasionally it will be 
desirable to compare two different methods of trimming to determine which has 
less drag for a given lift. Then, of course, drag measurements will be necessary. 
The 
tail lift curve slope as determined from the panel model may require adjust- 
ment in order to apply the test results. Example data are shown in Figure 13.22. 
For example, suppose that the complete model has been tested at a constant angle 
of attack with varying settings of the stabilizer. The pitching moment about the 
airplane center of gravity due to the horizontal tail, 
may be measured, and with the known tail area St 
and tail length 1, the value of C
,
 
may be determined. In these calculations it is probably better to use q, = qhsucam 
than the very questionable q, = 0.8qh,, 
sometimes arbitrarily employed. From 
the calculated CLr 
and known stabilizer angles the slope of the tail lift curve on the 
airplane (dC,ldolt) may be established. It then remains to diminish the panel lift 
curve slope by the factor (dCulda,)+l, divided by (dCIlldar)panel. 


506 
AIRCRAFT AND AIRCRAIT COMPONENTS 
FIGURE 13.22 Typical panel lift curves. The breaks in the curves for large flap deflections 
occur when the flap stalls. 
The procedure followed to align the hinge moment data to the airplane may be 
traced through Figure 13.23. 
Let us suppose that the power-off moment curves of our example airplane are 
as 
shown in Figure 13.23 for the model with tail and without tail, some center-of- 
gravity location" being specified. If lines abc, dej . . . are drawn between 
points of equal angle-of-attack values, the difference between the model plus tail 
(M + T) and M - 
T curves is the contribution of the horizontal tail with elevator 
zero at the specified aw. 
The moment due to the tail AC, = q,(CIt)S,& 
and values 
of CIt 
are readily determined. From the previously prepared tail lift curve we find 
the tail angles of attack that correspond to the CIt values, and so label the lines 
abc, deJ . 
. 
. 
as 
a, 
= -6.1, -4.2, 
. 
. 
. 
. 
This procedure furnishes the relation between 
the panel tests and the complete airplane, since values of hinge moment and tail 
lift coefficient for various angles of attack are available from the panel tests. 
To carry this 
chart to 
completion, the values of AC, for various 
elevator 
deflections 
are calculated from the CU values corresponding to the tail angles of attack, and 


. 
- 
- 
- 
- 
-- - -
-
 -
-
 
13.2 COMPONENTS 
507 
[
A
C
,
 due to SE 
.
;
 
- 
5' 
when at - 
- 
6.1' 
FIGURE 13.23 Procedure to align hinge moment data to airplane. 
curves of constant elevator deflections may be drawn in. The complete chart may 
then be used to read the amount of elevator needed to trim at any CL 
or the amount 
of moment available for maneuvering with a specified stick load. The maneuvering 
investigation requires the hinge moment data and the mechanical advantage, as 
follows: 
1. Assume the chart to indicate that an elevator deflection of - 
15" is required 
to trim at CL = 1.9 and a ,  
= +12. From the airplane geometry andCL 
= 
1.9, the value of q may be found from q = WISC,. 
2. From the chart of hinge moment versus a~ 
we read (say) for a = +12 and 
6, = - 
15" a C,, = 0
.
0
6
4
0
.
 
3. From airplane 
geometry and q (step 1) the elevator hinge moment is calculated 
from HM, = qSj, - CHr. 
4. From the curve of mechanical advantage versus 6, and the known linkage 
lengths, the stick force may then be found. 
In this manner the various flight conditions may be investigated and desirable 
balance changes evaluated. Note that the limit to forward center-of-gravity travel 


508 
AIRCRnFT AND AIRCRAFT COMPONENTS 
is a function of elevator power, which is a function of elevator deflection and 
size. The elevator power must be sufficient to balance the airplane at maximum lift 
(CmCG 
= 0). The critical condition is gear and landing flaps down in ground effect. 
Fuselages, Nacelles, and Bodies-of Revolution 
Tests of fuselage alone are rarely made, for the interference effect of the wing on 
the fuselage is of such prime importance and magnitude that tests of a fuselage 
without the presence of the wing are of very questionable value. When a fuselage 
alone is tested, the boundary effects are 
usually important. Blockage corrections are 
commonly moderate to large. 
Nacelle tests are much more valuable than fuselage tests because usually entirely 
different items are 
being investigated. Generally the nacelle tests are concerned only 
with cooling pressure drops and cooling drags and not with the total nacelle drag, 
which would be largely dependent on the wing-nacelle interference. 
If a power-driven propeller is to be utilized in the setup, careful consideration 
should be given to the control and measurement of the rpm. For nacelles simulating 
modem high-power units, the loss of a single rpm can represent a large thrust 
decrement and, in turn, can invalidate any drag measurements that may be made. 
It is usually advantageous to fix the rpm by means of a synchronous driving motor 
and to vary the tunnel speed and propeller blade angle to get various flight conditions. 
Such an arrangement corresponds to the customary constant-speed setup of most a
i
r
-
 
planes. 
The usual nacelle is of such dimensions that buoyancy, 
constriction, and propeller 
corrections are important. For clarity, let us assume that a model is to be tested at 
100 mph. The constriction effect of the closed jet increases the velocity over the 
model so that the results are similar to those encountered in free air at a slightly 
higher speed, say 102 mph. The effect on the propeller is opposite, however, yielding 
the results expected in free air at 96 mph. It is therefore necessary to increase the 
tunnel speed to approximately 104 mph, at which time the propeller slipstream is 
the same as in free air at 100 mph. The propeller coefficients are then based on 
100 mph. The buoyancy effect is assumed to be the same as expected at 100 mph 
without the propeller. 
Drag coefficients for a nacelle may be based either on nacelle frontal area or 
other reference area. The choice should be clearly stated. The quantity of cooling 
air per second Q is usually defined by 
where K is the engine conductivity; S the nacelle or engine frontal area (ft2); 
Ap 
the baffle pressure drop (lb/ft2); and p the air density (slugs/ft3). 
Bodies of revolution or fuselages are best tested on their sides using a single 
strut and yawing the model to simulate angles of attack. This procedure both reduces 
the tare and interference and makes their determination easier. For accurate angle 


13.2 COMPONENTS 
509 
determination the torsional deflection of the strut under torque load should be 
calibrated and corrected in the data work-up. 
Propellers 
Propellers are frequently investigated in wind tunnels either alone or in conjunction 
with a fuselage or nacelle. If an entire model is tested, the propeller diameter will 
be small compared to the tunnel jet diameter, and the corrections to be described 
will become small also. For tests in which propeller characteristics are to be deter- 
mined, the propeller 
diameter may well be 60% 
of the jet diameter, and the corrections 
are not only large but unfortunately not as accurate as those for wings. An approach 
to the problem has been made by Glauert, as discussed in Chapter 11. 
Numerous coefficients have been advanced for presenting propeller data, each 
type perhaps being advantageous 
for particular 
applications. One of the more popular 
forms is 
P 
c, 
= - 
pn3ds 
= power coefficient 
T 
c,=-= 
pn2d4 
thrust coefficient 
where P is power input (ft-lblsec); 
n is in revolutions per second (rps); d is propeller 
diameter (ft); and T is thrust (lb). The "variable" of propeller testing is usually the 
advance ratio J = Vlnd, where 
n, and d are in units such that J is dimensionless. 
In English units V is in feet per second, d in feet, and n in revolutions per second. 
Following the discussions of Chapter 1 on nondimensional properties indicates that 
the thrust and power coefficients are expected to be functions of advance ratio J, 
Reynolds number, and Mach number. The dominant independent variable is the 
advance ratio. Mach number comes next if it approaches 1, and finally is Reynolds 
number. Small scales are not used for propeller development due to the Reynolds 
number dependence. However, there are a good number of propeller-driven un- 
manned air vehicles that use relatively small propellers that can therefore be evaluated 
directly in a number of wind tunnels. 
Plots of C, and CT 
against J for a typical propeller are shown in Figure 13.24. 
Emergency Power Wind 'hrbines 
The need for a power source to operate when a jet engine airplane has a high- 
altitude flame-out has reactivated the interest shown many years ago in wind-driven 
generators or hydraulic pumps, and not infrequently the tunnel engineer is called 
upon to evaluate a particular generator by an operational test. When this is so, the 
special precautions that are paid to models such as rotors, propellers, and the like, 
whose possibility of failure is higher than that of rigid models, should be applied. 
Corrections to the data from a windmill test are subject to boundary corrections, 
as outlined in Chapter 11, specifically wake blockage, and propeller corrections 


510 
A I R C m  
AND 
AIRCRAFT 
COMPONENTS 
with a negative sign. However, the emergency power generator is frequently so 
small relative to the tunnel and the interest in very accurate data as compared to 
proof testing is commonly so slight that corrections may be neglected. This is not 
true of windmills intended to be used for ground power generation. 
It is of interest to look into the mechanism of a windmill from the theoretical 
side in order to gain an understanding of how it works. Of course the device takes 
energy from the air, but surprisingly the total free-stream energy passing through a 
stream tube with cross-sectional area equal to that of the windmill is not available 
to the windmill. The slowing of the stream resulting from the interaction with the 
windmill makes a portion of the air go around the windmill instead of through it. 
Looking at the problem from a momentum standpoint, we find that if the velocity 
at the windmill is V(1 - 
a
)
,
 
the final velocity will be V(l - 
h), 
and letting the 
windmill radius be R, we have for the power out 
Differentiating and solving, we find the maximum power out occurs when a = 
f. 
Substituting this value and comparing the maximum power out with the total in 
a free stream of the same radius Ps, 
we have 
or even with blades that have no drag the windmill could only extract 59.4% of the 
stream energy. A good figure in estimating windmill sizes seems to be about one- 


13.2 COMPONENTS 
511 
half that theoretically available, or roughly 30% of the total stream energy. During 
testing, stalled blades should be avoided, for when they unstall a runaway may 
occur. This can be avoided by use of a governor to control the rpm. As the windmill 
is often connected to a generator, some method such as a resistor bank must be 
provided to dissipate the output. 
Engines 
The actual operation of piston or jet engines in a wind tunnel for development 
reasons is a very specialized type of test possible in only a very few wind tunnels. 
Of the two, the piston engines present less of a tunnel problem, since their exhaust 
is smaller in quantity than that from a jet engine. The jet engine requires a huge 
scavenging system sometimes using half as much power as the tunnel itself in order 
to keep contamination low. This problem, incidentally, has an interesting facet in 
high-speed work, where the presence of rather small amounts of exhaust changes 
the values of y and hence confuses the operating Mach number. In some low-speed 
tunnels the air exchangers can handle the exhaust problem. 
If an engine is run in the tunnel with minimal air exchange, extreme care must 
be taken to protect personnel from high concentrations of carbon monoxide. After 
the test run the tunnel should be opened up and run to vent the CO before personnel 
enter the test section. 
Stores 
The word "stores" is a catch-all for all types of jettisonable fuel tanks, bomb shapes, 
and other capacity devices. In general, they are designed for minimum drag while 
on the aircraft and adequate stability after jettison. Tests run with the stores alone 
largely seek solutions for the stability problems; their cargo is typically of uniform 
density and their centers of gravity correspondingly from 40 to 55% of their length 
from their nose. 
Necessary wall corrections for the tests include wake and solid blockage. The 
lift is ordinarily so small that downwash corrections are not needed. Tests consist 
of angle-of-attack runs up to very large angles (say 50" or perhaps 60"). These sorts 
of angles in slight hurt the impact circle of probable error and are to be avoided, 
but stability must still exist if a bad pitch-off produces them. The shape should be 
tested with the fins in both the + (horizontal-vertical) and X (rotated 45") positions. 
The best drag data possible are not good enough for serious bomb work, nor is 
it possible to correlate tunnel data with flight, simply because the flying bomb is 
always rolling and sometimes pitching. Tare and interference tests of a store shape 
are illustrated in Figure 13.25. 
A few words about free-spinning rocket or bomb models might be added here 
of interest to wind tunnel engineers. A little thought will reveal that with a model 
at high angle of attack the downward-moving fin will stall fust, and the lift on the 
upward-moving fin then becomes a "driver." The result can be a great and sudden 


512 
AIRCRAIT AND AIRCRM COMPONENTS 
FIGURE 1
3
.
2
5
 Testing using a single- or double-support strut. Both the single- and double- 
support struts are quite weak in torsion (yaw), and any models tested with them should not 
have natural frequencies close to those of the tunnel. Seven-by-ten tunnels of the type shown 
often have low-speed oscillations around 1 Hz, and lateral restraint wires may have to be 
added if the model natural frequency is in the range. The model shown is installed with an 
image system. (Courtesy Sandia National Laboratories.) 
increase in rpm-
in one instance an increase from 300 to 2000 rpm in a very few 
seconds. Don't leave, just shut down the tunnel. 
Loads: Doors, Landing Gear, and Others 
Local loads on landing gear doors, bomb bay doors, flaps, nacelles, and so on, are 
best obtained by the use of strain gage balances designed for the expected loads. 
When the distribution of air loads is desired on the wing, fuselage, and tail, a choice 
from among the available pressure-measuring systems must be made. Pressure- 
sensitive paint has become a reasonable candidate for high-value projects. 
The data are usually presented in the form of a pressure coefficient versus 
model location. These data can then be integrated to obtain, for example, local lift 
coefficients on a wing or tail and plotted versus span for span load. In most cases 
the purpose of the test is to obtain aerodynamic loads for structural design. 
Invariably, 
in a large 
pressure 
test there will be plugged and leaking ports assuming 
traditional methods are being used. These problems are supposed to be caught in 
the model checkout, but some will still show up in the final data. Because of bad 
port problems there is a tendency to label any port that appears to fall outside the 
expected curve as a bad port. This can be dangerous, especially on leading-edge 
flaps. In one case on a leading-edge flap several ports at the same chordwise location 
very close to the leading edge showed very large negative C,'s. When looking at 


13.3 COMPLETE CONFIGURATIONS 
513 
one chordwise pressure station, one might assume that the port was bad. But it is 
hard to believe that at the same percent chord at several spanwise stations the same 
model port is bad in exactly the same way. Another anecdote that leads to caution 
in data interpretation was passed along recently. A number of pressure ports are 
included on a model coated with pressure-sensitive 
paint to provide in situ calibration 
data. A small model of a fuselage plus delta wing was run at a moderate angle of 
attack. One port near the intersection of the fuselage and leading edge provided 
such a low pressure (C, .
=
 -6) that either the port or the transducer was considered 
to be malfunctioning-. However, when the paint system was put into action, not 
only was the pressure confirmed but an even lower value was obtained a small 
distance away. 
133' COMPLETE CONFIGURATIONS 
An experiment in which six-component balance data for a complete configuration 
is to be measured is the most difficult of all wind tunnel experiments: More variables 
are under consideration than in other experiments, and the individual parts of the 
experimental matrix are more complicated. For instance, each data run requires 
up to three additional runs to evaluate the tare, interference, and alignment (see 
Chapter 7). 
Because tare and interference runs are 
extremely time consuming, they are 
often 
either replaced with a set of support tares taken from a calibration model or not 
applied at all to the data. When no tares are applied, the data are compared with a 
base airplane configuration and are incremented from the baseline data. This is 
usually done only when the firm conducting the test has had a lot of experience 
with a particular tunnel, model-mounting system, and probably some associated 
flight test work. Although experiments using a complete model are difficult, they 
are the most common type of aircraft program. Usually there are several wind tunnel 
entries of the model as the airplane design develops. 
Experiments to determine optimum leading- and trailing-edge flap configurations 
and angles can be quite long owing to the large number of variables, which include 
pitch-up on swept wings. The effect of control surface deflections both in pitch and 
yaw are checked not only for cruise but also for takeoff and landing flap settings, 
in and out of ground effect. The effect of power for prop-driven airplanes or high- 
bypass turbine engines merely adds to the complexity of the experiment with various 
power settings and engine-out simulations for multiengined aircraft required. 
The data are usually corrected for the effect of tunnel walls, tunnel upflow, and 
tunnel blockage (Chapter 10). The use of trip strips on the model is discussed in 
Chapter 6. Powered lift simulation limits for V/STOL-type aircraft are discussed in 
Chapter 11. 
Before a brief discussion of the required runs for the model of a general-aviation- 
type aircraft is given, a brief discussion of how an experiment is run is in order. 
Before a wind tunnel run sequence is begun with a model, the angle of attack is 
usually calibrated. This is done by the use of an inclinometer. The model reference 


514 
AIRCRAIT AND AIRCRAFT COMPONENTS 
plane is set to zero angle of attack (the fuselage reference line and chord plane of 
the mean aerodynamic chord are usually used as references). Then the model is 
pitched through the desired angle-of-attack range, and the relation between alpha 
indicated and alpha measured or geometric is determined. The next calibration is a 
weight tare. The model center of gravity does not coincide with the balance moment 
center and thus there is a change in pitching moment measured with angle of attack. 
This must be subtracted from the data as it is not an aerodynamic moment. In yaw 
there is both a rolling and a pitching moment. If a sting balance is used, the model 
is rolled rather than yawed, and if the model center of gravity is on the model 
centerline, there is no weight tare. Many weight tares will be taken during a test 
since they are a function of the model 
center-of-gravity 
location 
and hence model con- 
figuration. 
In a low-speed wind tunnel with unpowered models there is usually one 
wind-on nm 
made per model configuration. If the model is powered, several runs 
at different power settings may be made per model configuration without stopping 
the tunnel. Because of one run per setup, it is desirable 
to have a method of displaying 
the test results as they are obtained. The best form of data visibility is as presented 
in Figure 13.26. For pitch runs C+, 
CL-CD, CL-C,,,. and sometimes GI-a are 
required. For yaw runs it is C N 4 .  
C,-JI, Cy-+, or sometimes side slip angle P is 
used instead of yaw angle JI. 
These plots serve three purposes: 
1. They will show any points that do not fit the curves (so-called bad points). 
When these occur, the test point is repeated (a check point). Note: The check 
CD 
a 
cm% 
FIGURE 13.26 
Typical curves of lift, drag, and pitching moment, flaps up and down. 


13.3 COMPLETE CONFIGURATIONS 
515 
point should not be approached from a stalled condition owing to the possibility 
of hysteresis in stalled regions. If the check point fits the curve, it replaces 
the initial point. If the check point repeats the initial point, additional test 
points are then taken to define the curve in this region. 
2. Sometimes in the stall region the angle increments are 
too large to define the 
curve. When this happens, additional points are taken to define the curves. 
3
.
 The plots are often used to make comparisons between model configurations 
and to check values and slopes. 
The plots can be obtained in two ways. First, for small student-type tunnels 
. 
. 
without computerized data systems, 
the uncorrected (raw) balance data in engineering 
units can be plotted by hand. This task argues for an external balance of the pyramid 
type where the forces and moments can be obtained without excessive calculations, 
rather than platform- or sting-type balances. 
For tunnels equipped with computerized data systems where the data are both 
recorded and reduced by a computer, the type of balance is not critical. As it is 
desirable to see the data in coefficient form as close to real time as possible, the 
speed of the data reduction process in the computer will determine the number of 
corrections 
applied to the data. Balance corrections, 
if small, blockage, and mounting 
tare corrections may be omitted to save time. Angle calibrations, weight tares, and 
wall corrections should be applied. In most cases the wall corrections will be 
approximate wall corrections. The wall corrections to a, 
CD, 
and C,,, 
are all based 
on wing-alone or tail-off lift coefficients. The pitching moment correction is also a 
function of the location of the wing wake system relative to the horizontal tail and 
is measured during the test. It is not always practicable, owing to the time required, 
to change the model to make the tail-off and the two runs required for pitching 
moment correction. In this case the wall corrections can be based on tail-on lift 
coefficients, but such data should only be used for quick-look data during the test. 
To avoid using the quick-look plots for careful data analysis, the plots can be marked 
"Raw data-do not use for final analysis." This minimizes the improper use of data 
that has been reduced by approximate methods, in this case wall corrections, which 
can lead to significant errors in some components. 
The use of computers to carry out data analysis during experiments is essentially 
universal, as it must be to achieve the productivity now required. At the same time, 
it is often the case that the software that is implemented has been written by 
someone not present during most experiments. This situation demands that engineers 
conducting tests adopt strategies that continually monitor the data for consistency 
and see that there are no obviously erroneous results. The software systems are 
often used to determine slopes, values, or an increment or A in values or slopes. 
These data analyses must be camed out on fully corrected data. During a test, 
extreme care must be taken in making such analyses. The data used for such analyses 
should be plotted and visually inspected to minimize the probability that there are 
bad points or other unpleasant surprises in the data used. These plots should use 
the same fairing or fitting routines that will be used for the final data reduction. 
This is especially critical when the software is used to take increments or A's 


516 
AIRCRAIT AND AIRCRAFT COMPONENTS 
TABLE 13.5. Test Program for Unswept Configuration without Power 
Model 
Configuration 
W 
Runs 
1-4 
Data Sought 
Each Run Consists of: 
Tare, interference, and align- 
men$ final polar plot 
Polars, model normal and 
inverted, dummy struts 
in, dummy struts out 
Yaw 230" at CL 
= 0.3, 1 
.
O
 
Wing lateral stability for future 
correlation 
Tare, interference, and align- 
ment, final polar plot 
Polars, model normal and 
inverted, dummies in, 
dummies out 
Yaw 230" at CL 
= 0.3, 1
.
0
 
Wing and body lateral 
stability for future 
correlation 
Polar plot, effect of horizontal 
tail 
Lateral stability for evaluat- 
ing vertical tail and 
correlation 
Polar plot; effect of vertical 
tail 
Directional stability 
Polar 
WBH 
WBH 
Yaw 230" at CL 
= 0.3, 1.0 
Polar 
WBHV 
WBHV 
WBHV 
WBHV 
WBHV 
Yaw at t30° at CL 
= 0.3, 
1 
.o 
Polar with tail incidence 
-4, -3, -2, -1, 1 
Polar with + = 5
O
,
 lo0 
Tail setting and downwash 
Effect of yaw on static longitu- 
dinal stability 
Rudder equilibrium and power 
Yaw 230" at CL 
= 0.3, 
1.0; mdder at 2", 5", loo, 
-2", -5", -loo, -15", 
-20°, - 
25" 
Yaw 230" at CL 
= 0.3, 1.0 
with aileron -25". 
-20°, -15", -loo, -5", 
5". loo, 
15", 20°, 25" 
Polars with elevators from 
-25" to 15", $ = 0 
Polars with elevators from 
-25' to 1Y, + = 0, 
for takeoff and landing 
flaps 
Yaw at 230" at a 
= 3", 
lo0, 
for takeoff and land- 
ing flaps 
Polars with flaps 55", $ = 
0, ailerons at -25' to 
20" 
WBHV 
Aileron power 
WBHV 
WBHVF 
Elevator power 
Effect of flaps on elevator and 
trim 
WBHVF 
Effect of flaps on lateral 
stability 
WBHVF 
Effect of flaps on lateral 
control 


TABLE 13.5. (Continued) 
Model 
Runs 
Configuration 
Data Sought 
Each Run Consists of: 
105 
WBHFG 
Effect of gear down 
Polars with landing flaps, 
~JJ 
= 0 
model inverted to 
reduce interference be- 
tween supports and gear, 
and vertical tail removed 
to avoid physical interfer- 
ence with tail strut. 
106 
WBHFG 
Effect of gear down on lateral 
Y
a
w
 230" 
with a = 3", 
stability 
lo", 
flaps 55"; 
model in- 
verted 
Note: W 
= w
i
n
g
;
 
B = fuselage; H = horizontal tail; V = vertical tail; G = gear; F = flaps; "tare" = 
dummy shuts installed; polar plot = CL 
VS. 
a, 
Ch 
and C. from a= 
through stall; "correlation" 
= data 
to assist in laying future designs; polar run = L, D, M, from a
,
 through stall. 
between two runs. When slopes are 
required, care must be taken in the routine used 
and the range of values over which the slope is required. As an example, if one is 
trying to find CDSE. and Oswald's efficiency factor e (Example 13.1) and one uses 
a linear regression curve fit over the CL 
range from 0
"
 
to 3" or 4" past stall, one 
will not get the correct values for either term. The values of CD,,. 
and e are based 
on the linear portion of the CZ-CD 
curve and not the whole curve. Thus the software 
must be given the lower and upper limits of CL 
to be used. 
At the time of publication of the second edition of this book, it was argued that 
many of the answers being sought in a wind tunnel experiment could be obtained 
as quickly by manual means given automatic plots as by software algorithms. This 
was a commentary on the state of affairs of software, computer hardware, and a 
considerable 
cadre of already very experienced aerodynamicists accustomed to man- 
ual extraction of information from plots. There will be few instances today where 
that argument is true. The software is more sophisticated, the computers are faster, 
and the typical users are more skilled at using the computing machinery than in 
doing manual data extraction. No less attention to detail in monitoring outputs, 
however, can be tolerated as an experiment progresses. The engineer has to think 
of what he or she is trying to do and assure himself or herself that the program will 
yield the correct desired results. Unfortunately, the computer and its software are 
not inherently concerned with whether or not the results are correct. 
A list of the runs usually employed for an unswept and unpowered model is 
provided in Table 13.5. The numerical values in this table are, of course, only 
approximate, exact values being dictated by the particular design in question. Addi- 
tional runs would be needed to check fillets, alternative tail surfaces, ground effect, 
and so on. Attention is drawn to items in Table 13.5 marked "correlation." 
In many 
instances correlation runs are added to evaluate separate effects of configurations 
that would never be flown. For example, a two-engine model usually has a run 


518 
AIRCRAFT AND AIRCRAm COMPONENTS 
made without nacelles. The data from this run compared with those from the run 
with them in place aid in identifying the effect of the nacelles on the airplane's 
efficiency, drag, and lift. After several models have been tested, the effects of a 
"good" nacelle become known, and when a "poor" one turns up, it is so identified 
and attention is directed toward improving it. A standard procedure is to list the 
important performance parameters in tabular form, noting the change in each as 
each component is added to the wing. Studies made of such tables can be informa- 
tive indeed. 
A configuration with sweep requires more stall studies than are shown in this 
program of runs, particularly for longitudinal, lateral, and directional stability. 
Comments on the customary curves and information desired follow. 
Lift Curve, Flaps Up 
Items of interest on the flap-up lift curve include the value of C,, 
for determining 
flap-up stalling speed and minimum radius of turn, the shape of the curve at the 
stall (it should be moderately smooth, but may not be), the angle of zero lift, the 
slope of the lift curve dCL/da, 
and the value of negative CLmW 
At the Reynolds 
numbers usually encountered in the wind tunnel, CLmm 
will be from 0.6 to 1.7, 
dCLlda 
for nonswept wings from Equation (13.2), and swept wings from Equation 
(13.3). Construction of the power-off trim lift curve is shown in Figure 13.27. A 
similar method can be used for trim drag. 
Lift Curve, Flaps Down 
This curve will have very nearly the same slope as the flap-up curve and the same 
location of the aerodynamic center. The value of flap-down CLm is important for 
determining the increment due to the flap ACLmar, 
for this apparently does not change 
with Reynolds number and may be used to determine full-scale CL,, 
flaps down 
(see Chapter 6), which is needed for landing and takeoff runs. The value of C,,,, 
flaps down, will vary from 1.2 to 3.5, the higher value being sought after but rarely 
attained. Trailing-edge flaps increase a for zero lift, increase the CL-, and reduce 
the a for stall. They often will change the shape of the C L a  
curve near stall. 
Leading-edge flaps, slats, slots, and Krueger flaps tend to extend the lift curve to 
higher a stall and greater values of CLmax. 
The basic purpose of flaps is to reduce 
the wing area through increased CLm and thus reduce the parasite drag in cruise. 
To be usable, the CL,., must be for trimmed flight. Thus, flap systems that generate 
large negative pitching moments may require a large tail to develop adequate 
downloads for trim, which reduces the total CL- (wing and tail). 
The angle of 0.9 CLm is of interest for landing-gear-length considerations. It 
will probably be from 9 to 3' less for flaps down than for flaps up if the flaps cover 
the inboard wing area and from 5" to 8" less if they cover the entire span. Again 
the sharpness of the stall is of interest, since large lift coefficients that are perilously 
close to a violent stall cannot safely be utilized to their full value. There is usually 
little need to take the flap-down lift curve as low as the angle of zero lift. The stall 


13.3 COMPLETE CONFIGURATIONS 
519 
- 
10 
0 
+10 
+ 
0.1 
0 
- 
0.1 
a 
Cmsr 
FIGURE 1
3
.
2
7
 Construction of 
the t
r
i
m
 lift curve. 
should be read in very small steps so that its shape is accurately determined. To 
increase the span of the wing affected by flaps and hence the maximum lift, the 
ailerons are sometimes drooped (Figure 13.28). 
Spoilers on top of the wing can be 
used for roll control, to decrease lift usually in landing approach, and, when on the 
ground, to increase drag and kill lift, putting more weight on the wheels to increase 
the effective use of the brakes. If such devices are used, the number of runs in a 
wind tunnel increases as their effectiveness is determined. 
Here are some hints about testing for CLmar: 
1. If possible, plan CLm tests at flight Mach number since for many airfoils the 
local velocity over the leading edge becomes sonic when Mk- 
equals 0.1 
or 0.2. 
2. Low-aspect-ratio wings with sweep have a leading-edge vortex and are not 
usually sensitive to Reynolds number unless the leading-edge radius is large; 
RN 
= 2 X 106 is usually adequate. 
3. High-aspect-ratio wings are quite sensitive to Reynolds number. 


520 
AIRCRAIT AND AIRCRAFT COMPONENTS 
FIGURE 13.28 Testing for CL,,. (Courtesy of the Boeing Co.) 
4. Multielement high lift wing systems are Reynolds number sensitive. This is 
a major reason for recent demand for very high Reynolds number testing 
facilities. 
5. In studying C
L
,
,
 
the model should be as close to trim as possible. On low- 
aspect-ratio models with short tails, the tail effectiveness varies with angle of 
attack as the local dynamic pressure changes. 
6. The addition of nacelles usually reduces CL-. 
7. For swept-wing models attention must also be paid to pitch-up (reversal of 
the slope of the C
.
 curve) in the CL-Cm 
curve as it can limit the usable CL. 
Data from tests of a model of a twin-jet penetration fighter are presented in Table 
13.6. As is shown, it is customary to list both the 
fundamental 
data and the progressive 
increments, the increments drawing attention to both good and bad items more 
directly than the total numbers. The data as shown are for an untrimmed model, 
and the increase of lift curve and maximum lift with the addition of the horizontal 
tail will become a decrease when trim is considered. A pair of nacelles usually 
reduces the lift curve slope about 0.02. The angle for 0.9CL,, 
(which is of interest 
in designing the landing gear) should not be taken too seriously until good ground 
board tests are completed. 


13.3 COMPLETE CONFIGURATIONS 
521 
TABLE 13.6. Lift Curve Data from Tests of a W
i
n
 Jet Fighter 
W 
-0.3 
- 
0.0612 
- 
1.115 
- 
WB 
+0.2 
0.5 
0.0650 
0.038 
1.115 
0.0 
WBC 
+1.0 
0.8 
0.0650 
0.0 
1.115 
0.0 
WBCHV 
+0.9 
-0.1 
0.0709 
0.059 
1.197 
f0.082 
WBCHVFma 
-1.2 
-2.1 
0.0700 
-0.009 
1.34 
f0.143 
WBCHVF& 
-4.2 
-3.0 
0.0700 
0.0 
1.37 
f0.03 
WBCHVGb 
+0.9 
0.0 
0.0700 
0.0 
1.197 
0.0 
WBCHVGF, 
-1.2 
-2.1 
0.0700 
0.0 
1.34 
+0.143 
WBCHVGF5,, 
-4.2 
-3.0 
0.0700 
0.0 
1.37 
+0.03 
"Nose flap 30" with all T.E. flap deflections. 
bCompared 
with WBCHV. 
Drag Curves, Flaps Up and Down 
The designer is particularly interested in CD,,, because of its effect on aircraft 
performance. To ensure accuracy in this range, the readings should be made every 
degree near CD,M,. 
Aircraft CD,,i, 
will vary widely with the type of airplane and 
wing loading, a value of 0.0120 not unreasonable for a clean fighter. 
The airplane drag coefficient CD 
at C,, is needed for takeoff and landing 
calculations. Varying widely, depending on type of airplane and amount of flap, 
this coefficient may range from 0.1000 to 0.5000. 
The shape of the drag curve is important for climb and cruising, a minimum 
change with CL 
being desirable. 
Drag data for a twin-jet fighter are shown in Table 13.6. Of interest here is the 
decrease of effective induced drag when flaps are down. The increments of drag 
due to, for example, gear, flaps, and tip tanks are presented on a basis of wing area 
for consideration on the particular airplane at hand. It is also common to see them 
quoted on their own frontal area so that their losses may be compared from airplane 
to airplane. 
Pitching Moment Curve 
The slope of the pitching moment curve must be negative for stability, of course, 
although definite values for the desired slope are not agreed upon. Goett12 
gives an 
excellent discussion of wind tunnel procedure for finding the critical stability and 
control characteristics for single- and twin-engine propeller-driven aircraft. 
Quite often in reducing data the moments are calculated referenced to a nominal 
center-of-gravity location (usually near 25% MAC) and at desired forward and aft 
center-of-gravity limits. The forward and aft center-of-gravity limits usually allow 
for the destabilizing effects of power and possibly free controls depending on the 
aircraft's control system. It is often necessary to test for power effects on propeller 
aircraft with low-power loadings. 


522 
AIRCRAFT 
AND 
AIRCFAIT 
COMPONENTS 
Sometimes the siability is stated in terms of the added rearward travel possible 
before reaching neutral stability. For extensive discussion of these issues see the 
excellent text by Etkin and Reid.13 
This might be 0.1 MAC, meaning that the aircraft 
will still be stable if the center of gravity is moved one-tenth chord aft of the normal 
rearward location. It should further be stated whether this is for a control-free or 
control-fixed condition. 
The forward center-of-gravity location is not as restricted for many modem high- 
performance aircraft equipped with unit horizontal tail or stabilators that are power 
operated. The stick force is not a function of center of gravity, since it is artificial 
and can be programmed as desired by the control system designers. There is no 
distinction between stick-fixed and stick-free stability for these irreversible control 
systems for which no "floating" is possible. 
In general, the pitching moment curves are used to determine if the airplane 
has positive static stability throughout the desired center-of-gravity range at all 
flight conditions (cruise, takeoff, landing). The airplane's controls must be able 
to trim the aircraft under the same range of conditions. The aft center-of-gravity 
limit is a function of stability (slope) and determines the tail area for a given tail 
length while the forward center-of-gravity limit is a function of control, CmCG 
= 0
,
 
usually in landing configuration near the ground, and determines the required elevator 
size and travel. For swept-wing aircraft special attention is paid to pitch up as it 
will Limit the usable CL. 
Static stability does not guarantee dynamic stability, but 
usually it is a prerequisite unless there is to be a full-time active control system. 
The lift, drag, and moment data are usually presented on one sheet (see Figure 
13.26). The reversal of the moment positive and negative values makes the moment 
curve appear "normal" when viewed with the page on end. 
Longitudinal stability data for two airplanes are listed in Tables 13.7 and 13.8. 
Of interest is the customary destabilizing effect of the fuselage and of course the 
large stabilizing effect of the horizontal tail. For performance calculations trimmed 
values of CL 
and CD are often desired. These can be constructed as described in 
Figure 13.27. 
TABLE 13.7. Longitudinal Stability Data for Single-Engine Propeller Airplane with 
Power Off 
Configuration 
G o  
ACmo 
C L , ~  
dCm 
- 
dC, 
AC 
- 
-
-
 
W 
-0.021 
- 
0.50 
0.042 
25.8 
WB 
-0.036 
-0.015 
0.40 
0.091 
20.9 
W
B
H
 
0.062 
0.098 
0.53 
-0.120 
42.0 
WBHV 
0.032 
-0.029 
0.25 
-0.130 
43.0 
WBHVF, 
0.102 
0.070 
0.86 
-0.118 
41.8 
w B W s 5  
0.167 
0.065 
1.22 
-0.138 
43.8 
Note: Moment reference at 3
0
.
0
%
 
MAC, 0.4% 
above MAC. 


13.3 COMPLETE CONFIGURATIONS 
523 
TABLE 13.8. Longitudinal Stability Data for T
w
i
n
 
Engine Propeller Airplane with 
Power Off 
Configuration 
C ~ O  
Acme 
dCm/dCL 
W 
WB 
WBN 
WBHV 
Note: Moment reference at 30% MAC, on MAC. 
With automated systems another approach can be used effectively. The horizontal 
tail can be pitched remotely until the C, about the desired center-of-gravity reference 
location is zero and then all needed data are recorded. This procedure becomes very 
valuable for aircraft that have very wide ranging pitch control capability. Trim points 
can be located as indicated here; then a small range of pitch angles about the trim 
points can be taken to get the slope of the pitch curves near the trim points. 
Stabilizer effectiveness (dCJd6J is obtained by holding a
,
,
,
 constant, varying 
the tail incidence, and measuring the resulting pitching moment data. This slope 
should be evaluated early in the experimental program, since it is needed for the 
tail-on wall corrections (see Chapter 10). 
Elevator or Stabilizer Power Curve 
The plot of AC, against elevator deflection or stabilizer incidence is made at several 
values of the lift coefficient. It indicates the amount of elevator or stabilizer deflection 
needed to produce a certain moment coefficient. An example is given in Figure 
13.29. Usually the plot is nearly a straight line from +15" to -20" deflection with 
a slope of about -0.02 for elevators and about twice that for the complete tail. 
A further study of the elevator may be made from a plot of Cmcc 
versus CL 
for 
several elevator angles, as shown in Figure 13.30. The intersections of the curves 
with the axis indicate trim condition. This plot may also be made against a. 
The 
plot for an airplane with a unit horizontal tail would be similar. For propeller-driven 
aircraft, runs with propellers, windmilling, or at idle power, flaps and gear down 
are often required. 
It is also necessary to determine whether the elevator balance is sufficient to 
keep the control forces small enough that maximum-load factors may be developed. 
The control force criterion is usually critical in landing or accelerated flight, flaps 
and gear up, props windmilling. 
Aileron Power Curves 
The aileron criteria are usually determined at zero yaw and may be considered from 
the plots of C, versus C
,
,
 (Figure 13.17), and C, 
and C,, versus 6, (Figure 13.19), 
and CH, 
versus 8
.
 (Figure 13.18). The important qualities of good 
ailerons are 
high 


524 
AIRCRAFT AND AIR-
 
COMPONENTS 
FIGURE 13.29 Typical plot of change in moment coefficient with elevator and stabi- 
lizer deflection. 
rolling moment and low hinge moments (the latter can also be obtained from panel 
models). The maximum rate of roll and the maximum helix angle are determined 
from C,,,, 
with a CLmsx, 
of 0.03 being satisfactory for one aileron. 
The above information is obtained from runs at the proper angles of attack with 
Jr = 0. The rolling moments are measured for various aileron deflections and the 
helix angles computed. (See runs 44-63 in Table 13.5.) 
When taking aileron or rudder data, a small amount of rolling and yawing moment 
and side force is usually found even when the controls are neutral and there is zero 
yaw. This delta is due to asymmetrical flow in the tunnel, model asymmetry, or 
some hysteresis due to small separation areas. Both the appearance and the usefulness 
of the data are improved if aileron and rudder moments at zero yaw are subtracted 
from the data. 
It is a nice refinement to run aileron tests with the horizontal tail off for two 
reasons. The fist (and minor one) is that it saves effort in data reduction since 


13.3 COMPLETE CONFIGURATIONS 
525 
FIGURE 13.30 
Typical plot o
f
 Cmco 
versus CL 
for several elevator deflections. 
tunnel wall effect on the horizontal tail is then nonexistent. The second is that when 
the ailerons are deflected in flight the airplane normally rolls and the inboard aileron 
trailing vortices are swept away from the horizontal tail by the helix angle. When 
the model is immobile in the tunnel, these vortices stream back quite close to the 
horizontal tail and induce a loading on it that is different from that in rolling flight. 
Rudder Power and Equilibrium Curves 
The rudder for most single-engine 
aircraft is not a critical component. It must furnish 
adequate control on the ground and in the air, but no criteria similar to "rate of 
roll" or "pounds of stick force per g" have been established. The problem of the 
propeller-driven high-powered single-engine aircraft becomes difficult under the 
high-power, low-air-speed (wave-off) condition. Here it is not unusual to require 
full rudder to overcome torque to maintain straight flight. The criteria become more 
those of hinge moments than those usually obtainable from the complete model. 
Particular attention must be paid to avoiding overbalance at high rudder deflections. 
The modem high-performance multiengine 
airplane must possess sufficient 
direc- 
tional stability to prevent it from reaching excessive angles of yaw or developing 
rudder forces that tend to keep the plane yawing. Furthermore, it must also be able 
to be balanced directionally at the best climb speed with asymmetric power (one 
engine out, the other at full power for a two-engine airplane) as specified by the 
FAA and the military. 
The most critical condition for the criterion of decreasing rudder pedal force 
occurs at high thrust coefficient, flaps and gear down, at large angles of side slip. 
For propeller aircraft depending on propeller rotations the side-slip angle may be 
critical to the right or left, and test runs must be made accordingly. 
The asymmetric powerI4 
condition requires yaw runs at the attitude corresponding 
to 1.2VdI gear down, flaps at takeoff setting, takeoff power on right engine, left 
engine windmilling. 


526 
AIRCRAFT AND 
ARCRAFT COMPONENTS 
Usually the rudder information is grouped into two curves. The first, rudder 
equilibrium, is a plot of rudder deflection against angle of yaw, or in other words, 
6
,
 
for C
.
 = 0. This need be taken for yaw in only one direction, for it will be similar 
in the other direction. The slope d$I&,can be about - 
1.2 for maneuverable 
airplanes 
on down to -0.5 for the more stable types. An example curve is shown in Fig- 
ure 13.31. 
. 
-- 
The second curve, rudder power, is a plot of C
.
 versus 6,. A slope of dC,l&, = 
-0.001 is reasonable but varies with airplane specifications; one usual criterion is 
"one degree slip per degree rudder deflection"; that is, 
Again the curve need be plotted only for either plus or minus rudder. An example 
curve is shown in Figure 13.32. 
The effect of yaw on the characteristics of an airplane is shown in Figure 13.33. 
Comparison o
f
 
Lateral to Directional Stability 
Information about the roll axis is needed to determine whether sufficient dihedral 
is incorporated in the design to provide lateral stability at the most critical condition. 
w
o
f
m
*
*
.
d
a
a
a
s
s
 
FIGURE 13.31 
Rudder equilibrium. 


- 
- 
- 
- 
-- 
13.3 COMPLETE CONFIGURATIONS 
527 
RudW d e l k t h ,  
&
,
 degms 
FIGURE 
13.32 Rudder power. 
Left 
This will be, for most propeller aircraft, the approach with flaps down and power 
on, where power and flaps combine to reduce the dihedral effect. The ailerons 
should be free if possible. 
The tests for lateral stability consist of yaw runs at the approach attitude, flaps 
and gear down, and 50% normal power for propeller aircraft. (See runs 90-
95 in 
Table 13.5 for gear-up data; add runs with gear down.) The angle of attack for the 
approach should be chosen on the basis of tunnel CLm (used to get 1.2Vd), but 
the thrust coefficient should be based on full-scale conditions for propeller aircraft. 
Too much lateral stability for a given amount of directional stability results in 
an objectionable motion called a Dutch roll.13 
Too little lateral stability for a given 
amount of directional stability results in spiral instability. However, the advantages 
in general control and handling characteristics are so great with a relatively large 
vertical tail that some spiral instability is acceptable. Hence dihedral investigations 
are usually more concerned with avoiding Dutch roll than escaping spiral instability. 
A very rough idea of the proper distribution of dihedral and fin area may be 
obtained from Figure 13.34, which is an adaptation from GoettIz 
and from Figure 
13.35. The value of y in Figure 13.34 is for a lightly loaded high-wing monoplane. 
For low-wing airplanes the dihedral must be larger and y should be replaced by 
y, where 
The 3" difference between high and low wing configurations is due to fuselage 
cross-flow effects. The effective dihedral, not the strict geometric dihedral, is 


528 
AIRCRAFI AND AIRCRAFT COMPONENTS 
FIGURE 13.33 Effect of model yaw on basic characteristics. 
the important value. The effective dihedral is obtained by using the following rule: 
dCJd+ = 0.0002 is equivalent to lo 
effective dihedral. Wing sweep also can have 
a pronounced effect on the effective dihedral; highly swept-back wings display too 
much dihedral at moderate lift coefficients and are normally constructed with no 
geometric dihedral. 
Since a geometric wing dihedral alone does not indicate the overall effective 
dihedral, which includes vertical tail, wingtip shape, sidewash, and power effects 
for propeller aircraft, a more quantitative indication of the effect of combinations 
of directional stability and effective dihedral is shown in Figure 13.35. As shown, 
excessive dihedral coupled with weak weathercocking leads to the oscillatory or 
Dutch roll boundary. Excessive directional stability leads to the spiral divergence 
boundary. The complete wind tunnel model yields the total stability and dihedral 
including all interference effects. 


13.3 COMPLETE CONFIGURATIONS 
529 
FIGURE 1
3
.
3
4
 Proper dihedral for various amounts of f
i
n
 area, 
For most propeller airplanes the critical condition will occur at high speed, where 
the dihedral effect will be a maximum and directional stability a minimum owing 
to small power effects. The test runs therefore consist of yaw runs at high speed, 
flaps and gear up, with propeller windmilling or at high-speed thrust coefficient. 
Experience indicates that a value of roll to yaw that can be expected to give what 
pilots call satisfactory stability is 
Data for one experiment are given in Table 13.9. 
Lateral wind tunnel data is usually plotted as Cb C, C,, C,, C,, Cc, or Cy 
versus 
$ (yaw angle) or P (side-slip angle). A typical example is shown in Figure 13.36. 
The generally preferred axis system is the stability axis system. 
As discussed in Chapter 7, most external balances measure forces and moment 
directly in wind axis components, an axis system aligned with the tunnel centerline, 
while internal balances measure in body axis components, which pitch, roll, and 
yaw with the airplane model. In lateral stability it is desirable to use stability axes 
that yaw with the model but do not pitch. The equations to transfer from wind axes 
to body or stability axes and for body to wind axes are given in Chapter 7. 
When yaw runs are presented on stability axes the cross-wind force is replaced 
with the side force Cy 
and the drag CD 
is along the airplane centerline. No paaicular 


530 
AIRCRAIV AND AIRCRAFT COMWNENTS 
FIGURE 
1335 Free-flight 
tunnel results showing good and bad combinations 
of C,,+ and C
*
 
slope or values of Cy 
are required. The only use of Cy 
is to calculate the side force 
for asymmetrical flight and hence the necessary angle of bank 
to counteract said 
side force with a tangent component of lift. The side force needed to overcome the 
torque reaction at low speed while maintaining straight flight may also be evaluated 
for propeller-powered aircraft. 
Tailsetting and Average Downwash Angle 
To avoid the drag of cruising with elevators deflected and the loss of maximum 
AC, due to the elevator if a partial elevator is needed for trim, it is usually desirable 
TABLE 13.9. Directional Stability for a Single-Engine Airplane at Low and High 
Andes of Attack 
Configuration 
a 
e
n
*
 
Acn+ 
c
w
 
ACM 
dCJdC. 
W 
2
.
5
"
 
-
0
.
0
0
0
1
2
 
- 
0
.
0
0
0
5
6
 
- 
- 
1
1
.
1
"
 
-
0
.
0
0
0
1
4
 
- 
0
.
0
0
0
3
7
 
- 
- 
W B  
2
.
5
"
 
0
.
0
0
1
1
8
 
0
.
0
0
1
3
0
 
0
.
0
0
0
5
8
 
0
.
0
0
0
2
0
 
- 
1
1
.
1
"
 
0
.
0
0
0
8
2
 
0
.
0
0
0
9
6
 
0.00037 
- 
- 
WBH 
2
.
5
"
 
0
.
0
0
0
6
3
 
-
0
.
0
0
0
5
5
 
0
.
0
0
0
7
0
 
0
.
0
0
0
1
2
 
- 
1
1
.
1
"
 
0
.
0
0
0
2
7
 
-
0.00055 
0
.
0
0
0
8
7
 
0.00050 
- 
WBHV 
2
.
5
"
 
-
0
.
0
0
1
6
5
 
-
0
.
0
0
2
2
8
 
0
.
0
0
2
1
0
 
0
.
0
0
0
5
0
 
-
0
.
7
2
7
 
1
1
.
1
"
 
-
0
.
0
0
1
8
6
 
-
0
.
0
0
2
1
3
 
0
.
0
0
0
8
7
 
- 
-
0.467 
W B m 4 5  
2
.
5
"
 
-
0
.
0
0
2
3
0
 
- 
0
.
0
0
0
4
0
 
- 
-
0
.
1
7
4
 
1
1
.
1
"
 
-
0
.
0
0
2
5
0
 
- 
0
.
0
0
0
1
2
 
- 
-
0
.
4
8
0
 
W B W s s  
2
.
5
"
 
-
0
.
0
0
2
3
0
 
- 
0
.
0
0
0
4
0
 
- 
-
0
.
1
7
4
 


13.3 COMPLETE CONFIGURATIONS 
531 
Yaw a
m
 
#
,
 f k m s  
FIGURE 13.36 Typical yaw characteristics. 
to set the stabilizer incidence so that the aircraft is trimmed at cruising with 6, = 
0
.
 
For stability considerations 
as well as correlation 
for future designs, 
it is necessary 
to know the angle of downwash at the tail for each wing angle of attack. The 
procedure is as follows: 
1. Run 
the model with the horizontal tail removed, obtaining a tail-off stability 
curve similar to that shown in Figure 13.37. 
2. Next run the model with the horizontal tail on, using tail incidence i,, at angles 
of, say, -a0, -4", 0°, 4", and 8". Curves as indicated in Figure 13.37 will 
be obtained. 
FIGURE 1
3
.
3
7
 
G. 
Pitch moment, tail off and tail on, at various values o
f
 ' tail incidence. 


532 
AIRCRAFT 
AND 
AIRCRAFT 
COMPONENTS 
FIGURE 13.38 Downwash at tail, flaps up and flaps down. 
Now the intersections of the horizontal tail-on curve with the tail-off curve are 
points where, for a given wing angle of attack cl,, the tail-on pitching moment 
equals the tail-off pitching moment; that is, the tail is at zero lift, and hence 
where E,, is the downwash angle at the tail and a, 
the tail angle of attack. 
Since a
,
 
and it are known for the points of intersection, E, may be determined 
from Equation (13.38), and a plot of E,, against a
,
 
or CL 
may be made. This plot 
and the usual effect of flaps on downwash 
are 
shown in Figure 
13.38. Not infrequently 
the curve of E,, against cr, 
is a straight line. 
Methods shortcutting the above lengthy procedure have been devised based on 
the assumption that the wing downwash is zero at zero lift. However, when a wing 
is twisted, the total lift is zero, but it is not zero at all spanwise stations. Thus, the 
wing is usually producing a downwash in the region of the tail. The shortcut is only 
true for a nontwisted wing. In general, it is better not to use such methods as they 
eventually lead to errors. 
13.4 POWER EFFECTS OF PROPELLER AIRCRAFT 
The effect of the propeller on stability and control can be broken down into direct 
and indirect effects. The direct effects are as follows: 
1. Pitching and yawing moments that arise from the thrust line do not pass 
through the center of gravity. 
2. The propeller normal force 
in the plane 
of rotation produces pitching or yawing 
moments. This contribution can be large even at zero thrust coefficients and 
adversely affects longitudinal and lateral stability. 
3. The torque reaction to the propeller. 
4. For rnultiengined aircraft there is a yawing and rolling moment for the engine- 
out condition. This usually is the critical design condition for sizing the rudder. 


13.4 POWER EFFECTS OF PROPELLER AIRCIZAFT 
533 
The direct effects are generally amenable to analysis, as they involve a force 
(thrust) and moment arm. 
However, it can be difficult in some cases to obtain data 
for the normal force variation with flow angle. 
The indirect effects are a result of the interaction of the slipstream with other 
parts of the aircraft. Determining the indirect effects accurately is very difficult by 
analytical or even computational methods. The indirect effects are sensitive to the 
airplane configuration and can be broken down into the following broad categories: 
1. effect of slipstream on the moments of the wing, nacelles, and fuselage; 
2. effect of slipstream on the wing's lift coefficient due to higher local dynamic 
pressure over portions of the wing; 
3. effect of slipstream on downwash and cross-flow at the tail; and 
4. effect of slipstream on the dynamic pressure at the tail. 
The effect of slipstream on the fuselage and nacelle moments is usually small 
compared to other power effects and is difficult to analyze. The slipstream effect 
on the wing's pitching moment with the flaps down can be large. The same is true 
for the wing's lift, both with the flaps up and down, which affects stalling speeds 
power on and off. The partial immersion of the wing in the slipstream will alter 
the downwash and thus change the angle of attack of the horizontal tail. The normal 
force at the propeller will also change the downwash at the tail. The rotational 
component of the slipstream will change the angle-of-attack distribution across the 
horizontal tail as well as the vertical tail. The critical condition is at high power 
and low speed. And, finally, the increased velocity of the slipstream will change 
the tail's contribution to stability. Just how much the downwash due to the propeller, 
rotation effect, and velocity increase affects the tail's contribution is a function of 
how much or how little of the tail is immersed in the slipstream. In general, the 
propeller downwash is destabilizing even at zero thrust. 
The displacement of the slipstream in side slip results in one flap being immersed 
in the slipstream to a greater extent than the other, which reduces the dihedral effect, 
and this effect is maximized at low speeds and high thrust. From the foregoing 
discussion, it can be seen that the effect of power tends to be destabilizing both 
longitudinally and laterally, with the critical conditions generally occurring at high 
thrust and low speed with the flaps down. For multiengined aircraft, the magnitude 
of the power effects are also a function of the propeller's direction(s) of rotation, 
that is, for example, both right handed or one right and one left. 
Effect of Power 
To illustrate the effect of power, let us look at a single-engine tractor with a wing 
loading of 39 lb/ft2 and a power loading of 7 lbthp. The thrust line of this airplane 
was very close to the center of gravity. Figure 13.39 shows pitching moment as a 
function of lift coefficient for several power settings for both flaps down and flaps 
up. As can be seen from the plots, there is a large change in the longitudinal stability 


534 
AIRCRAFT AND AIRCRAFT COMPONENTS 
+ 
Wing loodinq 
't 
Power looding 
100% power 
1
0
0
%
 
Power 
407- Power 
0.1 
0 
-0.1 
- 
0.2 
0.1 
0 
-0.1 
-0.2 
Pitching moment coeffiiient , 
C 
u0.23 
FIGURE 13.39 
Effect of power on longitudinal stability. 
between power off and 100% power, with both flaps up and down. For this airplane 
with the flaps up there is about an 80% reduction in the moment curve slope from 
power off to 100% power and a 50% reduction with the flaps down. 
Figure 13.40 shows the effect of power on the lateral characteristics with the 
flaps down. The effect of the partial immersion of the flaps in the slipstream can 
be seen in the rolling moment plot. These figures show that the effect of power can 
be dramatic in a high-performance airplane. Fortunately, the above effects may be 
evaluated in the wind tunnel, and the aircraft may be revised andlor the flight test 
pilot forewarned. 
Propeller 
Characteristics The simulation 
of the propeller slipstream 
for a constant- 
speed propeller requires matching both the axial and rotational velocity ratios. To 
match these ratios over the entire range of lift coefficients would require 
an adjustable 
pitch propeller. However, a satisfactory approximation of the slipstream may be 
accomplished with a single setting of a fixed-pitch model propeller over a large 
part of the lift coefficient range where power effects are of importance. From 
momentum theory, it can be found that the axial velocity ratio can be matched with 
a propeller of scale diameter. The rotational velocity can be matched by using a 
geometrically similar propeller operating at the proper advance ratio. Typical fixed- 
pitch model propellers have aluminum or steel blades with steel hubs and allow the 
blades to be set over a wide range of pitch angles. In other words the blade 
angles are adjustable between runs but not during a run as for full-scale constant- 
speed propellers. 


13.4 POWER 
EFFECTS OF PROPELLER AIRCRAFT 
535 
Flops down CL ~ 2 . 0  
T
,
'
 
= 0.69 = 1
0
0
%
 power 
FIGURE 
13.40 Effect of power on lateral stability. 
We have briefly discussed propeller evaluations earlier (see under Propellers in 
Section 13.2). 
The relationships between model and full-scale propellers are obtained as follows. 
Thrust and torque coefficients are defined by the equations 
where T and Q are thrust and torque, respectively, and d is the propeller diameter. 
The advance ratio J 
is defined as 
A propeller of a given shape moving along its axis will have the thrust and torque 
coefficients as functions of advance ratio, Reynolds number, and Mach number 
according to the considerations discussed in Chapter 1. In other words, we will have 
T, 
= 
f(J, 
R., M) 
and Q, 
= g(J, R, M). So long as the Mach number stays comfortably 
subsonic, the dominant dimensionless parameter 
is the advance ratio J. 
The Reynolds 
number for the scale model cannot be matched to the full-scale value. 


536 
A I R C R m  AND AIRCRAFT COMPONENTS 
Using subscript*S 
for full-scale airplane and subscript M for model, we have, 
for similarity, 
Also 
Dividing produces 
Substituting from Equation (13.42) and clearing, we obtain 
and it can be shown that the thrusts are 
Ts = pn%$C, 
and TM 
= pn~$CTM 
(13.46) 
and that, for a given Vlnd, if the two propellers are geometrically similar, CTs 
= 
C,, with scale effect omitted. Hence 
or, if the model is tested at ZM 
= cs, 
similarity of thrust will be preserved. In a 
similar manner, Q,, should equal Qcp 
The motors used to drive the propeller are usually of small diameter and high- 
power output. They are generally water-cooled, variable-frequency, alternating-cur- 
rent motors. These motors operate at frequencies up to 400 Hz with maximum 
voltages of 240 or 480 V
.
 Maximum rpm varies between 12,000 and 24,000 rpm. 
Motors have either a two- or four-pole tachometer. The rpm is best measured by 
counting the tachometer frequency and dividing by 60 or 30 to get the rpm. The 
motors also have one or two built-in thermocouples to monitor their temperature. 
One limitation on the choice of a motor is the physical size of the model into which 
it must fit. Another consideration in selecting a motor is that usually maximum 
power can only be held for 1 or 2 min before overheating: thus the motor should 
be selected to avoid continuous operation near maximum power. This problem can 
be reduced by operating at a lower wind tunnel velocity. 


13.4 POWER EFFECTS 
OF PROPELLER AIRCRAFT 
537 
A variable-speed alternator is used to supply power to the motors. It must have 
a variable-frequency range commensurate with the motor rpm requirements. Since 
the motors require a specified volts-per-cycle input to minimize current and thus 
heating, the power source must match the motor's specified volts-per-cycle range. 
The wire bundle providing power and water to the model motors should be 
brought into the model on a lower surface. The bundle should have some sort of 
fairing around it to make the model support tares more repeatable. 
Selecting the motor is dependent on test velocity and vice versa. Knowing full- 
scale flight conditions and power setting to be simulated, model power may be 
calculated by the equation 
where A is the model scale, y the model test velocity per full-scale velocity, and a 
the density ratio. Knowing the model scale, a plot can be constructed of required 
power versus lift coefficient, as sketched in Figure 13.41 for a range of dynamic 
pressures. Lines of constant rpm may also be plotted. Limits on rpm are defined 
by the motor characteristics and considerations of tip losses if the model propeller 
tip speed is higher than full-scale tip speed. 
Model Propeller Calibration 
With the tunnel test velocity determined, the selection of an appropriate blade angle 
can be accomplished. This required the full-scale information shown in Figure 13.42: 
1. a plot of T: versus CL 
for the power setting to be simulated, T: = C
D
,
,
,
,
f
i
 
- 
c ~ , p w m a ;  
Lift coefficient, C, 
FIGURE 13.41 Model motor power requirements. 


538 
AIRCRAFT AND AIRCRAFT COMPONENTS 
Lift coefficient, CL 
FIGURE 13.42 Full-scale airplane propeller characteristics. 
2. a plot of J versus CL 
(J = advance ratio = Vlnd, n = rprn); 
3. a plot of P versus CL; 
and 
4. the range of lift coefficients that are to be simulated. 
Then, with the model in the tunnel at the minimum drag point, runs are made 
at several values of p, which cover the range of full-scale p's over the desired CL 
range. A run is also made with the propeller off, and the difference in drag between 
power off and power on determines T:. Thus, for each P selected a run should be 
made through the r
p
m
 range of the motor and drag, test-section static temperature, 
and pressure for each motor rpm should be recorded. These data are indicated in 
Figure 13.43: 
Propeller N (rpml 
Advonce rotio, J 
FIGURE 13.43 Model propeller blade angle selection. 


13.4 POWER EFFECTS OF PROPELLER AIRCRAFT 
539 
1. Calculate Tf versus rprn for each P and plot. 
2. Calculate Tf versus J for each P and plot. 
To match the full-scale Tf-versus-CL 
relationship, plot J 
versus CL 
for each P on 
the plot that has the full-scale J versus CL 
curve, as indicated in Figure 13.44. As 
plotted, all blade angles match the full-scale axial velocity ratio. To match rotational 
velocity ratios, select the blade angle that best matches the full-scale curve. If the 
rotational 
effect is to be matched at both extremes of the CL 
range, it will be necessary 
to use two blade angles during the tests. Now the required P or p's for the model 
propeller as well as the relationship between Tf and rpm for those p's are known. 
If the static temperature and pressure vary from values used in calibration, the test 
rprn is adjusted to hold the advance ratio at the same value used in calibration. 
Experimental Methods for Powered Models 
Two different methods are commonly used for powered experiments. The first is 
to test at a constant thrust coefficient, that is, constant rpm. The Tf-versus-rpm plot 
of Figure 13.42 is used to select the proper rpm. A series of runs are made at 
different Tf values. The data may be used directly for yaw runs and calculation 
involving no air speed charges, such as short period motions. The data may be 
cross-plotted to match the full-scale airplane Tf-versus-CL 
relationship for informa- 
tion when the airplane velocity does change. The second method involves testing 
at constant power. The rpm is varied to match the T:-versus-CL relationship of the 
full-scale airplane. A plot of model lift versus rprn as indicated in Figure 13.45 is 
required and is obtained from the T:-versus-CL and T:-versus-rpm plots as given in 
Figure 13.42. 
For each configuration that changes the zero lift angle, an operator's plot of rprn 
versus a indicated is required (Figure 13.45). The model is pitched through the a 
range, and at each angle of attack the rprn is varied until the trimmed lift and rprn 
match a point on the lift-versus-rpm plot. The trimmed lift can be calculated from 
- - ~ ~ - p ~ ~  
~p~ 
Lift coefficient . 
C, 
FIGURE 13.44 Model propeller final selected blade angle, 


540 
AIRCRAFT AND A
R
M
 
COMPONENTS 
Model lift 
Indicated ongle of ottock 
FIGURE 
13.45 Model power operating charts. 
the balance pitching moment and lift readings. Additional runs with the same 
configuration but with different tail angles, for example, can use the same operator's 
plot. The data generated can be used directly in calculations where the airplane 
velocity is variable. For calculations involving other T:-versus-CL relationships, 
additional constant power runs at different powers must be made to allow cross- 
plotting the data. As can be seen, the second method is more time consuming than 
the first. In practice a combination of the two methods is often used. Various Tf = 
constant runs are made that allow the construction of different Tf-versus-CL 
relation- 
ships. Constant-power runs at the maximum engine power may be made to give a 
closer definition of the curves than would be obtained by cross-plotting the T: = 
constant data. It should be noted that if the airplane power is increased, the constant- 
power runs yield no data that can be extrapolated for the new engine. 
If it is desired to match both the axial velocities of T: and rotational velocities 
Qo 
the model propeller must be exactly geometrically similar to the full scale and 
the test run at the same J's. If there is room in the model, the motor and propeller 
can be mounted on a strain gage balance that will measure the torque and yield Q,. 
If a torque balance cannot be installed in the model, the following procedure can 
be used: Set the motor in a dynamometer and obtain curves for bhp for various 
values of rpm and input kilowatts. The results will yield a plot similar to Figure 
13.46. When making the calibration, monitor the motor temperature to not exceed 
limits or stall the motor as there is great risk of burning up the windings. It also 
should be noted that most AC voltmeters and ammeters are intended for 60 Hz. 
They may not be accurate at other frequencies. 
As outlined before, when the model is in the tunnel to calibrate Tf-versus-rpm, 
also measure Q, 
from the torque balance or the input kilowatts. Then for several 
values of p plot Tf versus Q
,
 
as shown in Figure 13.47. The curve for the actual 


13.4 POWER EFFECTS 
OF 
PROPELLER 
A I R C m  
541 
I 
Line of maximum /! 
allowable t o r q u m  
FIGURE 1
3
.
4
6
 Model motor dynamometer chart. 
propeller is put on the same plot. From this plot select a model P that most closely 
matches the full-scale propeller. If the full-scale propeller is a constant-speed propel- 
ler, it may be necessary to pick two model S's to match high and low speeds or J's 
as before. 
The test is then mn as described before in the constant-power method. Either Q, 
from the torque balance of input kilowatts should be recorded with the data. If 
desired, constant T
L
 runs can be made for cross-plotting. 
Table 13.10 lists power and sizes of some electric motors used for this purpose 
and photographs are shown in Figures 13.48 and 13.49. 
Because of the small size of hydraulic motors and the high rpm they develop, 
they are now being used in many instances for V/STOL propeller drive systems. 
mically, pressures of 600 to 5000 psi are needed to meet the power require- 
ments. Some performance curves for a typical hydraulic motor are shown in Figure 
FIGURE 1
3
.
4
7
 Model and full-scale propeller performance. 


542 
AIRCRAFT AND AIRCRAFT COMPONENTS 
TABLE 13.10. Dirnehsions of Some Wind lhnnel Electric Model Motors 
Diameter 
Length 
Horsepower 
(in.) 
(in.) 
=I"'' 
13.50. Also 
available are some air-driven turbines that can be used to 
drive propellers. 
When considering such a device, it should be borne in mind that the required rpm 
for propeller windmilling cases is usually much less than the free wheeling rpm of 
the propeller. Thus, the turbine must be capable of holding such rpm. 
The problem of "jumping the balance" 
with water lines, power leads, and so on, 
is quite simple as once the desired water flow rate is established (and not changed) 
FIGURE 13.48 
Water-cooled AC motor in nacelle. (Photograph courtesy of Raytheon.) 


~~ 
~ 
 
~ 
 
 
13.4 POWER EFFECTS 
OF PROPELLER AIRCRAFT 
543 
FIGURE 13.49 
A powered model. The power and water leads leave the model between 
the mounting forks and enter the balance fairing through streamline tubing. (Photograph 
courtesy of Raytheon.) 
FIGURE 
13.50 
Hydraulic motor characteristic performance curves (intermittent hp 34.9 
at 4850 r
p
m
)
.
 
(Courtesy Vickers Inc.) 


544 
AIRCRAm AND AIRCRAFT COMPONENTS 
the load put on the balance is constant and not a function of the model power. The 
problem of jumping the balance with hydraulic or compressed air is not that simple 
since both the pressure and mass flow will vary with the required power; thus 
balance loads also vary in both forces and moments. These balance loads as functions 
of pressure and mass flow must be determined and subtracted from the data. See 
Section 13.5 for a possible mefiod of jumping the balance with hydraulic pres- 
sure lines. 
1
3
.
5
 POWER EFFECTS OF JET AIRCRAFT 
The need for power-on tests is far less acute for a jet-engine airplane than for a 
propeller-driven one. The effect of the thrust moment is easily calculable, and there 
is no large slipstream of high rotation that strikes the fuselage and tail with a wide 
variety of effects. Indeed, the sting mounting usually employed helps simulate the 
jet stream for the single-engine airplane. However, as the engine bypass ratios 
increase, the nacelle inlet lip normal force may become more important for engines 
mounted close to the wing. This is destabilizing and may require power testing in 
takeoff and landing configurations. 
There are two methods of simulating a jet engine in power-off testing. The fist 
is to fair in the inlet and exhaust with smooth fairings. With engines mounted close, 
but external to the body, or close to the wings, this approach may significantly 
distort the flow over the nacelle and adjacent areas. The same may be true on aircraft 
with engines buried in the fuselage with inlets near the leading edge of the wing 
root. The method may be acceptable for single engines on a sting mount with inlet 
in the fuselage nose. 
The second approach is to use flow-through nacelles, which can be of two types. 
The first is a simple flow-through nacelle. The internal drag is either ignored or it 
is estimated or measured and subtracted from the data. The second type has an 
intemal cowl or plug that is used to provide a correct inlet condition corresponding 
to a specific flight condition. The intemal drag of these can also be estimated or 
measured and subtracted from the data. 
Sketches indicating the three types of nacelles are shown in Figure 13.51. 
A blowing nacelle is used when a thrust producing jet is required. The inlet is 
covered by a faired dome that is used for a high-pressure plenum. By the use of 
choke plates and screens the flow is more uniformly distributed as it is exhausted 
from the nacelle. Often a blowing nacelle has two independently measured and 
regulated flows to represent both the fan air and primary air. 
The use of a flow-through nacelle for inlet flow simulation and the fan cowl 
geometry effects and blown nacelles for the jet effect will simulate the engine 
airframe interactions successfully if the following three conditions can be satisfied: 
1. There must be no coupling in the near-field 
flow between the inlet and exhaust 
flow fields. 


13.5 
POWER EFFECTS OF JET AIRCRAFT 
545 
Turbine-powered Simulator (TPS) 
FiW-through Nacelle 
Blown Nacelle 
FIGURE 13.51 Three ways to simulate jet-engine nacelles. 
2. The ram condition plume of the blown nacelle must accurately represent the 
plume exiting from the flow-through nacelle. 
3. The potential flow field that is displaced by the domed inlet must not signifi- 
cantly alter the adjacent aerodynamic flow field. 
The difficulty of always meeting these three assumptions can be avoided by 
using a turbine-powered simulator (TPS), which is sketched in Figure 13.51, and a 
model in a tunnel with TPS 
units is shown in Figure 13.52. These provide a practical 
model equivalent of a real engine in a real airplane. The T
F
'
S
 uses high-pressure 
air to drive a turbine that drives a fan stage that compresses the inlet air. The 
FIGURE 13.52 
A sting-mounted model near the tunnel floor with two TPSs. The sting 
support is capable of vertical translation. (Photograph courtesy of DNW.) 


546 
AIRCRAFT AND 
AIRCRAFT COMPONENTS 
inlet air is exhausted through a fan nozzle and the turbine air through a primary 
nozzle. The TPS will simulate 80-90% of the inlet flow, the pressure ratios of the 
fan and the core jets, and the fan temperature, but the core temperature is very low. 
The error in core temperature does not significantly affect an accurate representation 
of the thrust and exhaust flow. This is because in high-bypass engines the core flow 
is a small part of the total flow an3 
is surrounded by the large fan flow. To accurately 
duplicate the full-scale engine airframe, the TPS must be calibrated. 
The simulation of jet engines puts two requirements on the wind tunnel facility: 
a large air supply and some method of jumping either an external or an internal 
balance with this air. Since the blown nacelles or similar ejectors to simulate an 
engine exhaust usually require large masses of air when compared to a TPS, they 
will define the air supply system. Furthermore, to keep the size of the air lines into 
the model reasonable, as required by support tares, the air must be delivered to the 
model at high pressure. The mass flow is, of course, also a function of the tunnel 
and hence the model size. For tunnels of the size used for development testing, 
this leads to an air supply that can deliver on the order of 20 lb/sec at 1000 psig 
or more. 
There are many schemes in existence 
for getting air of this mass flow and pressure 
across balances. These methods can be adapted for hydraulic fluid if a hydraulic 
motor is used to drive a propeller. When faced with this problem for an external 
balance, the easiest solution appears to be the use of loops of high-pressure hose. 
This is not a correct approach, as can be seen when one realizes that most dial- 
type pressure gages use a Bourdon tube, a curved tube closed at one end used to 
measure pressure by gearing the pointer to the tube and using the tendency to the 
tube to straighten out under pressure to drive the pointer. A curved piece of hydraulic 
tubing or hose will do the same thing and load the tunnel balance when the curve 
is between the balance and a connection to the tunnel structure. 
Ideally the air should pass along the vertical centerline of an external balance 
so that it can enter a large high-pressure plenum in the fuselage. From the model 
plenum the air flow is controlled by small, electrically driven ball valves or their 
equivalent as it is routed to its desired use. For an internal balance the air will 
usually pass through the sting and then through the internal balance to a plenum. 
A note of caution: high-pressure piping falls under piping or boiler codes. This 
means that all welds usually must be made by a certified welder; welds may or 
may not require x-ray tests and pipes and welds must pass hydrostatic tests before 
they can be used. 
One highly successful method jumping an external balance is to use an L-shaped 
air line. Starting from the compressor side, at some point near the balance the pipe 
is firmly attached to the structure of the building. From this point the bottom of the 
L runs toward the balance. Very close to the ground connection there is a gimbal 
made out of X flexures. Within the gimbal there is a bellows with a liner (to prevent 
the air from vibrating the bellows). The pipe then makes a 90" bend up to the 
balance. In this leg there are two gimbals with bellows. The lengths of the pipe are 
critical as the gimbals should have very little deflection when the system is at rest. 
With adequate pipe length any small motions due to the healingkooling of, for 


13.5 POWER EFFECTS OF 
JET AIRCRAFT 
547 
example, pipe will be taken up in the three gimbals (Figure 13.53). The effect of 
pressbe in the pipe can be calibrated by caping the test-section end and pressurizing 
the pipe. Note: This will also require a valve to release the pressure. The effect of 
mass flow can be achieved by the use of a zero-thrust nozzle. This is T-shaped pipe 
with two calibrated sharp-edge orifice plates at the end or the top of the T. This is 
attached to the air line at the model tnmnion. The mass flow can be changed by 
changing orifice plates. 
To jump an internal balance with compressed air requires the balance to be 
designed for this purpose. The air is delivered through a sting system that is nonmet- 
ric. The six-component balance has a central air duct that matches the sting. The 
FIGURE 
13.53 Calibration stand for model jet engines. Two six-component balances are 
at the top and bottom with the nacelle inlet in the center. The high-pressure air enters from 
the lower left through a shielded gimbal. Two other gimbals are in the vertical leg of the L. 
(Photograph courtesy of Boeing Aerodynamic Laboratories.) 


548 
AIRCRAFT AND 
AIRCRAFT COMPONENTS 
air duct has opposing bellow seals and is sealed at the model end. Holes in the 
circumference pass the air to a chamber that encloses the bellows and from this 
chamber to the model plenum. The balance is calibrated with the balance pressurized 
at the expected running pressures to account for small interactions and sensitivity 
changes due to the air pressure. Momentum tares are evaluated by calibration with 
a zero-thrust nozzle. An example of a scheme for jumping air across an internal- 
type balance is shown in Figure 13.54. 
What is required to get high-pressure air to the model has been outlined. But 
before we turn to equipment to calibrate the jet engine simulators, a word of caution 
about high-pressure air systems. Air or any other gas in large quantities at high 
pressure represents a large amount of stored energy, and it must be treated with 
respect. The air controls in the model and most of the other controls in the system 
are remotely operated by either electrical or pneumatic methods. 
To protect people working on the model, there must be some interlock system 
to prevent the model from inadvertently being charged with high-pressure air. Any 
place in the system where air can be trapped must have bleed valves and a pressure 
gage to ensure that there is no high-pressure air when disassembling. An example 
is the piping across the balance when checking pressure tares. When removing 
flanges, each bolt should be slightly backed off one after the other. The bolts should 
never be completely removed one at a time. People have been killed when removing 
a cap on a high-pressure pipe when pressurized. The load on the cap can exceed 
the strength of the bolt and the cap can blow off. When going from a pipe designed 
for high pressure to one designed for a lower pressure through a pressure-reducing 
valve, blow-out or rupture disks are required to protect the lower pressure pipe in 
Mas8 flow dirtributer (metric) 
Annular balance 
n ( 
/ O m i n p  
bcllow sealsy 
Inonmetric) 
v 
To model 
FIGURE 1354 Schematic of jumping air across an internal (sting) balance. The forces on 
the two bellows cancel out, leaving small air line tares. 


13.5 POWER EFFECTS OF JET AIRCRAFT 
549 
case of a valve failure. Any high-pressure-air system should be designed by an 
engineering firm experienced in high-pressure piping. Do not try to cheat the safety 
system by replacing a rupture disk that continually ruptures with one of a higher 
rating or bypass the safety system. Also, extreme care must be taken with positive- 
displacement pumps to prevent "dead heading" the pump. The pressure will build 
up at an alarming rate. Do not clean pipe connections with a petroleum product or 
an in-line explosion may occur due to dieseling. Treat all high-pressure-air systems 
as if they are a loaded and fused bomb--they are. 
The problems of getting the air across the balance and into the model have been 
discussed, and now the requirements for calibrating a flow-through nacelle, a blown 
nacelle, or a TPS will be discussed. 
If the requirements for the nacelle drag in a flow-through, or the thrust of a blown 
nacelle or TPS, are not stringent, they can be obtained by momentum methods using 
a wake rake. This method is theoretically correct, but it is difficult to get the correct 
momentum when integrating the rake output owing to distorted velocity profiles. 
A better way to calibrate these devices is to use a special calibration stand that 
will cover the full range of flight operations (Figure 13.53). One such device is a 
chamber 4 ft in diameter by 12 ft long. At the forward end two six-component 
balances support a force-balance assembly to which either a TPS, blown, or flow- 
through nacelle is mounted. The inlet of the TPS or flow-through nacelle is open 
to the ambient pressure of the room and the exhaust confined to the chamber. A 
bellows seals the air passage around the nacelle and force due to pressure is canceled 
by compensating bellows. Thus the balance measures the nacelle thrust. Air is 
jumped across the balance by the same method used for the t u ~ e l  
external balance. 
The air flow required to drive the blowing nacelle or TPS is measured by either a 
calibrated single critical flow venturi (CFV) or a set of CFVs that operate in parallel 
in any combination desired, called multiple critical venturis (MCVs). These have 
throat areas ranging in proportion to 1, 2,4, and 8 and two throats at 16. This gives 
a total of 47 effective venturi sizes. When the throat is at sonic velocity, the CFV 
only requires one pressure and temperature measurement to obtain the mass flow. 
Venturis built to the dimensions given in ASME standards can have errors in mass 
flow of up to 0.5% owing to manufacturing tolerances and finishes. Therefore, the 
CFVs should be calibrated and their calibrations should be traceable to primary air 
flow standards of the Colorado Engineering Experimental Station or equivalent. A 
TPS requires one CFV or MCV while a blown nacelle with both fan and core flow 
requires two in which to measure the mass flow. 
The inside of the calibration chamber is filled with screens to break up the 
exhaust jet and prevent recirculation and entrapment around the jet. They also diffuse 
and mix the flow before exiting at a low-~ressure 
MCV at the rear of the chamber. 
- 
. 
The low-pressure MCV measures the air flow exiting the chamber and controls the 
nacelle pressure ratio. Two air ejectors exhaust the flow and maintain the low 
pressure at the MCV at sonic throat conditions. 
For a TPS the fan air flow is the difference between the high-pressure air flow 
into the nacelle and the low-pressure MCV at the end of the chamber. F r ~ r n m ' ~ ~ ' ~  
and Harper" 
give descriptions of the problems of model testing of powered nacelles. 


550 
AIRCRAFT AND AIRCRAFT COMPONENTS 
Flow-through nacelles are calibrated for internal drag by using the difference 
between ideal thrust and the measured thrust. Flow-through nacelles often have trip 
strips just inside the inlet lip. The location of the trip strip is often determined by 
flow visualization to ensure the desired turbulent boundary layer within the duct. 
The nacelle has four or more internal static ports. The average of these pressures 
is used to determine the mass flcw via the nacelle calibration when running the 
test. From the test mass flow the nacelle 
drag is determined via the nacelle 
calibration. 
13.6 V/STOL VEHICLES 
Aircraft can be characterized by their mode of takeoff and landing. There are large 
numbers of aircraft that use conventional takeoff and landing (CML) techniques. 
These aircraft require relatively long runways. A second mode is vertical takeoff 
and landing (VTOL), such as helicopters and the Harrier AV-8. The third mode is 
short takeoff and landing (STOL). The required length of runway can very from 
500 to 2500 ft depending on the size and weight of the aircraft. The STOL field 
length is the hardest to define and, perhaps, as one wag put it, "the STOL field 
length is the length required by our aircraft." The VTOL and S M L  
type. 
are often 
called V/STOL aircraft. Over the years there have been a multitude of V/STOL 
vehicle configurations proposed, studied, and b~ilt.l~-'~ 
There is a distinguishing aspect to wind tunnel experiments supporting develop- 
ment of V/STOL aircraft: The generation of lift to support the weight of the aircraft 
at lower speeds than for conventional vehicles means that the wake, whether from 
an engine or from extremely high lift wing designs, moves downward at a higher 
angle relative to the free stream. This can reach conditions that require special 
methods to evaluate the interference on the flow from tunnel boundaries. 
Helicopters 
The helicopter 
is the most successful 
and widely used V/STOL vehicle, both cornmer- 
cially and military. It can take off vertically or with a short ground run if heavily 
loaded; it can hover; and it can maneuver in any direction. Outside the military the 
helicopter is used more for emergency transport, law enforcement, and industrial 
purposes rather than as public transport, such as airlines, owing to its relatively 
high operating costs. The high-speed performance of a helicopter tends to be limited 
by rotor tip losses due to compressibility 
and retreating blade stall plus the decreasing 
ability of the rotor to produce propulsive thrust as speed increases. Various schemes 
have been proposed and explored to overcome the helicopter's speed limits, such 
as wings to unload the rotor at high speed, additional sources of thrust other than 
the rotor, folding and storing rotors, and so on. None of them provide more than 
marginal improvement. 
Helicopter rotors in forward flight are inherently producers of unsteady forces, 
moments, and air flow no matter what reference frame is adopted. These unsteady 
phenomena are an ongoing source of study because they have unwelcome conse- 


13.6 V/STOL VEHICLES 
551 
quences, including producing vibratory inputs to the aircraft structure and producing 
excessive noise. Efforts to reduce these unwelcome side effects constitute much of 
the ongoing research activity in the helicopter field and lead to many experiments, 
some of them in wind tunnels, and show rotor models in use for experiments in 
wind tunnels. (See Figures 13.55 and 13.56.) 
Tilt Rotor 
This configuration obtains the vertical takeoff capability of a helicopter by having 
rotors whose axes can be oriented from horizontal to a little past vertical. The 
difference between a rotor and a propeller is generally that a rotor is designed for 
lower disc loading and the blade pitch can be varied as a function of the azimuth 
angle. A propeller is usually designed for higher disc loading, and while the blade 
pitch may be variable, all the blades have the same pitch at any moment in time. 
An example of a tilt rotor configuration is the Bell-Boeing Osprey. 
Vectored 
Thrust 
This category has rotatable jet nozzles, entire engines, or ducted fans. Sometimes 
this is considered to include both jet-powered and tilt propeller or tilt rotor vehicles. 
FIGURE 13.55 Rotor test rig with generic fuselage. (Photograph courtesy of Glenn L. 
Martin Wind Tunnel.) 


552 
ARCRAFT 
AND 
AIRCRAFT 
COMPONENTS 
FIGURE 
13.56 Two-blade helicopter rotor in DNW open test section for aeroacoustic 
testing. (Photograph courtesy of U.S. Army Aeroflightdynamics Directorate, Ames Re- 
search Center.) 
These types of vehicles provide the wind tunnel engineer with another challenge. 
There will be high-speed concentrated jets issuing from the thrusters perpendicular 
or nearly perpendicular to the airstream and the airstream speeds of interest will 
extend down to zero. This introduces an entirely separate class of flow problems 
and corresponding tunnel boundary interactions that must be evaluated as part of 
any good experimental program. An example of this class of vehicle is shown in 
Figure 13.57. 
Others 
Elf Wing This configuration obtains the high lift for vertical takeoff by rotating 
the wing, engines, and propellers about a spanwise axis a little more than 90". 
The 
propeller is in a horizontal plane for takeoff and landing and a vertical plane for 
forward flight. A large portion of the wing is immersed in the slipstream(s). This 
type of interaction between wings and propulsive flows continues to be a subject 
of research. An example from a development experiment for this class of configura- 
tion is shown in Figure 5.13. 
Deflected Slipstream The propeller slipstream is deflected through a large angle 
by the use of specially modified wing flaps or other very high lift wing modifications. 
When the aircraft is powered by jet engines, this method of powered lift is often 
called either upper surface blowing or lower surface blowing. In supper surface 


13.6 V/STOL VEHICLES 
- - 
- 
-
-
 
FIGURE 13.57 
Powered lift model in NASA Ames 80 X 120-ft tunnel. (Photograph 
courtesy of NASA Ames.) 
blowing the engine's jet blows across the upper surface of the wing and flap. The 
flow follows the wing-flap due to the Coanda effect and the high energy in the 
boundary layer prevents separation. The wing also reduces the noise on the ground. 
On lower surface blowing the engine exhaust is below the wing and impinges on 
the lower flaps to deflect the flow (Fig. 13.58). An example of this class of vehicle 
is shown in Figure 13.58. 


554 
AIRCRAFT AND AIRCRAFl COMWNENTS 
FIGURE 13.58 Vector slipstream by upper surface blowing of jet engine exhausts in NASA 
Ames 40 X 8 0 3  
tunnel. (Photograph courtesy o
f
 NASA Ames.) 
Jet Flaps High-pressure air is ducted along the wing span and is blown over the 
wing or parts of the wing in several ways. At the trailing edge of the wing either 
the air is blown over the upper surface of the flap using the Coanda effect over a 
curved surface at the trailing edge or the jet nozzle is built to deflect the jet wake. 
In either case the thin jet is turned downward. When the flap is blown, the high- 
energy a
i
r
 delays separation. The air can also be ejected at the leading edge to delay 
separation of the wing, and this can be used alone or in combination with the two 
trailing-edge blowing methods. When the amount of air on a blown or jet flap is 
greater 
than that required to prevent separation, additional 
circulation lift is produced, 
which is greater than that predicted by either jet reaction or potential flow. 
Fan in Wing A large fan is buried within the wing airfoil contour. In hover the 
wing acts as a duct, improving the static thrust of the fan. In forward flight at low 
speed the fan aids the wing lift. The fan is primarily used for vertical lift and 
transition, and jet engines or other propulsion methods are used for thrust in forward 
flight. A development model is shown in Figure 13.59. 
Autogyros The autogyro 
uses an unpowered rotor (same as a helicopter 
in autorota- 
tion) to provide lift. The thrust for forward flight is usually supplied by a piston 
engine propeller combination. 


13.6 V/STOL VEHICLES 
555 
FIGURE 13.59 Fan-in-wing model in NASA Ames 40 X 80-ft tunnel. (Photograph courtesy 
of NASA Ames.) 
This list of types of V/STOL aircraft is not intended to be all inclusive, and 
aircraft using combinations of powered lift systems have been proposed. 
At low flight velocities used in V/STOL operations, the wing lift can be produced 
in three ways: 
1. Basic lift of a wing or unpowered 1
1
3
.
 This lift is due to circulation and is 
independent of thrust. 
2. Lifr due to defected thrust by any of several methods as describedpreviously. 
This lift varies linearly with thrust. 
3. Additional circulation lift due to either jet exhaust or a propeller slipstream 
moving over the wing. This lift is a function of the increased velocity and the 
increase in the effective chord of the flap used to deflect the air downward. 
The increase in effective flap chord is due to high-speed air being approxi- 
mately parallel and in the same plane as the flap. This lift varies in a nonlinear 
manner with thrust, as the rate of increase in lift decreases with increasing 
thrust. 
The basic concept in all V/STOL aircraft is to create lift by using power to 
produce a downward directed momentum. For the purpose of discussion of wind 
tunnel tests of V/STOL aircraft, the powered lift can be divided into two broad 
categories. The first is a distributed power lift such as produced by a helicopter 


556 
AIRCRAFT 
AND 
AIRCRAFT 
COMPONENTS 
rotor or a blown flip. The second is point power lift similar to the vectored thrust 
from a jet engine. 
Experimental Issues 
Wind tunnel experiments on V/STOL vehicles, including isolated rotors, have much 
in common with experiments that require powered models of a conventional 
configu- 
ration. Among the more important issues is how to keep the size of the matrix of 
runs within bounds and yet obtain the most important data. A common approach 
is to obtain data for conditions known to be at and near feasible flight trim conditions 
rather than just incrementing all the experimental variables through a predetermined 
list of values. 
To illustrate the situation, consider a development program for a tilt wing aircraft. 
It is desired to measure the six component balance data as functions of a, 
P, i,, J, 
T& a,, 6,, 6,, and R,. Table 13.11 identifies the meaning of the symbols. Consider 
also what may seem the reasonable proposition that 10 values per variable are 
desired to obtain well-defined functions over the ranges of interest. This would 
require lo9 
(that is, one billion) data points. Suppose we could average recording 
a data point every 3.6 sec or 1000 points per hour. We would need lo6 
h to conduct 
the experiment. Even if we immediately 
conceded and reduced the Reynolds number 
variation to a single value, we would still need 100,000 h. This has to be reduced 
drastically in order to be feasible. It is done by finding the combinations that 
correspond to trimmed flight conditions and taking measurements only in a small 
band about the trimmed flight states. This requires that the run schedule be carefully 
considered in advance and that data be reduced in real time and used to update to 
choices of conditions to be included in the run program. 
If the purpose of the test is to obtain basic data, then a different procedure is 
followed. Usually the purpose of these research tests is to determine the effect of 
one parameter on the other parameters. As an example, for a pure jet flap on a wing 
one might desire the effect of varying the jet momentum coefficient on lift, drag, 
and pitching moment from zero lift to maximum lift. Thus pitch runs would be 
made at various momentum coefficients with all the other variables held constant. 
TABLE 13.11. Experimental Variables 
Symbol 
Variable 
a 
Angle o
f
 attack of aircraft 
I
3
 
Side slip of aircraft 
1, 
Angle of incidence of wing relative to fuselage reference line 
J 
Propeller advance ratio 
e b  
Pitch angle of propellers 
8
.
 
Angle of ailerons 
6, 
Angle of rudder 
6, 
Angle of elevator 
R. 
Reynolds number 


13.6 V/STOL VEHICLES 
557 
V/STOL Instrumentation 
As can be seen from the description of the various methods of producing powered 
lift, the simulation will be accomplished in the wind tunnel by two general methods. 
The first is by rotational devices such as a helicopter rotor, propeller, ducted fan, 
or fan in wing. The second is usually by compressed air to simulate jets and blown 
flaps. The rotational devices can be powered by electric motors, hydraulic motors, 
or air motors. The rotation devices can also be used to simulate a jet exhaust similar 
to a turbine power simulator. When the power is an electric motor, the problem of 
jumping from ground to the balance is relatively easy even for a water-cooled motor. 
However, when either compressed air or hydraulic power is used, the problem of 
jumping the balance is more complex as there can be loads applied to the balance 
that vary with both pressure and mass flow. V/STOL models almost always require 
much more instrumentation within the model than a standard nonpowered force 
model. 
Measuring rpm If the model has rotating machinery, such as a helicopter rotor, 
lift fan, or propeller, the rprn must be controlled to match tip speed ratios on rotors, 
advance ratio on propellers, and thrust on lift fans. There are two types of optical 
systems that can be used. The first is a transmissive sensor, a light on one side of 
a disk with a hole in it and a light detector on the other side of the disk. For one 
hole in the disk one pulse per revolution is obtained. The second is a reflective 
sensor where a light shines on the shaft that has a painted mark that reflects light 
to the detector, yielding a one-per-revolution pulse for a single mark. Both of the 
above units may have to be shielded from ambient light. A third method is an AC 
generator where a magnet is rotated with the shaft inside a coil producing a sine 
wave whose frequency varies with shaft rpm. All three of these methods can use a 
counter that will measure pulses or frequency per second, which can be converted 
to rpm. The output of the counter must be visual for the operator. Many counters 
have binary outputs that can be adapted for input to a data system. A fourth way 
to measure rprn is to use a DC generator whose output voltage is proportional to 
an rprn that can be calibrated. This is the least accurate. A digital voltmeter could 
be used for visual output and data system input or the voltage itself could be used. 
The rprn of rotors and propellers can be checked by the use of commercial 
strobotachometers. These use a xenon flash tube that is flashed at various frequencies 
that are set on the dial in terms of rpm. When a marked blade is rotating at the 
same rpm, it is stopped by the light. These units must be used with care, for if the 
desired rprn is 2000, the blade will appear to stop also at 4000 and 1000 or other 
even multiples 
of the blade speed. This problem is 
further complicated when multiple 
blades are in use. The use of a strobotachometer when there are multiple blades 
requires distinctive markings on the blades that can reliably be discerned under the 
illumination of the flashing light. 
CompressedAir When compressed air is used for simulating, 
for example, vectored 
thrust, the mass flow must be measured accurately and controlled reliably. This 
usually requires calibration of the nozzle by one of two methods. The first is to 


558 
AlRCRAFT AND AIRCRAFT COMPONENTS 
calibrate the nozzlecin a calibration facility so that the thrust, mass flow, and so on, 
are known by measuring pressure and temperature for desired thrusts. The second 
method is to use a pitot rake to calibrate the thrust. This is a simpler method, but 
not as accurate as the first. 
Rotors It is common that duGg rotor experiments both the lead-lag angle and 
the flapping angle versus azimuth position are required. These are sometimes mea- 
sured by strain gage beams calibrated for angle versus strain. During experiments 
on rotors and propellers, stresses or moments on the blades may be desired, and 
these too are usually measured by strain gages. Such measurements give insight 
into blade twist and vibration frequencies when operating. As these measurements 
are taken on rotating devices, the signals are transmitted through slip rings. Much, 
if not all, of the data from rotating blades are needed as a function of blade position, 
which requires a continuous trace of the data signal or more likely a high-speed 
digitization system. Until recently the most convenient method of acquiring the data 
was on an FM 
tape deck. An event marker was put on one of the tape channels to 
be used to determine the blade azimuth position. Today, a high-speed digitizer is 
more accurate, more convenient, and less costly than an FM instrument grade 
tape recorder. 
Vectored Thrust When the lift is produced by jet engines, it may be desired to 
separate the wing lift from the thrust lift to determine the interference between the 
component parts. This necessitates the model being designed so that the loads on 
the engine can be measured separately from those of the model. For example, the 
first, often an external, balance can be used to measure the power and aerodynamic 
forces and moments while the model is attached to the power section by a second 
balance that measures the aerodynamic 
forces and moments. The difference between 
the two balances is the power effects plus the interferences. 
The other approach is to have the first balance measure the aerodynamic forces 
and moments plus interference and the second balance measure the power effects. 
The second method is often more difficult because of the tares on the air lines due 
to pressure and mass flow. 
Balances for rotors must be even more carefully designed than some other 
balances or selected to avoid resonances between the balance and the rotor. The 
excitation frequencies from the rotor are multiples of the rotor speed. For existing 
external balances it is necessary to avoid operating in regions of balance-rotor res- 
onance. 
Tare and Interference Tare and interference measurements for V/STOL models 
are the same as for conventional models with the following exceptions. If the model 
uses compressed air, the pressure and mass flow tares must be evaluated. The second 
problem is with helicopter rotors, because it is difficult to use an image system 
from the ceiling. Generally, for rotors only the tare of the model supports themselves 
is evaluated. This method neglects the effect of the rotor wake on the support system. 
The tares are taken with the rotor blades removed, and the forces, moments, and 


13.6 V/STOL VEHICLES 
559 
driving torque are recorded at the various air speeds. If the rotor is mounted to a 
fuselage, the tares and interference 
of the 
fuselage are handled the same as any model. 
Model Sizing The determination of model size for a given tunnel for a V/STOL 
model that must be tested in the transition flight range is complicated. As discussed 
in Chapter 11, there is a lower speed test limit that is a function of the model area 
and tunnel cross-sectional area for models with distributed lift. This limit requires 
a small model in a big tunnel. A small model at low velocity means low Reynolds 
numbers. If care is not taken, the Reynolds number may get in the range of 200,000 
or less. At this low Reynolds number the aerodynamic properties of conventional 
airfoils may be quite different than at RN 
= 6 X lo6 
(see Chapter 8). It should be 
noted that the full-scale aircraft also may be operating at low Reynolds numbers in 
transition. Because of the Reynolds number issue and difficulty in model construc- 
tion, most of the tunnels built in the 1960s for V/STOL are large. 
There is no known easy way out of the dilemma of small models relative to 
tunnel size. If the model is not to be tested toward the hover end of transition, the 
size can be increased. But for models with large downwash angles and large wing- 
span-to-tunnel-width ratios, the distribution of the tunnel interference may be- 
come nonuniform. 
The Rotor Model The design of a model rotor presents some difficulties not 
encountered with most other wind tunnel models of airplanes. The hub and hinge 
design and construction can usually be worked out in a satisfactory manner, but 
some inherent difficulties arise with the rotor blade representation. It is common 
practice in rotor design to have the blade statically balanced about its quarter- 
chord line. Such a balance rules out the homogeneous blade and requires either a 
built-up blade or a solid wood blade with a metal leading edge. Most model blades 
are now of built-up-type construction, even for quite small models. 
The actual blade dynamically flabs and twists during flight, and when it is 
possible, usually when larger models are employed, a model will be designed so 
that its dynamic characteristics match those of the full-scale craft, and realistic 
aeroelastic deformations and vibratory stresses are obtained. The performance of a 
rotor is helped aerodynamically by root cutaway, inverse taper, and twist, and the 
model designer may be expected to produce such designs despite their difficulty. 
The model should be equipped with adequate flat surfaces for leveling and angle 
measurements, some type of hinge lock to be used during balancing, and an ample 
supply of spare parts as rotor models are never examples of great reliability. 
Hinged Rotor Operation There are certain operational procedures that must be 
followed with rotors equipped with flapping hinges operating in a horizontal plane: 
1. The motor is brought up to operating speed with the tunnel off. As the rotor 
starts to rotate, there is very little centrifugal force on the blade. If the tunnel 
is running, the advancing blade will flap up to very large angles, owing to 


560 
AIRCRAFT 
AND 
AIRCRAFT 
COMPONENTS 
its large lift, and the blade will not track, leading to relatively large oscillat- 
ing loads. 
2. When the rotor is at the desired rpm, the tunnel is brought up to desired speed. 
3. When shutting down at the end of a run, the tunnel is brought down to zero 
or a very low speed and-then the rotor rpm is reduced. When large blade 
angles are used, this procedure may not be possible because of either limits 
on the power of the rotor drive or blade strength being marginal to carry the 
large static thrust or flow recirculation between the rotor and tunnel floor. For 
these conditions it may be possible to tilt the rotor forward, start the tunnel, 
and gradually increase the speed. The rotor will autorotate, and as the rpm 
builds up, rotor power may be added. Extreme care must be taken when 
operating in an autorotation mode to avoid excessive rotor rpm. When condi- 
tions are at large collective pitch angles with the rotor shaft tilted aft to the 
flow, the rotor can also enter an autorotating mode. This can be detected by 
a reduction in rotor torque, with the torque sign changing as the rotor begins 
to autorotate. Again, extreme care must be observed when the rotor is powered 
by an electric motor to avoid large increases in rpm due to the rotor driving 
the motor. The increase in rprn is usually very dramatic if such an increase 
occurs; control can be obtained by cutting the tunnel and pitching the rotor 
forward. 
Flow Visualization 
for Rotors: Propellers Small t
u
f
t
s
 can be attached to the 
blades; the centrifugal force does not seem to seriously affect the tufts. The minitufts 
described in Chapter 5, which are fluorescent and viewed under ultraviolet light, 
are 
ideal for this application. When an event-marked signal (used to determine blade 
position) is available, it can be used to trigger the flash stopping the blade at the 
desired azimuth position. 
A smoke generator can also be used to visualize the flow through the rotor- 
propeller disk. 
1
3
.
7
 REENTRY LANDING CRAFT 
Low-speed tests of reentry landers are made to determine the performance, stability, 
and control during the approach and landing of the spacecraft. The low-speed test 
program for these vehicles is the same in principle as for an unpowered airplane. 
Low-speed evaluations of any 
supersonic configuration are likely to require higher 
angles of attack than are needed for configurations that are designed for lower 
speed flight. 
REFERENCES 
AND 
NOTES 
1. High-speed tests for transonic airplanes may precede the low-speed tests. 
2. Lockspeiser, B., "Ventilation of 24 ft Wind Tunnel," ARC R&M 1372, 1930. 


REFERENCES AND NOTES 
561 
3. Not upside-down on a left wall. 
4. A second method of calculating the location of the aerodynamic center is given in the 
appendix of "The Measurement of the Damping in Roll on a JN4h in Flight," NACA 
TR 
627, 1923. 
5. The mean aerodynamic chord may be found from either 
where CT 
is the wing tip chord and CR 
the wing root chord for straight tapered wings, or 
for other platforms. 
6. Schrenk, 0. A., "A Simple Approximation Method for Obtaining the Spanwise Lift 
Distribution," 
NACA TM 948, 1940. 
7. Pearson, H. A,, "Span Load Distribution for Tapered Wings with Partial-Span Flaps," 
NACA TR 
585, 1937. 
8. Panel rolling (Cb) and yawing moment (C,) coefficients; do not confuse with damping- 
in-roll dCild@b/2V) or damping-in-yaw dCnld(rb/2V). 
9. Equation (13.26) applies only to roll without yaw or sideslip and can be misleading at 
high angles of attack, where adverse yaw in flight may be appreciable. 
10. For zero trail angle the rudder is so balanced that it remains at a zero deflection even 
when the airplane is yawed. 
11. If another location is desired for the center of gravity, the curves may be rotated about 
zero lift by the relation 
dC, = 
% MAC change 
A
-
 ~ C L  
100 
= Acg 
12. Goett, 
H. H., "Tunnel Procedure 
for Determining 
Critical 
Stability," 
NACA TR-781,1943. 
13. Etkin, B. E., and Reid, L. D., Dynamics o
f
 Flight, Stability and Control, John Wiley & 
Sons, New York, 1996. 
14. This is the critical condition for multiengine types. 
15. Fromm, E. H., "The Boeing Flight Simulation Chamber for Static Calibrations of Engine 
Simulators," 
paper presented at the Forty-Fifth 
Meeting of the Supersonic 
Tunnel Associa- 
tion, Sandia National Laboratories, Albuquerque, NM, April, 1976. 
16. Fromm, E. H., 'Wind Tunnel Testing of Integrated Aerodynamic and Propulsion Effects," 
paper presented at the Forty-Eighth Meeting of the Supersonic Tunnel Association, 
Toulouse, France, Sept., 1977. 


562 
AIRCRAFT AND 
AIRCRAFT COMPONENTS 
17. Harper, M., 
"The Propulsion Simulator Calibration Laboratory at Ames Research Center," 
AIAA Paper 82-0574, 1982. 
18. Kohlman, D., Introduction to V/STOL Airplanes, Iowa State University Press, Ames, 
Iowa, 1987. 
19. Campbell, J. P., Vertical Takeoff and Landing Aircrafl, MacMillan, New York, 1962. 
-- 


14 Ground Vehicles 
In the last few decades the wind tunnel has become a primary tool in ground vehicle 
design programs. Various needs for understanding and dealing with phenomena 
related to air flow have significantly increased the wind tunnel testing time required 
in support of design decisions for trains, busses, individual passenger vehicles, 
motorcycles, trucks, and racing cars of all types. 
There has been a corresponding increase in the number of wind tunnels specially 
built or adapted for the study of aerodynamics of ground vehicles. Many of these 
wind tunnels have been constructed for companies in the automobile industry. Most 
are focused on production car development, with a smaller number focused on 
racing car development. Wind tunnels developed for automobiles are for the most 
part very useful for other forms of ground transportation too, which of course 
promotes the increase of wind tunnel testing in the development of these other 
vehicles. Hucho' et al. provide a comprehensive 
treatment of aerodynamic 
considera- 
tions in the design and development of automobiles and trucks, including aspects 
of wind tunnels that are particularly adapted to ground vehicle test purposes. In 
Volkert and Kohl? and Nilssor and Berndtsson,' and Ogata et aL4 
three very different 
examples of wind tunnels specifically 
designed and built 
for automotive 
development 
activities are presented. 
So, what are the main uses of a wind tunnel in the design program of a ground 
vehicle? The most prominent uses are presented in the following sections as well 
as a few comments on significance for selected types of vehicles. 
Aerodynamic Forces and Moments 
Among the most important results obtained from wind tunnel experiments 
supporting 
design programs are the aerodynamic forces and moments acting on the test vehicle 
in a controlled and repeatable environment. Force and moment measurements are 
important for all ground vehicles. For some the principal interest is on drag because 
of its reflection on energy requirements. For others, such as performance 
cars, racing 
cars, and motorcycles, the moments, lift, and side force are at least as important as 
drag because of their impact on controllability and safety. 
The drag and lift forces generated on a high-speed train, for instance, are funda- 
mental in determining its safety, the maximum cruise speed, and all the consequent 
issues (e.g., the time of travel and the fuel efficiency) that eventually affect ticket 
prices. In the case of motorcycles the moments and forces generated in straight-line 
motion and upon exposure to side winds have a dominant 
effect on the performance of 
the vehicle and the safety of the rider. Drag is often the component that receives 
563 


564 
GROUND 
VEHICLES 
the greatest attentick as it has a dominant effect on fuel consumption at a given 
speed and on the top speed attainable. 
The lift force is of extreme importance in determining controllability for perfor- 
mance cars and race cars, becoming more critical as the speed increases. Lift is 
often considered in terms of front lift and rear lift. This is equivalent to considering 
total lift and pitching moment. Other aerodynamic force and moment components 
also play major roles in the controllability of ground vehicles at high speeds. Side 
force, yawing moment, and rolling moment under side-wind conditions or due to 
passing of another vehicle are important determinants of the safety and comfort of 
a passenger vehicle or the capability of a race car in competition. 
Cooling Flows: Power Plant and Brakes 
For vehicles where the power plant is tightly enclosed, careful study of the cooling 
system performance is an important part of development commonly done in the 
wind tunnel. Many companies have wind tunnels that, in the automobile industry, 
are called "environmental wind tunnels" that are solely devoted to cooling system 
development. There are a few facilities that are used for both cooling system 
development and external aerodynamic development. Wind tunnel experiments with 
the engine 
operating under load, with controlled airstream temperature, 
and with radi- 
ation allow for parametric studies to be done that can provide the parameter effects 
on cooling system performance. This provides direct evidence for choosing system 
parameters and greatly reduces the amount of road tests required. Road tests are 
still very important, but a road test following a well-designed wind tunnel experiment 
can be focused on optimization of a few configurations chosen from the many that 
may have been investigated in the wind tunnel experiment. Most important is that 
data will be available from the controlled wind tunnel environment that will allow 
a more thorough analysis to be conducted. 
In the case of busses and trains the propulsion units are usually much bigger and 
hence the heat source is increased. The concern then becomes not only that the heat 
be dissipated but also that heat be kept away from the passenger compartment. Air 
flow plays a significant part in the arrangement. 
Brakes as well as the propulsion unit generate a large amount of heat that must 
be dissipated. In fact, the brakes must commonly absorb energy more rapidly than 
the motor installed in a given vehicle can produce it. The efforts to minimize overall 
drag has in some cases resulted in too severe reduction in the air flow to the brakes. 
This has a negative effect on performance and on the life times of brake system 
components. There have been a number of instances in which this was not recognized 
until after vehicles were in production. It is now common practice to evaluate the 
air flow to the brake systems. 
There is still substantial uncertainty about the minimum 
specifications, so this is an area in which there is a requirement for ongoing research. 
Heating, Ventilation, and Air Conditioning (HVAC) 
The requirements for a more or less comfortable climate vary greatly with the type 
of vehicle. A summary of requirements and systems is given by Hucho.' The 


GROUND VEHICLES 
565 
significant contributions of wind tunnel experiments to HVAC are in two parts. 
First, the selection of locations for supply inlets and outlets is critically influenced 
by the external pressure distribution, which is a primary topic of wind tunnel 
investigations. Second, the likelihood of spray or dirt ingestion at various candidate 
ventilation intake locations is very important and can be evaluated in wind tunnel 
experiments. 
Wind Noise 
For comfort, for compliance with environmental legislation, and increasingly for 
marketing reasons much effort is dedicated to reducing the noise sources in ground 
vehicles. For many vehicle classes, low noise is perceived to indicate high quality. 
Several wind tunnels in the automobile industry, as well as a number in the aircraft 
industry, have been designed or modified to have low background noise and outfitted 
with aeroacoustic instruments for measuring noise sources and for evaluating the 
noise reaching the driver's and passengers' ears. 
Many techniques have been adapted in recent years from general acoustics to 
apply to aeroacoustics of automobiles and other ground vehicles. The principal noise 
sources have typically been classified into three parts: (1) engine and drive-train, 
(2) tires, and (3) aerodynamic or wind. For decades, the first two were of such 
intensity that the third was not a serious factor in the perceived noise of either 
occupants of vehicles or persons in the drive-by environment. Advances in the last 
two decades have reached a point where the third is now an important element in 
. 
. 
the perceived noise of both occupants and persons in the drive-by environment. The 
wind tunnel is currently the best available tool for aeroacoustic develo~ment. 
As 
. 
aeroacoustics becomes more important in ground vehicle design, the same happens 
with the wind tunnel, although this new requirement demands considerable additional 
facility development, instrumentation, and personnel capability. 
Wipers, Washers, and Related Surface Flows 
A final set of applications of the wind tunnel are experiments on the effect of 
aerodynamics when the vehicle is under hard weather conditions that involve sprays, 
mists, and accumulation of dirt. salt. or other contaminants on the vehicle itself or 
the reduction of visibility for nearby vehicles. In a number of automobile wind 
tunnels it is possible to simulate rain, snow, and dirt propagation situations. Studies 
are done to optimize the design of the wind shield and head light wipers, rear-view 
mirrors, and other details of the geometry in order to minimize the negative effects 
of particle deposition on the vehicle's surfaces. Once again road testing is not 
eliminated but complemented by the information from the wind tunnel experiments. 
In the following parts of this chapter the role of the wind tunnel in the development 
of ground vehicles is illuminated by giving some details of selected cases. Ground 
vehicles are categorized into three groups: production cars, racing cars, and other 
vehicles. First concepts and techniques are introduced, and then selected results 
obtained by the engineering community and published in technical papers are given. 


566 
GROUND VEHICLES 
14.1 PRODUCTION AUTOMOBILES 
Wind finnel Role in Production Car Design 
The aerodynamic 
evaluation that influences the shape of a new vehicle is only one of 
many different areas that must be-considered and carefully evaluated in a design pro- 
gram for a new automobile. The aerodynamic development enters from the earliest 
stages, just after the concept is conceived, and continues up to full production level. 
Although aerodynamics is only one of the very many aspects of the development, it 
is one of a few that is required all along the life of the project. Computational 
simula- 
tions and road testing have an important role in modem car aerodynamic design pro- 
grams, 
but windtunnel 
measurements 
continue 
to be 
the 
most common andextensivelv 
. 
used approach. This is because wind tunnel measurements are highly efficient and 
highly productive for ground vehicle simulations. Full-scale Reynolds numbers can 
usually be attained, 
and thelow 
dynamic 
pressures 
cornparedto 
thoseneededin aircraft 
experiments result in much less severe structural demands on the models. 
In aircraft development once a target mission is defined, achievement of aerody- 
namic targets usually becomes one of the most important tasks of the design phase. 
In the automobile industry this is almost never the case. The degree to which 
aerodynamic development influences the shape of the final product depends on 
several factors, not all of them directly related to automotive technology. Some of 
the most important factors are as follows: 
- The relevance of aerodynamic characteristics is variable for different classes 
of vehicle. For instance, a two-seater, high-speed sports car and a six-seater 
- 
- 
minivan will have significantly different requirements. In the first the drag and 
lift forces that are generated are critical, especially at higher speeds. In the 
second, more functional aspects of aerodynamics, 
such as interior 
cabin cooling, 
dirt deposit on the windows and aerodynamically generated noise become 
more important. 
The importance of fuel efficiency varies from market to market. In most 
European and some Asian markets fuel efficiency is critical due to high taxation 
on fuel. In these markets aerodynamic drag reduction becomes critical for the 
success of the product. 
In many countries information on aerodynamical characteristics has become 
part of the marketing of the product. It is then mandatory, especially in the 
sedan market, that the new products present competitive 
aerodynamic 
character- 
istics. It often appears that this is important even if an objective analysis of 
cost of ownership for a particular vehicle class shows that fuel costs are far 
below cost of capital investment, depreciation, and maintenance. 
Government regulations regarding fuel efficiency are often significant. 
Based on these and other factors, the role of wind tunnel experiments will be 
more or less relevant. However in the last three decades, with market demand for 
higher fuel efficiency in Europe and Asia due to pump prices and an oil crisis and 


14.1 PRODUCTION AUTOMOBILES 
567 
concerns with fuel waste, air pollution, and global warming in the United States, 
aerodynamic development and the associated wind tunnel experiments have become 
more and more a standard part of the automobile design arena. The scope of the 
role is expected to continue increasing, although the specific manifestation will 
certainly continue to change as it evolves. Wind noise, for example, will likely play 
a larger role in the development process. 
The description of the role of the wind tunnel in a new automobile design program 
presented here is for a typical passenger vehicle. The degree to which the results 
from the various stages of the experiments will affect choices of design features 
will depend on the vehicle mission. Virtually all aspects that have to do with any 
sort of air flow in a new vehicle require at some point the use of a full-scale, scale, 
or climatic wind tunnel. 
Preliminary Shape or Theme Development Stage In the theme development stage 
wind tunnel experiments are done to compare aerodynamic performance of proposed 
designs and variations. In some cases actual parametric studies are performed even 
before the design comes into play. A basic shape and set of dimensions 
are determined 
based on the proposed vehicle type and the external shape is optimized. 
Hucho6 has described two strategies for aerodynamic development: detail optimi- 
zation and shape optimization. Detail optimization is a process in which an initial 
- 
vehicle geometry is assumed given to the aerodynamicist. It would typically be a 
product of a design studio or perhaps it might be an existing vehicle. A set of 
parameters such as those indicated in Figure 14.1 are 
selected and varied indepen- 
dently and in combination with schematic results for a single indicator of goodness, 
also shown in Figure 14.1. The results are used to select the set of parameters by 
the project team based on these and competing issues in the design evaluation. 
Shape optimization is a process in which the initial shape is chosen from basic 
aerodynamic considerations and then modified in steps to reach a result that is 
judged a desirable vehicle shape given all the other constraints. We give a schematic 
indication of this process in Figure 14.2, again with drag coefficient as the single 
measure of desirability. An image of the starting shape for this sequence is shown 
in Figure 14.3. 
Traditionally scale models are preferred, cheaper, and quicker to produce; they 
are 
a good compromise between accuracy and testing time. Security issues are very 
k
;
?
 r
;
&
7
-
3
 
Jump 
Saturation 
I 
I 
I 
. 
. 
L 
,
I
 I 
Ris Ril RM (optimk 
values) 
R&L 
4 
FIGURE 14.1 Schematic of drag vs. geometry relation. 


568 
GROUND 
VEHICLES 
FIGURE 14.2 
Schematic: shape optimization process. 
important in this stage, and the easy handling of a scaled model-
less prone to 
attracting attention-is an advantage. Some car companies have opted to work with 
full-scale models from the start. Some of the advantages of this option are as follows: 
Geometric tolerances are more easily met for small trim elements. 
Existing car platforms can be used as the underpinning for the clay models 
allowing for early optimization to be made with cooling air flow and underbody 
details, sometimes with less additional cost. 
FIGURE 14.3 Body shape with low drag in proximity to the ground, Cd 
= 0.049. (Photo- 
graph courtesy of Pininfarina.) 


14.1 PRODUCTION AUTOMOBILES 
569 
Aeroacoustic development can be initiated with greater confidence from an 
early stage. 
Easily moldable materials 
such as clay are used, which allow the team of engineers 
to work closely with the stylists while performing efficient changes to the model 
that are 
immediately evaluated in the wind tunnel. The materials used can be easily 
milled, or parts can be created using stereolithography, from standard commercial 
software such as CATIAm, 
IDEASm, 
or other CAD packages in use by the industry. 
Accurate shapes can be produced efficiently on short turnaround times and thereby 
allow for unanticipated changes in geometry to be evaluated even as an experimental 
program is in progress. 
Computational simulations can produce interesting results for certain types of 
vehicles when relatively simple geometric forms are used. However, the wind tunnel 
is still the only tool capable of producing fully reliable aerodynamics results for 
reasonably complete geometries 
in the automotive 
design world. At this stage evalua- 
tion of drag tendencies and discovery of possible large separation regions are what 
is most relevant. The detail in these early models is still far from full production, 
and lift values are so dependent on that detail that they are usually of little value 
here. This happens either because the shape is a first iteration in detail of what the 
actual product will be or because the power train and other components that are 
relevant for the lift forces are simply not ready at this stage. Flow surveys can be 
used for detection of separation regions and other features of the flow that might 
be dictated by the generic shape under study. In some cases the need for this type 
of investigation is largely superseded by extensive experience of the aerodynamics 
groups in auto companies 
over the last 20 years. There are seldom surprises regarding 
generic shape classes. An early test may be required if the shape being contemplated 
is known to be near a boundary that separates two flow topologies. 
"Tuning" after Main Shape or "Theme" Is Frozen After the main shape is 
frozen, smaller details are yet to be optimized. Clay models are 
used either in scaled 
version or in full scale. Changes studied are mostly to the shape of bumpers, rear- 
view mirrors, air cooling inlets, back shape, lights, hood details, radii of curves, 
wheel well flows, and other details. The work performed in this phase is represented 
in Figure 14.1. 
This is also the time when changes are performed in order to optimize geometries 
that have to do with the interaction between aerodynamics and the functionality of 
the vehicle. Examples are the optimization of external mirrors and the A pillar in 
order to minimize dirt deposit on the side windows under heavy rain and snow 
conditions. Other examples are windshield wipers and headlight wipers under the 
same harsh conditions. Surface pressure measurements are often done to support 
optimization of air intakes for engine and brake cooling. If the experiments are 
being done at full scale, aeroacoustics measurements and evaluation of alternatives 
can also occur. Explorations are under way to support aeroacoustics measurements 
at small scale but for the moment full scale is considered mandatory for confident 
evaluation. Lift and side forces are 
evaluated in order to check if the values obtained 
are in the expected range or if some drastic changes to the shape have to be 


570 
GROUND 
VEHICLES 
implemented. The underbody flow detail can be quite close to production at this 
stage and hence studied and optimized here. Flow surveys are commonly carried 
out near air inlets and other critical points to identify any possible separation regions, 
circulation regions, and other flow patterns that are not desirable. 
. 
-- 
Accessory ReJnement, Mockups, First Prototypes 
At this stage the design is 
totally frozen barring discovery 
of a totally disastrous 
characteristic that has somehow 
survived the earlier development process. Wind tunnel experiments continue to be 
conducted, however, in order to optimize more functional aspects of the vehicle 
that are very dependent on aerodynamic features. Examples are 
the cooling air flow, 
air conditioning, passenger cooling flow, windshield and headlight wipers, dirt 
deposit on the side windows and rear windows, and aeroacoustics, especially at 
higher speeds. 
This phase of the development is usually parallel with the development of the 
first full-scale running prototypes, and information is exchanged between wind 
tunnel testing and road testing in order to guarantee that the development will be 
as cost and time efficient as possible. Often full-scale engine running tests are 
conducted in a properly equipped wind tunnel with higher air temperatures in order 
to access the performance of different cooling systems. Some of this testing may 
occur with a running engine only or both with a running engine and running wheels 
if the tunnel is fitted with rollers. In either case special arrangements must be 
available to handle the exhaust gases. It often happens in a new car design that the 
combination of front-end design, engine cooling requirements, and proposed cooling 
system is not feasible. Finding out about this during road testing involving several 
people in a desert proving ground can be very expensive and even dangerous. The 
wind tunnel then becomes a fundamental validation tool for the cooling system. 
Aeroacoustics is another concern at this stage. Either on the outside or on the 
inside of the vehicle numerous measurements are carried and results are analyzed. 
Changes are then implemented accordingly. Although data may have been obtained 
in a previous stage it is here that the validation of the measurements is done. The 
wind tunnel is again crucial, especially if it allows testing at higher speeds (where 
aerodynamically generated noise is more relevant) and if it is designed for acous- 
tic measurements. 
Cross-wind sensitivity is another aspect that concerns the engineers responsible 
for the aerodynamic development of a new automobile. Although the wind tunnel 
is not the best simulator of cross winds (due to the random nature of the direction 
and intensity of natural winds), it is the only available way to evaluate the aerody- 
namic forces and moments generated at yaw in a steady wind condition. There have 
been extensive correlations 
of the response of various vehicles to natural 
and artificial 
side gusts with the aerodynamic properties measured in the wind tunnel. This allows 
a reasonably confident prediction of the cross-wind response of a vehicle once the 
wind tunnel measurements and sufficient detail of the suspension systems are in 
hand. 


14.2 RACING VEHICLES 
571 
Final Trimming, Prototypes, and Production Cars In this period that spans from 
the finished prototypes and beginning of production to the end of the life of the 
vehicle the wind tunnel becomes an evaluation tool for smaller details. These 
details have to do with "cosmetic" changes dictated by marketing, performance 
requirements, or functionality. During the lift of a vehicle a number of exterior 
gadgets andlor appendages are designed and their properties must be tested. Exam- 
ples are special aerodynamic mirrors, lower ground clearance, different bumpers, 
wings or spoilers, skirts, aerowheels, different racks for skis or other purposes, and 
trailer configurations. These and other possible appendages and resulting configura- 
tions are 
tested for stability, drag and lift, moments, 
cross-wind stability, and acoustic 
effects. Some of these can be developed with justification as component tests with 
a partial body to "host" the component. 
Convertibles 
The requirements and constraints for convertibles are somewhat different. Although 
the design process is essentially similar, there are some new aspects that are not 
present for standard 
cars. The aerodynamic evaluation and development for a convert- 
ible must be done for at least two configurations, top down and top up. Additional 
configurations of differing arrangements of the side glasses may also be included 
as these variations are more likely to produce larger perturbations on the aerodynamic 
properties than comparable variations in window positions for standard vehicles. 
The aerodynamic properties that are considered desirable are essentially the same 
for a convertible and a sedan. But the achievable properties are generally in the 
direction considered to be less desirable relative to sedans of similar themes. The 
conduct of force and moment measurements for a convertible is the same in detail 
as for sedans. Essentially different measurements are required to determine the 
actual shape that will be realized by the soft top at various speed and cross-wind 
conditions. This leads to a need to evaluate alternative fabrics, frames, and attach- 
ment arrangements. 
The essentially open environment is checked carefully for flow properties near 
the head locations of driver and passengers. Flow velocities near zero are sought. 
The acoustic environment is also checked at the head locations. Details of the 
windshield shape and edge treatment are critical determinants of both flow and 
acoustic environment. Cogotti7 has given a discussion of experimental techniques 
used in the development of convertibles. 
14.2 RACING VEHICLES 
Wind 'hnnel Role in Race Car Design 
Although the aerodynamic development of race cars shares many of the tools and 
processes used in the aerodynamic development of production cars, the objectives 
of the testing are often very different. In racing the aerodynamics are a dominant 


572 
GROUND 
VEHICLES 
factor in determining the success of a vehicle. Hence the effort and relevance put 
into aerodynamic development 
is very large, as almost any measurable 
improvement 
may prove critical on the track or course. 
There are 
many different classes of auto racing, but only some motivate extensive 
aerodynamic development work. Some examples are the formula racing champion- 
ships Formula One: CART,9 ana IRL,l0 the endurance and high-speed GT racing, 
the NASCAR" racing in the United States, and the manufacturer-sponsored tourism 
races in Europe. The differences between the vehicles in the various classes are 
significant enough to justify different goals in the development and testing programs. 
In fact, the aerodynamics for each class must be tailored for specific tracks and 
courses. However, the common aerodynamic goals are straightforward 
and common 
to all of them. They are to provide the driver with the possibility for the minimum 
lap times and the best control to ultimately beat the competition. This sometimes 
requires minimum drag, but it usually requires more attention to maximizing down 
- 
force with proper balance between front and rear wheels while also obtaining a 
relatively low drag. Every class of racing has design rules that constrain the allowable 
shapes available to the aerodynamicist. 
In order to achieve these goals, effective aerodynamic development programs 
include extensive track testing. This validates and extends the results learned in the 
wind tunnel while integrating the knowledge with the driver and other members of 
the development team. In the off season during a major part of the development, 
and even during the season when changes to the vehicle are to be evaluated, wind 
tunnel experiments are of fundamental importance. 
Aerodynamic development of race cars is in general limited by existing regula- 
tions dictating dimensions, weights, materials, and shapes of the allowable changes 
to the vehicle or some of its aerodynamic appendages. Due to the complexity of 
the flow and the importance of even the smallest incremental improvements, the 
development relies heavily on experimentation. The design engineer is responsible 
for planning and conducting 
series of experiments with proposed designs and config- 
urations before and during the season. 
Race car aerodynamic development can be considered to be in two phases that 
repeat for each racing season, as discussed next. 
Preliminary Development In this stage an array of different configurations, car 
setups, and design possibilities are evaluated. Extensive experiments are planned 
and executed. Preliminary conclusions are reached as to what setups and configura- 
tions are optimum for different situations. Wind tunnel experiments and road trials 
are performed. Wind tunnel experiments have an important role in the comparison 
of various options under consideration and the subsequent selection of the most 
promising configurations. This phase has the obvious advantage of test condition re- 
peatability. 
This stage is often done with scale models. The scale models used for race 
vehicle development are much more detailed than the clay models used for early 
production car development. The race car models are usually made with the proper 


14.2 RACING VEHICLES 
573 
shell structure, allowing internal flows to be properly simulated, and are sufficiently 
strong to allow running at the highest available tunnel speeds. 
Optimization during Racing Season During the season a number of changes may 
be prompted by either less than optimum results or changes in regulations. Changes 
in regulations commonly come about from safety issues or from a circumstance 
arising in which some major sponsors feel their entries have been disadvantaged in 
some way. The wind tunnel becomes again instrumental 
in the evaluation of different 
options for aerodynamic solutions. 
The prevailing practices with regard to the choice of scale models, full-scale 
models, or actual vehicles differ somewhat among the various race series. Most 
NASCAR teams, for example, carry out a considerable amount of full-scale wind 
tunnel work with the actual vehicles. Some of them conduct scale wind tunnel 
experiments as well. Few if any NASCAR teams do very extensive development 
using scale models. The situation is quite different for Formula One teams where 
a large fraction of the development effort is often done with scale models. 
An advantage of using models for aerodynamic experiments is that the work can 
proceed without having an actual vehicle at a wind tunnel. This allows a greater 
possibility for parallel activities to proceed. Race car wind tunnel experiments 
are usually done in a facility equipped with a moving ground. Stationary ground 
experiments can be useful for some race car aerodynamic development, but this 
should be carefully considered. In closed wheel vehicles sensitivity of lift forces 
and even drag forces to ground clearance and ground effects can be high. And in 
open wheel vehicles there is a dominant effect of the wheels on the aerodynamics. 
Wind n m e l  
Methods for Racing Vehicles 
The most significant racing vehicle types can be categorized in three groups: open 
wheel race cars (Figure 14.4), Le MansIGT-type racing vehicles (Figure 14.5), and 
production cars transformed for racing (Figure 14.6). 
For all three types the ground effects are very important so that accurate 
simulation 
of near-ground flow is necessary. For the open wheel vehicles, the wheel rotation 
has effects that are greater on the overall aerodynamics than is the case for the 
covered wheel vehicles. For the open wheel vehicles, wind tunnel experiments not 
only must provide proper ground simulation but also must include wheel rotation 
as well. 
We discuss ground simulation methods in Section 14.4. The principles of ground 
simulation are the same regardless of the type of vehicle being developed. However, 
the need for the more sophisticated methods are greater as the ground clearance 
decreases and the speed of vehicle operation increases. The requirements to conduct 
valid and productive experiments on racing vehicles, therefore, are the most de- 
manding. 
As a rule of thumb wind tunnel results are very useful for the track or road. 
Even if the wind tunnel experiments are just a simulation, this is by far the most 
used approach in aerodynamic development of race cars. In general, good results 


574 
GROUND VEHICLES 
FIGURE 14.4 
An open wheel race car in a wind tunnel. (From Katz, Joseph A,, Race Car 
Aerodynamics, Bentley Publishers, Cambridge, MA 02138. O Bentley Publishers.) 
FIGURE 145 A LeMansIGT-type race car in a wind tunnel. (Photo courtesy of Glenn L. 
Martin Wind Tunnel.) 


14.3 TRUCKS, MOTORCYCLES, AND OTHER VEHICLES 
575 
FIGURE 14.6 A NASCAR race car model in a wind tunnel. (Photo courtesy of Glenn L. 
Martin Wind Tunnel.) 
in the wind tunnel correspond to good results on the track and only relatively fine 
tuning of the vehicle suspension settings in combination with the aerodynamic 
settings is necessary following the wind tunnel work. More and more racing car 
manufacturers have developed their own full-time dedicated wind tunnel. This is 
particularly the case for the more expensive racing classes, such as Formula One 
and CART. 
1
4
.
3
 TRUCKS, MOTORCYCLES, AND OTHER VEHICLES 
By far the most widespread use of the wind tunnel as a tool in the aerodynamic 
development of road vehicles is in production and racing vehicles. However, there 
are a few more types of vehicles or combinations of vehicles that require special 
attention and for which wind tunnel experiments are important in their development 
or certification. These include 
trucks, 
motorcycles, 
tractor-trailer configurations, 
groups of vehicles, and 
trains. 


576 
GROUND 
VEHICLES 
The systems employed in the wind tunnel testing of these vehicles are in all 
cases similar to the ones applied to the passenger or racing automobiles. However, 
due to the specific requirements of the development, emphasis on different aspects 
of the testing changes with the type of vehicle tested. 
A brief discussion of such requirements follows. 
Trucks 
For road-going cargo trucks there are primary concerns with comfort, safety, fuel 
efficiency, and practicality. 
'Qpically the ground clearance of a road-going truck is very large compared to 
the thichess of a controlled boundary layer on the floor of a modem wind tunnel. 
Hence, unless the testing is carried with a very small scale model, the correct ground 
flow conditions have been considered less critical than for low-ground-clearance 
vehicles. Usually a good boundary layer suction system allows for good results to 
be obtained when developing this type of vehicle even in scale. There are some 
reasons for caution, however, because these vehicles are considerably longer with 
respect to their width than automobiles. This means that there is a longer relative 
distahce over which the truck body flow field will interact with the floor or near 
road fluid. Since the rear of these vehicles is a part that continues to attract attention 
for possible drag reduction, the ground simulation should not be dismissed as an 
important aspect. 
These vehicles are to be driven for many hours, often in very adverse weather 
conditions. It is then essential that the windshield, side windows, and rear-view 
mirrors be kept as free from deposits as possible. Be it from dust, snow, rain, or 
other undesirable particles. Great effort is then put into the development of the flow 
around the driver cabin in order to minimize these effects. 
Another aspect that is of great relevance for this type of vehicle is the fuel 
efficiency. Qpically these vehicles displace a very large weight, and considerable 
amounts of power and fuel are required to maintain a high average speed on the 
freeway. Due to practical considerations having to do with the need to maximize 
cargo space for the minimum wheel base, an optimum aerodynamic shape is not 
acceptable. Hence trucks generally have blunter shapes with sharper edges generating 
substantial base pressure deficits and high shape drag. In the development stages 
the usage of aerodynamic appendices and small changes that do not interfere with 
the practicality aspects can significantly reduce drag and improve fuel efficiency. 
Such improvements eventually reflect in the final price of the goods transported 
and are critical. 
Another important aspect for truck aerodynamics is safety. l b o  
major concerns 
d~riilg 
development are to control the value of lift forces generated at higher speeds, 
their distribution between the axles, and to make sure that the vehicle handles well 
when exposed to side winds. Numerous side-wind sweeps are carried for different 
configurations and details, such as radius of edges, deflectors, and other appendices. 
Details are optimized in order to guarantee the highest degree of safety. 


14.3 TRUCKS, MOTORCYCLES, AND OTHER VEHICLES 
577 
Another important aspect is the cooling system. The power units in these vehicles 
are larger and operate continuously much closer to capacity than automobile engines. 
They produce an enormous amount of heat. The cooling system must then be 
carefully designed not only to ensure proper cooling of the engine compartment but 
also to do so in the efficient way possible. 
Finally, due to the size of these vehicles and to the fact that most automotive 
wind tunnels are designed with small vehicles in mind, there are few wind tunnels 
in the world that will support full-scale truck testing. For this reason and for financial 
reasons scale testing is most commonly used. In development that does not include 
force measurements, however, some tests may be done at full scale even with the 
resulting higher blockage, taking advantage of the full-scale detailing level. This is 
typically done for the optimization 
of the window surfaces and mirrors for evaluation 
of deposits. 
'lkactor-'hailers and Groups of ~ e l h l e s  
An aspect related to road vehicle safety and fuel efficiency is the interaction between 
the flow around different vehicles traveling in proximity or different parts of a 
compound vehicle. The wind tunnel becomes again fundamental for it allows the 
study of complex interaction features of these three-dimensional flows in a con- 
trolled environment. 
At the same time, the test requirements become more demanding and more 
difficult to satisfy. This is because the scale of the models that can be used becomes 
more 
constrained for the given test facilities as the 
lengths of the vehicle 
combinations 
increase. The level of the experimental detail and sophistication for groups of 
vehicles is typically much less than is common for single-vehicle development. An 
example is given by the paper of Zabat et a
l
.
I
2
 
Trains 
Aerodynamics of trains has become of greater importance as maximum speed has 
increased. The efficiency of rail vehicles supported by steel wheels on steel rails is 
very high compared to any other land mode of transportation. Aerodynamic resis- 
tance becomes the largest energy absorber other than grade climbing for long runs. 
Overcoming the aerodynamic resistance represents a larger and larger fraction of 
the overall power requirement as the speed increases. For the highest speed trains, 
for example the Japanese Shinkansen and the French TGV, aerodynamically gener- 
ated noise becomes an important environmental issue. 
The importance of aerodynamics and the utility of wind tunnel methods in ad- 
dressing them is indicated by the large investment by the Japanese Railway Tech- 
nical Research In~titute'~ 
in a new wind tunnel capable of air speeds up to 300 kmlh 
in a test section 5 X 3 X 20 m equipped with a moving-belt ground simulator 2.7 X 
6 m capable of speeds of 60 mls. The tunnel test sections can be arranged in several 
configurations. One is an open jet with a large anechoic chamber. The background 
noise level is reported to be 75 dbA at a jet speed of 300 kmh. A smaller test section 


578 
GROUND VEHICLES 
for use with model-scale trains and full-scale pantographs, a known source of noise, 
provides speeds to 400 kmlh. The new wind tunnel opened in 1996. 
We mention two examples of studies on aerodynamics of trains. The fust study 
is on the limits of speeds in cross-wind operations. 
The aerodynamic characteristics of the vehicle due to cross winds depends not 
only on the shape of the vehicle:-but also on that of the infrastructure (e.g., a bridge 
or an embankment along which the train is passing). 
A wind tunnel test was 
conducted 
using a model train on a particular trestle arrangement. The measured lift, side- 
force, and rolling moment coefficients and corresponding critical wind speeds are 
shown in Figure 14.7. The critical wind speed is that environmental wind speed 
that can cause overturning as a function of wind approach angle and vehicle speed. 
The second study involves the search for a tonal noise of irritating amplitude 
during passing. A class of shinkansen train exhibited such an annoying pure-tone 
sound as it passed. The source was identified using trackside microphone arrays as 
a ventilating fan and louver combination. Examination of alternative configurations 
in a wind tunnel experiment using half-scale models showed that the source was a 
plate louver with circular holes for ventilating air passage. Alternative hole shapes 
that do not produce tonal sound radiation were identified and adopted. 
Motorcycles 
Aerodynamic experiments on motorcycles are conducted for the same reasons as 
for automobiles. However, a special emphasis must be put on the safety when the 
vehicle is exposed to side winds or to ensure high lift forces are not generated at 
high speed. In racing motorcycles low lift and drag forces are fundamental for the 
Wind Direction Relative to Train 
FIGURE 
14.7 Aerodynamic forces and moments on first train car and corresponding 
critical 
wind speeds. 


14.4 SYSTEMS FOR GROUND VEHICLE EXPERIMENTS 
579 
performance on a straight line and wind tunnel testing is instrumental in reaching 
competitive results. A particular aspect is that in this type of vehicle the driver is 
exposed to the flow, which makes the aerodynamic development more challenging. 
The aerodynamic characteristics 
of the rider-machine assembly must be investigated 
and tailored for a range of different vehicle-rider positions. 
14.4 SYSTEMS FOR GROUND VEHICLE EXPERIMENTS 
Methods that have been developed for measuring the aerodynamic characteristics 
of ground vehicles in wind tunnels and some indications 
of their genesis are presented 
next. Examples and discussion of actual implementation 
and some results of specific 
investigations are included. 
Ground Influence and Treatment in Wind Tunnels 
Background Automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, 
and so on, move in close proximity 
to the road. Clearance from the surface varies with the intended use of the vehicle, 
with a value of 5 4  
in. being common for passenger cars in a typical load condition. 
This may represent about 10% of the height of the vehicle and perhaps 3% of the 
length of the vehicle. The clearance for racing vehicles is typically as small as the 
rules and racing surface regularity will allow. Zero clearance around the edges 
through use of flexible material has been used in a few cases. This contrasts with 
the wing of an airplane that, even in landing, seldom comes closer than about half 
its streamwise length to the ground and still has clearance that is 5-
10 times its 
vertical thickness. The clearance for a wing may be a fraction of its span, which is 
the dimension that is used to judge when a wing is "in ground effect," but the 
phenomenon that is brought into play is a reduction in downwash associated with 
a trailing vortex wake system, and this phenomenon is very different from the main 
ground effects experienced by automobiles. In the case of the automobile, there is 
the possibility that the boundary layer forming on the vehicle underside will directly 
mingle with a boundary layer on the ground, if there is one, or contact the ground 
if there is not. The details of this interaction can have substantial influence on the 
flow under and about an automobile and thereby strongly influence the aerodynamic 
characteristics. The treatment of this aswct in wind tunnel simulations is important 
and is continuing to evolve at this time. 
Aircraft models are mounted near the center of a wind tunnel test section with 
very large clearance from all the surfaces. The wall boundary layers or open jet shear 
layers are thin relative to the clearance and are not considered a direct compromise of 
the simulation that is based on having a stationary model and a moving stream. The 
proximity of the ground in the operation of an automobile, however, immediately 
raises the question of whether it is necessary to have the floor of the wind tunnel 
moving at the same speed as the air to achieve a useful simulation. If it were 
technically simple to provide such a system, then it is certain that moving-ground 
systems would have been in wide use many years ago. Klemint4 
reported on a 


580 
GROUND 
VEHICLES 
FIGURE 14.8 
Schematic of a car in a wind tunnel. 
moving-ground simulation more than 60 years ago. However, it is technically difficult 
and adds considerably to the costs of experiments. So a large majority of wind 
tunnel measurements of automobile aerodynamic characteristics have been done 
with stationary surfaces representing the ground. We will describe the most common 
methods that have been used and later will give some results of experiments 
designed 
to evaluate some of the methods. 
The situation is indicated in Figure 14.8, which represents a cut through the 
center plane of a car. A very much simplified schematic representation of boundary 
layers on the tunnel ceiling and floor and on the car is given. A car on the road, 
ignoring ambient winds and gusts, would have boundary layers develop along its 
surfaces very similar to those on the model in the wind tunnel, but there would be 
only induced boundary layers on the road rather than a developed boundary layer 
as exists on the floor in a fixed surface wind tunnel, 
It turns out that the influence of the car body under typical conditions in a wind 
tunnel actually reduces the thickness of the floor boundary layer in the vicinity of 
the car as compared to the boundary layer thickness on the tunnel floor in the 
absence of the car. 
Fundamental Flow Features Consider a body moving through a semi-infinite 
fluid at various distances from a plane boundary. Assume the fluid far from the 
body is at rest relative to the plane boundary. Sketches indicating some primary 
characteristics are shown in Figures 14.9-14.12. The regions that are shaded are 
regions in which the vorticity is significantly different from zero. Nonshaded regions 
are parts of the flow that are essentially irrotational and behave nearly as ideal flow. 
These sketches are based on Wiedeman~~,'~ 
as is the approach given in this section. 
Figures 14.9-14.12 represent the situation when a body is moving through a 
fluid that is stationary relative to the "ground" plane. This would also be the case 


14.4 SYSTEMS FOR 
GROUND 
VEHICLE EXPERIMENTS 
581 
FIGURE 14.9 Body with large clearance from plane boundary. 
FIGURE 14.10 Body with medium clearance from plane boundary. 
FIGURE 14.11 Body with small clearance from plane boundary. 
FIGURE 14.12 Body with very small clearance from plane boundary. 


582 
GROUND VEHICLES 
in a wind tunnel with a perfect moving ground with the speed synchronized with 
the stream speed. Following Wiedemann,ls we describe the four cases shown. 
Large Clearance (Figure 14.9). The presence of the ground affects the effec- 
tively inviscid velocity distribution at the body. There is a small influence on 
the development of the boundary layer on the body. The induced flow near the 
ground is sufficiently small so that no significant boundary layer is developed. 
Medium Clearance (Figure 14.10). The presence of the wall is significant on 
the body and the presence of the body induces a significant boundary layer 
on the ground. There is a d e f ~ t e  
region of effectively irrotational 
flow between 
the boundary layer on the body and the ground boundary layer. 
Small Clearance (Figure 14.11). There is strong interaction on both boundary 
layers, and there is little mixing of rotational fluid or merging of the body 
boundary layer with the ground boundary layer within the streamwise extent 
of the body. There is no potential core separating the two boundary layers over 
much of the body length. 
Very Small Clearance (Figure 14.12). This is a limiting situation in which the 
viscous forces dominate the motion between the body and the ground. The 
convective terms of the Navier-Stokes equations become very small and the 
flow is essentially creeping flow. 
The clearance of existing automobiles puts them in the middle two classes. 
Production vehicles fall mostly into the medium-clearance category while racing 
vehicles fall mostly into the small-clearance category. 
Systems Used for Ground Simulation 
Basic Fixed-Floor Wind n n n e l  It is obvious that in the case of a fixed-wall 
wind tunnel, there is already a floor boundary layer of some thickness determined 
by the particular local situation. Also, it is reasonable to consider a classification 
of flow analogous to that indicated in Figures 14.9-14.12 as the clearance is varied. 
The situation with a fixed-floor wind tunnel is indicated in Figure 14.13 for a 
representative height. There are clearly similar variations in the relative boundary 
layer thicknesses and some height at which the floor and body boundary layers 
begin to intermingle within the vicinity of the body. It is evident that critical 
FIGURE 14.13 Body in fixed ground wind tunnel with exaggerated floor boundary layer. 


14.4 SYSTEMS FOR 
GROUND VEHICLE EXPERIMENTS 
583 
parameters will be the ratio of clearance (h) to body size (c) and the ratio of clearance 
to floor boundary layer thickness as represented by displacement thickness or mo- 
mentum thickness. When the incoming floor boundary layer is thick relative to the 
clearance, it has considerable potential to modify the flow about the body. In the 
first place, there is low-energy fluid that can be entrained more easily into the 
boundary layer of the body and the wake of the body. Second, the displacement 
thickness of the floor boundary 
layer will be modified by the presence of the pressure 
field of the body, which will induce a flow angularity that will vary with the 
streamwise coordinate. Historically, many measurements have been done with un- 
treated fixed-floor systems. These measurements must be interpreted carefully. Data 
obtained with these systems have proved very useful in cases where the users have 
extensive data sets, including on road results for validity checking and where relative 
performance of alternative designs is directly evaluated. This is not a currently 
recommended practice. 
Symmetry The idea is to use two models with exactly the same shape inverted 
relative to one another so that there is a plane of geometric symmetry representing 
the ground (see Figure 14.14). For geometries and Reynolds numbers that lead to 
steady flow, this is a valid method of simulating a moving ground for large to 
medium clearances. However, there are two limitations. Fist, there are few, if any, 
cases of interest for which the flow is actually steady and for which the symmetric 
geometry can be known a priori to produce symmetric flow at all times. The mean 
flow may or may not be symmetric, although it is still common to encounter 
the erroneous assumption that symmetric geometry always yields symmetric flow. 
Second, if the clearance is such that there would be an induced ground boundary 
layer, this technique will not reproduce that effect. This technique has been applied 
in a few research studies but is not used in automobile development programs. In 
addition to the fundamental problem mentioned, the model costs are doubled for 
each experiment. 
Elevated Ground Plane A relatively thin plate, referred to as a "ground plane," 
is mounted parallel to the floor of the wind tunnel and above the thickness of the 
floor boundary layer and extending entirely across the wind tunnel. The length 
required depends on the models to be tested but is commonly made the length of 
the test section. In some cases the length has actually exceeded the test-section 
length. The typical height will be three to five times the thickness of the floor 
boundary layer. A new and therefore thinner boundary layer begins along the up- 
FIGURE 14.14 Symmetric models to obtain ground plane representation with no ground 
plane boundary layer. 


584 
GROUND 
VEHICLES 
stream edge of the plate. This technique is fairly simple and inexpensive but it 
presents some disadvantages, the most obvious, of course, being that the boundary 
layer is not removed but rather replaced. The new, thinner boundary layer may still 
affect some tests. Also some flow perturbations may result either from the introduc- 
tion of the plate in the test section that changes the flow or by perturbations at the 
leading edge being carried downslieam. A major difficulty is that the arrangement 
provides a split flow, below and above the plate, that is influenced by the characteris- 
tics of the test article. This makes accurate determination of the effective test speed 
significantly more difficult. Some installations included flaplike segments at the 
downstream end that were used to adjust the flow split above and below the plate. 
The support of the vehicle can be troublesome, especially if full-scale vehicles are 
to be tested. This type of mounting system was widely used into the 1970s but is 
little used today. 
Raised Floor: Suction at Leading Edge This system is used at the General Motors 
Full Scale Wind Tunnel and at the Glenn L. Martin Wind Tunnel among others. 
The arrangement is indicated in Figure 14.15. A blower is used to take the low- 
energy air from the tunnel floor boundary layer at the leading edge of the test section 
and reinject it at the downstream end of the test section. The effect is very similar 
to the elevated ground plane. There are two strong advantages. First there is positive 
control of the incoming flow through the easily adjusted suction blower setting. It 
is adjusted to make the floor and ceiling pressures at the entrance of the test section 
equal. Second the effective area of the test section is affected very little as the 
typical raised floor height is about equal to or somewhat less than the boundary 
layer thickness at the entrance of the test section. 
Suction through Perforated Floor This is the classic boundary control method 
that has been studied for decades as applied to airplane wings and other devices. 
It appears in two distinct forms for the current application. 
The first form is the use of suction applied to a floor segment upstream of the 
model. This suction reduces the thickness of the boundary layer with the resulting 
boundary layer dependent on the amount of suction applied. The boundary layer 
begins to grow again at the downstream end of the suction segment. The result can 
be similar to the raised-floor method. The setting of the suction level can be more 
problematical, however, since the geometry does not provide a sharply delineated 
place where the streamlines are to be parallel. There is a delicate compromise 
FIGURE 14.15 Tunnel boundary layer removal system. 


14.4 
SYSTEMS FOR GROUND VEHICLE EXPERIMENTS 
585 
between the amount of suction that yields optimum positive results and the effect 
that suction may have on the angularity of the flow. Usually smaller amounts of 
suction are used in conjunction with other techniques. 
The second form is the provision of widely distributed perforations that allow 
suction throughout the test section, including under and beyond the model. This 
type of system can prevent a growing boundary layer, but practical limitations mean 
that it cannot duplicate the moving-ground case with precision. There is a necessary 
compromise associated with balancing induced flow angularity and boundary layer 
thickness allowed. 
There are two wind tunnels at the P~rsche'~ 
development center that use this 
type of system. Results have been studied and compared to measurements on the 
road and using other  method^.".'^ 
Tangential BIowing Fluid is injected parallel to the free stream through a thin 
slot along the floor and upstream of the model. The resulting flow is a case of a "wall 
jet" that energizes the boundary layer and allows the displacement and momentum 
thicknesses 
to be reduced or even made negative over some region. The displacement 
or momentum thickness, for example, could be made zero at the location of the 
front of the test article. There will, of course, be the typical thickening of the 
boundary layer withdistance 
downstream, 
which will produce 
effective 
flow angular- 
ity. Mercker and W i e d e m a ~ ' ~  
give a discussion of tangential blowing fundamentals 
as applied to ground simulation. Hackett et a
l
?
O
 conclude that tangential blowing 
provides drag results that are quite close to those for moving ground but that flow 
details and therefore other measures can differ considerably between tangential 
blowing and moving-ground conditions. 
Moving 
Ground A rolling belt is installed as the effective floor of the wind tunnel 
and ideally is run so that the belt speed matches the air speed in the test section. 
Conceptually one can exactly simulate the road condition; in a reference fixed to 
the vehicle we now have air and road movement. This method is considered to 
be the standard of comparison. It best simulates the real operating conditions. 
Disadvantages are of two principal types. First is the complexity and cost of the 
implementation of the belt itself. There are no belt systems today that match tunnel 
speeds of 200+ mph (loo+ d s ) ,  
although some are approaching this speed. Second 
the test article cannot just rest on balance pads but has instead to be held from the 
top or the sides. Either the balance is inserted into the vehicle or a fairly delicate 
system must be designed to measure the forces by applying the balance to the wheel 
axes. In this 
last 
case, however, the forces on the wheels 
are 
not measured. These more 
difficult measuring arrangements mean that it is difficult to match the repeatability of 
the data-gathering capability in non-moving-ground systems. 
Another aspect that adds difficulty is the requirement that the belt remain flat 
under the test article. The belt tends to be sucked up from the floor by the low 
pressures present under many vehicles. This must be counteracted with a suction 
on the underside of the belt. 


586 
GROUND 
VEHICLES 
This system is very powerful. However, the setup and conduct of experiments 
involving a moving ground is considerably more time consuming, complicated, and 
expensive. It continues to be applied primarily to racing vehicles and to comparative 
tests for other vehicles rather than to production programs. There are indications 
that this may change in the near future. 
Combinations Two or more of the above methods can oe aeneficially combined: 
Raised Floor and Tangential Blowing. If a tangential blowing slot is placed 
just downstream of the front of a raised floor, the wall jet does not have to 
overcome the velocity deficit that exists in the typical incoming boundary 
layer. This provides better control of the profile 
downstream 
of the blowing slot. 
- Raised Floor, Tangential Blowing, and Moving Ground. This combination can 
provide a very good initial profile on the beginning of the moving belt. Other 
combinations such as concentrated suction upstream of a moving belt can 
also provide good initial profiles that are then maintained by the moving- 
ground system. 
Wheel Rotation 
Most experiments on ground vehicle aerodynamics that have been done in the past 
have been done with nonrotating wheels. This is true for experiments that have used 
actual vehicles in full-scale wind tunnels as well as for experiments that have used 
models. This is an obvious inconsistency with the real vehicles in actual operating 
conditions. The fact that many of these experiments have provided useful data is 
simply a result of the fact that most attention has been focused on the upper 
body external aerodynamics. And much of the focus has been on the single force 
component, drag. As attention is moving to the details of underbody flow, cooling 
flows, and the interplay of internal flows with external flows, provision of wheel 
rotation is becoming more important. 
As with moving-ground simulation, which has long been recognized as required 
for technically precise reproduction of on-road conditions, so have rotating wheels. 
But provision of rotating wheels is also a technically complicating 
and costly addition 
that has not proven necessary for much of the historical progress in ground vehicle 
aerodynamics. But it is necessary element when complete simulation is required. 
One is faced with several significant decisions in the implementation of a system 
with wheel rotation. Several options are now described. 
Rotating Wheels with Fixed Ground Systems using a fixed ground almost always 
support the vehicle on the wheels either by having them resting on a pad that in 
turn rests on the balance or by mounting a set of posts directly into the bottom of 
the wheels. If the wheels are 
to be rotated and the remainder of the system remains 
a fixed-ground type, this can be done by placing rollers under the floor with a 
relatively small exposure through the floor that supports the vehicle wheels. Figure 
14.16 is a sketch indicating this arrangement. The motor-driven rollers are mounted 


14.4 SYSTEMS FOR GROUND VEHICLE EXPERIMENTS 
587 
General Arrange) 
Detail 
- 
W
.
,
A
 
n
.
,
-
l
 a
m
.
-
 
FIGURE 14.16 Rotating-wheel arrangement with fvted ground. 
on the balance system so the highly reliable and precise external balance remains 
the primary data source. There must be a clearance between the wind tunnel floor 
system and the roller system. 
A second system is to support the vehicle by posts at some convenient locations 
and drive wheel rotation through motors contained within the vehicle. Common 
post locations are just behind the wheels or just inside the wheels. This arrangement 
requires there to be a clearance between the bottoms of the wheels and the floor. 
Since this clearance is required to be very small to minimize the flow through the 
gap, maintaining it precisely can be difficult. 
The various treatments available to improve ground simulation for fixed-ground 
systems can be combined with these wheel rotation systems. 
Rotating Wheels with Moving Ground As previously indicated, the test article 
with a full moving ground must be suspended above the moving belt. The two 
options frequently used are suspension from above or from the side. In a few 
instances, a sting from the rear has been employed. This is an undesirable arrange- 
ment because the base pressure is greatly affected by a sting from the rear and base 
pressure is among the most important variables to be determined by an experiment 
on a bluff body. Adding rotating wheels to this arrangement can be done by addition 
of a drive mechanism inside the test article if clearance from the moving-ground 
surface is to be maintained as it must if the balance is to record total aerodynamic 
forces on the vehicle including the rotating wheels. 
Several variations have been used. The wheels can be actually separated from 
the vehicle body and supported in position from the sides but resting on the moving 
belt so that the belt drives the rotation of the wheels. The body then is supported 


588 
GROUND VEHICLES 
from above with the forces on the body being measured. This introduces the difficult 
technical issue of infemng the effective net forces on the body plus rotating wheels. 
There is not sufficient data in the public domain to do this with confidence. 
Multiple-belt 
systems can be conceived with possibility of supports from narrow 
between-belt sections. Such systems have not been implemented except for very 
small scale pilots. An example dfsuch a system was used by Hacked et al." 
Combinations A hybrid system that provides many benefits but still falls short of 
total simulation fidelity is to provide a moving-ground belt between the wheels and 
to place the wheels on rollers that rest on an external balance. Such a system is 
described by Coggotti." 
Choice of Scale for Experimental Studies 
This is an issue with very different aspects for developers of ground vehicles as 
compared to the aerospace industry or marine vehicle industry. The proper perspec- 
tive is obtained by revisiting the basic equations of fluid dynamics, which are 
reviewed in Chapter 1. The nondimensional form of the equations contains the two 
similarity parameters, R, and M. We consider Mach number to be low enough in 
the present applications so that the incompressible limit is a valid approximation. 
This is not true, of course, for many aerospace applications. This is almost exactly 
true for marine vehicles. The Reynolds number is our most important consideration. 
In the case of aerospace vehicles, there are few cases in which a model-scale 
experiment can produce an operational Reynolds number. And there are 
even fewer 
cases in which a full-scale vehicle can be ground tested to operational speeds. So 
methods of extrapolation are very important. The situation is similar for marine 
vehicles. 
For ground vehicles, there are a considerable number of wind tunnels that can 
- 
accommodate full-size actual vehicles at operational speeds, and it is possible to 
obtain operational Reynolds numbers on models of scales from 1 : 
1 down to around 
1 : 3 in even more wind tunnels. Our equations 
inform us that we will obtain precisely 
the same fluid dynamic results so long as the Reynolds number is held constant, 
for any scale whatsoever, if and only if the geometric boundary conditions are 
precisely similar. To reiterate this point: What drives the choice of scale for an 
experiment? We assume that the ovemding requirement is technical. The choice 
must be technically correct. And among available technically correct options, it is 
likely that the most cost-effective option will be preferred. As indicated above, it 
is possible to achieve equivalent fluid dynamic results for a range of scales so long 
as the test articles have the requisite geometric precision. The costs can be considered 
to be the sum of the cost of the wind tunnel and the cost of the test article. The 
larger the wind tunnel the greater the cost of wind tunnel time. The cost of a test 
article, however, can vary widely depending on many aspects, with size being only 
one factor. Therefore, various projects will have a variety of optimal choices for 
the size of the test articles. 


14.4 
SYSTEMS FOR GROUND VEHICLE EXPERIMENTS 
589 
In many car companies the aerodynamic development of a new vehicle has 
historically encompassed a period of scale model testing. This usually happens in 
an early design phase when clay models have almost universally been used in both 
studio design studies and aerodynamic development. The most common scales have 
been .375 
and .
4
0
0
,
 
although tests have been canied at many other scales. The use 
of scaled models at this stage offers several benefits. They are usually somewhat 
cheaper to produce than a full-scale clay, especially if they are essentially copies 
of a studio clay. The evaluation experiments can be done in a smaller and therefore 
less expensive wind tunnel. Handling and transport are less costly for models as 
compared to full scale. Use of scaled models is hence very attractive because it is 
cost effective. This is partly because there is not a requirement to reproduce the 
precise 
geometry of a production 
vehicle. This requirement 
is to discern the incremen- 
tal effects of theme choices rather than to produce exact scale results. 
As further refinement in the effects of details is sought, the cost of modeling 
becomes higher. However, the development of fast prototyping techniques such as 
stereolithography has provided a quick and effective way to produce accurate parts 
for any of the typical scales that are used. 
Ground Simulation The boundary layer thicknesses in wind tunnels that are geo- 
metrically similar are proportional to the sizes of the wind tunnels. This means that 
systems for ground simulation also scale in the same way. In the case that model- 
scale experiments are to be conducted in the same tunnel as full-scale experiments, 
it is necessary to have ground simulation equipment in both scales. However, that 
is not too common, especially for passenger car development, and a compromise 
is sometimes reached with some boundary layer thickness decreasing technique. 
These systems are usually optimized for the full-scale experiments. Hence when a 
scaled model is evaluated, the ratio of boundary layer thickness to ground clearance 
of the test body is much higher than for full scale. This can have great impact on 
the results since a very relevant part of the body (the underside and wheels) will 
be exposed to a lower kinetic energy flow. 
Detailing The single most important 
factor 
in obtaining good results 
from compara- 
tive and repetitive aerodynamic experiments on vehicles is the accuracy of geometry 
of the test article. This should be obvious since the flow structures, pressure losses, 
and all other aspects of the flow around and about a car body are highly dependent 
on details of the geometry. 
Road Tests versus Wind lbnnel Tests 
When on a road an automobile often experiences a reality that has little to do with 
the steady, controlled, and homogeneous flow to which it is exposed in a wind 
tunnel. When on the road wind gusts with variable direction and intensity are. 
common, as are wakes from passing vehicles and obstructions from different bodies. 
Variations in air temperature, sun radiation, and road temperature are also common, 
as are winter conditions with extremely wet or icy road and rain and snowfall. 


590 
GROUND 
VEHICLES 
Although rain is fairly easy to simulate in a wind tunnel, many other factors 
cannot and are not simulated. Road testing 
is fundamental 
in automobile 
development 
programs. The two forms of testing, while different in nature, are complementary. 
Wind tunnel testing is safe when it comes to concealing a new product; changes 
can be performed to the vehicle or model quickly and in house, which makes them 
less expensive. Most importantl<ihe conditions in the wind tunnel are controlled 
and predictable. 
Repeatability is high so comparison tests are in order. If the company 
owns its own tunnel, then there is the added advantage of convenience. 
Many people 
will have access to the test without leaving their work place. Of course wind tunnels, 
especially in full scale, are very expensive to build and operate, and road testing is 
still required. 
Road testing is a mandatory part of a development program. It is the only way 
to really test a proposed vehicle's performance, and millions of miles of road 
testing are necessary during development. In aerodynamics, however, these tests 
are relevant, concerning side-wind stability and the study of deposits on windows, 
tail 
lights, 
and other parts 
of the vehicle that may affect safety. It 
does present 
engineers 
with a real-life test. However, it is usually expensive to relocate a team of engineers 
and test drivers along with test vehicles, there are safety concerns when the project is 
classified, and the repeatability of the conditions is very difficult to achieve. 
An interesting study concerning the effects of turbulence experienced by road 
vehicles in road conditions was conducted by Watkins et aLZ3 
In their study a moving 
vehicle was fitted with hot-wire anemometry and a survey of the turbulence intensity 
under normal weather conditions (winds up to 10 m/s) and under extreme winds 
was conducted. The study revealed that for normal operating conditions the vehicle 
was exposed to a longitudinal and lateral turbulence intensity of 2.5-5%. For the 
case of strong winds it ranged from 2 to 10%. Spectral analysis showed that the 
energy peak was centered at about 1 Hz and ranged from 0.25 to 2.5 Hz. The study 
suggests that some wind tunnel testing should be conducted with higher turbulence 
levels in the flow, namely, yaw tests, since strong side flow on the road is highly 
turbulent. For more details the reader is encouraged to read the original paper. 
Ground Effects in Race Cars 
One of the greatest concerns of race car aerodynamicists is with the lift forces 
generated. As described above, the effect of lifting devices in near-floor situations 
changes dramatically and can induce significant increases in lift forces. As a conse- 
quence this concept is applied successfully to the design of race cars by applying 
wings near the ground or by shaping the underbody of the car in order to take 
advantage of the ground effect. 
Both cases are particularly relevant for wind tunnel testing. The sensitivity of 
the aerodynamics of vehicles that depend on ground effects significantly increases 
the need for an accurate ground simulation in testing. 
The introduction of a sloped underbody in a race car together with a restricting 
surface on the sides of the body transforms the region between the car and the road 
into a channel. The side restricting surface can be composed of either skirts of 


14.4 SYSTEMS FOR GROUND VEHICLE EXF'ERIMENTS 
591 
flexible material or solid walls when the underbody is shaped as to include ducts. 
The resulting effect is much like in a venturi type duct and hence these ground 
effects are commonly referred to as venturi effects (see Figure 14.17). 
The idea is that the air that flows through the underbody region is accelerated 
up to a certain point and then slowed down through an expansion region where the 
flow is allowed to recuperate pressure to the ambient value. Since we are dealing 
with incompressible flow, the region with high-speed air flow will have a lower 
pressure and down force is generated. 
The air speed and associated pressure decrease are critical for the lift forces 
generated. It is then fundamental that for race cars that depend heavily on ground 
effects a moving-belt facility be used. 
This is a simple conceptual description of the phenomenon and the plots in Figure 
14.18 help illustrate the effect. The reader is referred to a more in-depth discussion 
on race car aerodynamics for more details. 
Automotive Aeroacoustics 
Introduction The following description is generic and the concepts described are 
valid for trains, motorcycles, and other ground vehicles for which wind-generated 
noise is relevant. The examples of application are however centered on the auto- 
mobile. 
FIGURE 
14.17 
Venturieffect bodies: ductedflow; 
Side s
k
i
r
t
e
d
 
body. (FromKatz, 
Joseph A., 
Race Car Aerodynamics, 
Bentley Publishers, Cambridge, MA 02138. O Bentley Publishers.) 


592 
GROUND VEHICLES 
" 
1 
Centerline 
/ \  
f\ 
pressure 
Centerline 
pressure 
0 
FIGURE 
14.18 Pressure 
coefficient: analogy between race car and duct. (From Katz, Joseph 
A.,Race CarAerodynamicq Bentley Publishers, 
Cambridge,MA02138.8 
Bentley 
Publishers.) 
In the last 15 years the automotive design process has seen a rise in the importance 
of aerodynamic design accompanying 
a general trend of increase of high-technology 
input into the automobile. Gradually 
quieter and more efficient 
engines, 
transmission, 
and tires together with an increase in the average travel velocity of the automobile 
have created a need for understanding and predicting the effects of aeroacoustics 
in an early stage of product development. This need for development has propelled 
a number of experimental and computational approaches that are useful for the 
automotive design process. 
Automobile noise can be categorized as interior and exterior noise, the interior 
noise being of more relevance to the internal occupants of the vehicle and the 
exterior noise being of relevance for standing observers. The exterior noise is also 
related to some environmental concerns. 
The purpose of this part of the text is to present a summary of the problems 
involved in the aerodynamically 
generated noise in the automobile, 
how the minimi- 
zation of these problems is tackled in the design of new products, and the role of 
the wind tunnel in this process. Note, however, that this text is only introductory 
to the subject of automotive aeroacoustics, 
and further references 
should be consulted 
for a more in-depth discussion. 
In a car with an aerodynamically perfected external 
shape and details the customer 
will expect low levels of wind noise at high speeds. This is not always the case. In 
fact, the evolution of drag and lift coefficients in the last 20 years has made cars 
more efficient and stable but there is no guarantee that the aerodynamic optimization 
of the shape will yield low wind noise levels. There is a large number of details 
that, if not attended to, will create different sources of noise that will disturb the 
user and surrounding environment. Finding those details and dealing with them in 
an efficient and cost-effective manner are the job of the automotive aeroacoustician. 
Approach to Automotive Aeroacoustics Since there is no established similarity 
rule 
for the measurement of noise 
as there 
is for force measurements, the 
experimental 
work carried in this field is mostly composed of full-scale wind tunnel testing. 


14.4 SYSTEMS FOR GROUND VEHICLE 
EXPERIMENTS 
593 
Full-scale wind tunnel time is expensive and careful development of experimental 
methods is necessary. Some state-of-the-art automotive aeroacoustics experimental 
methods for full-scale wind tunnel testing are described below. 
In the analysis of an aeroacoustic problem of this nature clear definitions of the 
sources, path, and receivers are very useful. In the case of the automobile the sources 
are the fluctuating pressures caused by the turbulent flows around the car, flow over 
surface gaps, and protrusions and outright leaks. The paths are the body shell of 
the car and the surrounding static fluid, and the receivers are the occupants and 
others in the surrounding of the passing vehicle. There are a number of possible 
solutions to these problems, namely the application of better sealing, more absorbing 
materials in the passenger compartment, noise barrier material in the shell, or 
improved air flow on the outside. However, the assessment of the sources and needs 
of the users are quite a challenge. 
Hypothetically we could solve the equations of fluid flow for the turbulent flow 
on the outside and use established theories of solid mechanics, acoustics, and 
vibration to calculate the acoustics inside the passenger compartment. Of course 
this is not possible, for closed-form analytical solutions are not available and compu- 
tational models are only useful to a certain extent due to lack of accuracy. Neverthe- 
less, the use of approximate models is of some importance. The models can range 
from fairly elaborate ones making an attempt to solve for the full flow numerically 
to those where the near-field flow is solved numerically and a Kirchhoff method is 
used to find the far field, or even, in what is the most important approach, approximat- 
ing the near field flow with sound and then using some variation on Lighthill's 
acoustic analogy to find the radiated sound. This is the approach that is generally 
followed here. 
The commonly used sound radiation models are the monopole, the dipole, and 
the quadrupole. 
The monopole source effect, from an unsteady introduction of volume into the 
surrounding fluid, is the most efficient noise generator at low Mach numbers (typical 
of automobile flows). The next most efficient generator of sound at low Mach 
numbers is the dipole source, related to the unsteady application of forces on the 
fluid. Finally the least relevant source for automobile flows is the quadrupole, which 
results from internal stresses and turbulence inside the flow. 
The monopole, or unsteady volumetric addition, source is relevant for automo- 
biles, and a good example is the exhaust pipe volume addition. This (as well as the 
engine intake manifolds) is considered a primary monopole source and can be very 
effective in producing noise. Primary sources are dealt with in a high-priority basis 
during the development process so that a well-designed car will have these sources 
well minimized. However, secondary types of monopole sources can be very 
annoying and are not as carefully evaluated in many cases. Such is the case of leaks 
in the sealings 
of doors or unsteady addition of volume to the passenger 
compartment 
through some leak path. 
The dipole type of source results from unsteady pressures acting upon a rigid 
surface. Hence the separated turbulent flow impinging on a surface can be considered 
a dipole type of source. These types of sources are very characteristic due to the 


594 
GROUND 
VEHICLES 
large number of regions around an 
automobile where the flow is separated. Another 
type of dipole source results from the unsteady forces generated due to the von 
Karman vortex shedding in the wake of the antenna. 
The quadrupole source is caused by collisions of fluid elements and is typical 
of the turbulent shear layer of a jet. We will soon show that the ratio of quadrupole 
source strength to dipole source &en& is very small for automotive flows. Since 
dipole sources are invariably present in automotive aerodynamic noise, quadrupole- 
type sources can usually be ignored since they are comparatively very weak. 
Velocity Dependence and Scaling of Automotive Noise For the case of compact 
sources (the size of the source is small compared to the wavelength of the perturba- 
tion) we have that, for a monopole source, 
and for a typical velocity V and a length L the volume flow 0 
is proportional to VLZ. 
Approximating the derivative with an order-of-magnitude approach alat - 
V1L 
and introducing the intensity given by I = p2/2pc, 
we get 
For a dipole source we have 
The force is proportional to pU2L2, 
SO we find, for the intensity, 
Finally for a quadruple source, which can be thought of as equal and opposite 
dipole sources, the intensity can be shown to be 
If we divide these intensities, we find the ratio of the strengths. We find that the 
dipole source strength divided by the monopole source strength is proportional to 
the square of the Mach number. Similarly, the quadrupole source strength divided 
by the dipole source strength is proportional to the square of the Mach number. 
From this we find that for low-Mach-number flows if monopoles are present they 


14.4 SYSTEMS FOR GROUND VEHICLE EXPERIMENTS 
595 
will be the primary noise source. If not the monopoles, then the dipoles will be 
preponderant if present and quadrupoles will be relevant only if no monopoles or 
dipoles are present. 
A key factor regarding automobile aeroacoustic noise is the dependence of the 
sound pressure level (SPL) on velocity for different types of sources. It is known 
that the SPL of a simple monopole source is proportional to the fourth power of 
the velocity. Also it is known that for the dipole source the dependence is on the 
sixth power of the velocity. For the quadrupole 
it is the 
eight power. Since automobile 
aerodynamic noise is typically a combination of monopoles and dipoles, the depen- 
dence on velocity will be somewhere between the fourth and the sixth power of 
velocity (this fact has been confirmed experimentally). It is then obvious why 
aerodynamic noise becomes very relevant as velocities increase. Another important 
conclusion is that when making aeroacoustic measurements the velocity must be 
very closely controlled to ensure repeatability. This can be done in most modem 
wind tunnels but is nearly impossible 
on the road due to unstable winds that change 
the effective flow velocity. For this reason, noise measurements on the road are not 
used for development purposes and wind tunnel testing is of fundamental importance. 
Another effect of velocity is on the propagation of sound originated by separated 
flow phenomena or other dipole-type sources. The analysis can be camed with 
velocity or with the pressure coefficient. It can be shown that for a dipole type 
source we have 
where V is the local velocity, V, the free-stream velocity, and Cp 
the local pressure 
coefficient. Let us compare several regions subject to similar turbulent flow struc- 
tures. If the pressure coefficient is - 
1 in one region and zero in another, the region 
with lower Cp 
will generate a SPL that is 9 dB larger than for the other region, 
according to the sixth-power rule. If Cp 
= -2, which is not uncommon around the 
A-Pillar, the difference will be 14 dB. Moreover, at the stagnation point where 
Cp 
= 1 no sound will be generated. 
In a similar fashion, flow affected by an upstream separation region will generate 
less sound if its velocity is decreased. An example is the flow underneath the car 
that is slowed down further downstream as it passes through all kinds of protuber- 
ances. Even a reduction to three-quarters of the upstream velocity results in a 
decrease of 7.5 dB in radiated sound for a component in the flow. 
One of the main outcomes of this analysis to aeroacoustically efficient vehicle 
design is that the placement of geometrical characteristics that cause separation 
should be done in regions of lower speeds and higher pressures. Special care must 
be taken with add-on objects that are exposed to high velocities like antennas or 
rear-view mirrors. 


596 
GROUND VEHICLES 
Estimates of Z)pical Frequencies Some interesting information is obtained when 
one tries to estimate the frequencies involved in automotive aeroacoustics phenom- 
ena. For many noise sources the Strouhal number is of the order of unity. The 
Strouhal number relates the frequency of a sound source to the length and velocity 
scales associated with that source. The Strouhal number is defined as S
,
 
= 
fUD, 
where 
f 
is the frequency in her ti;^ the length scale of the source, and Vthe velocity 
scale of the source. If we consider the whole car, we have that with a velocity of 
30 m/s and a length of about 5 m we find that the frequency of the large-scale 
separation in the rear-wake region is of the order of 6 Hz. If we consider the wheel 
housings and underbody areas with length scales ranging from 10 to 50 cm, the 
resulting frequencies are 60-300 Hz. If we consider details on the exterior of the 
body ranging from 10 to 100 mm, the resulting frequencies are of the order of 
300-3000 Hz. Also it is known that the Strouhal number for a circular cylinder in 
the flow regime in study is approximately 0.2. Thus, given a flow velocity of 30 
m/s, a 4-mm-diameter radio antenna will produce a tonal noise at approximately 
1500 Hz. 
Automobile Aeroacoustic Sources Aerodynamic noise contributors can typically 
be grouped into three categories: 
aerodynamic noise due to the basic shape of the vehicle and exterior components 
such as outside rear-view mirrors, antennae, and others; 
noise due to flow over surface gaps such as around the doors; and 
noise due to leaks through seals. 
Separated-Flow Regions Most of the aerodynamic drag in automobiles is due to 
the large low-pressure separated region in the base of the body. However, this is 
not the most annoying source of dipole-type noise from the flow because the 
frequency of the sound is very low. Smaller features can cause more annoying 
sounds, such as the external rear-view mirrors. The wake flow of the mirror has 
some energy and is impinging 
on the front side windows. These windows are usually 
made of glass and placed close to the passenger's ears. This can often be the most 
annoying source of sound in an automobile. Some of the most relevant effects are 
presented below in more detail. 
The rear-view mirrors are placed in a very high turbulence and velocity flow 
and their design is an important part of the aerodynamic development of a new 
vehicle. The design accounts for the drag and lift forces produced and for the 
deposition of deposits on the side windows. The noise generated is then one of 
many parameters that have to be optimized along with the styling constraints, which 
can be stringent. However, and generally speaking, the rounding of the trailing 
edges of the mirror will have a positive effect in decreasing the noise generated in 
that region. In fact, any change that affects the size and direction of the wake can 
be very relevant. 
Another cause of high wind noise due to separation is the windshield wipers. 
The flow over the hood of most cars today has little or no flow separation, which 


14.4 SYSTEMS FOR GROUND VEHICLE EXPERIMENTS 
597 
results in a high velocity impinging flow on the wipers. The result is again a high- 
frequency noise close to the ears of the passengers. Solutions to this problem usually 
encompass a kick-up of the flow before it reaches the wipers or simply hiding the 
wipers in a recessed cavity below the hood. 
Yet another common source of annoying noise is the radio antennae. The process 
of von Karman vortex shedding that occurs is a well-known periodical phenomenon 
that occurs when a circular cylinder is exposed to flow at high enough Reynolds 
number. This results in a tonal noise that some manufacturers have tried to diminish 
by tripping the flow in order to prevent the formation of the von Karman street. 
Some solutions include wrapping a helical stake around the shaft of the antennae 
(much like in industrial chimneys), including part of the antennae in a sleeve or 
boot, or varying the diameter of the antennae in a stepped fashion. 
Finally the existence of roof racks or other objects of that nature will cause flow 
separation andlor tonal noise of the type generated by a cylindrical antenna. These 
objects are of a very practical nature, and usually the solution to decreasing the 
noise generated is to trip the flow to separate before reaching these objects. But a 
specific solution depends on the geometry of the protuberance involved. 
Note that even if the automobile was completely streamlined and no flow separa- 
tion would occur there would still be noise, for the flow has a Reynolds number in 
the order of lo6 
or lo7 
and the boundary layer that would develop along the surface 
would be turbulent and would generate noise. 
Cavity Noise Two types of noises originate from flow through a cavity: through 
the big cavities (e.g., open windows and sunroofs) and through the small cavities 
(door and panel gaps). 
The flow through large cavities can generate trailing-edge noise or leading-edge 
noise. A critical and very undesirable situation occurs when a disturbance is created 
at the leading edge. This disturbance is then convected to the trailing edge and an 
acoustic wave is produced. Under the right condition this acoustic wave is propagated 
upstream and triggers another disturbance at the leading edge, and the process 
continues to get stronger and stronger. This acoustic wave can then trigger a standing 
wave in the passenger compartment that is felt as a strong low-frequency throb. 
This can be extremely annoying. The usual way of dealing with this problem in 
sunroofs is by tripping a kick-up of the flow at the leading edge. Regarding side 
windows such solutions are not as easy to implement so the initial design must take 
this effect into account. The positioning of the rear-view mirrors or partially limiting 
the opening of the rear windows can help minimize the problem. 
The flow through small cavities can potentially be very annoying since the 
resulting sound is usually a high-frequency tonal sound. Also many modem cars 
have rear-view mirrors that are designed to fold in case of a collision, and there 
are additional gaps in these regions, which can be very effective in noise generation 
since they are exposed to a very high speed turbulent flow. The solution to this 
type of problem is usually the introduction of additional acoustic sealing in the 
exposed cavities. 


598 
GROUND VEHICLES 
Leaks A leak is a monopole type of source and hence it is not uncommon for a 
source of this type to dominate the noise generation. A leaking seal, for instance, 
can increase interior noise by as much as 10 dB. Common places for leaks are the 
window seals, the movable window seals, and the Axed side-window seals. The 
existence of a leak can increase the interior sound level by both the very monopole 
characteristics 
of unsteady mass iiijection and by allowing sound propagation without 
interference of the structure of the car, which would normally introduce a significant 
transmission loss. 
The two types of noise source mechanisms are represented in Figure 14.19. In 
the first case there is path for flow to go through the sealing region and there will 
be mass injection. If the mass injection is unsteady, we will have a monopole type 
of source. However, even if the injection is steady, the flow will separate and be 
turbulent in region 3 giving rise to dipole type of sources in the separation region 
and quadruple type inside the turbulent flow. In the second 
case sound is transmitted 
through a seal even if there is no flow. If there is a high enough pressure P(t) on 
the outside that will move the seal back and forth, noise will be transmitted. This 
movement will be resisted by the seals' stiffness, mass, and damping. The best 
solution (as expected from analogy with the wall case) is found to be to have 
multiple seals rather than to try to increase the mass or stiffness of a single seal. It 
is experimentally found that doubling the stifmess or mass of a seal will give a 
3-dB increase in attenuation whereas using a double seal can double this attenuation. 
Underbody and Wheels The extremely turbulent and separated flow between a 
car and the ground as well as around the wheels is responsible for noise generation 
that is then transmitted through the lower parts of a car or even propagated around 
the transmitted through side panels. However, due to the complexity of the flow 
Leaks with net flow passing seal 
External 
mow> 
vl@fse 
Acoustic transmission w
i
t
h
 
no net flow passing seal 
Seal moves 
in response to 
pressure 
fluctuation 
FIGURE 14.19 Scheme of typical leak system. 


14.4 SYSTEMS FOR GROUND VEHICLE EXPERIMENTS 
599 
involved, there is not much information available or many studies carried on in 
this area. 
Analogy with Aircraft 
Noise Many aspects of aircraft noise are still completely 
understood. This is even more so in automotive aeroacoustics. Figure 14.20 shows 
schematically the various stages of development of experiment and analysis. Auto- 
motive aemacoustics is still operating in stages 1 and 2. 
Exploratory experiments to pin down noise sources are being conducted that are 
looking at very idealized models of these sources and in more advanced cases doing 
phenomenological experiments on particular identified generic source types and 
looking at the first concepts and analyses for predicting and reducing the noise from 
them. We are still far from having design concept verification 
experiments 
or specific 
design ideas and analyses used, even on a development basis. We have quite a long 
way to go before we will be doing developmental tests for these problems. 
Experimental Methods Measurement of automobile aerodynamic noise is usually 
performed by placing the vehicle in a wind tunnel and placing a number of micro- 
phones at the passengers' head positions. Then the wind tunnel is run at moderate 
speeds and the microphones are used to get a time average of the SPL in the 
Experiment and Andyuls 
stlse 1 
Stage 2 
Stage 3 
Stage 4 
Idealized 
models 
1 
1 
FIGURE 14.20 
Experiment and analysis scheme. 


6
0
0
 
GROUND 
VEHICLES 
automobile interior. Typically, the signal is averaged over a period of 60 s or so. 
Once a baseline level for the automobile aerodynamic noise interior SPL has been 
measured, one can use trial-and-error techniques to see which specific components 
and regions contribute more to the total SPL. This procedure can be quite time 
consuming but the results are usually good. 
Instead of a simple microphon5, an artificial head is commonly used. The artificial 
dummy is shaped after a human body and different microphones are placed in the 
artificial ears. The artificial head then gives results that agree better with what a 
human occupant will hear. One can then analyze the signal on-line or record it for 
playback. The playback possibility allows for a panel of listeners to subjectively 
evaluate different aerodynamic noises helping the design engineers correlate the 
objective values with the subjective human perception of the noise. 
Role of Psychoacoustics Psychoacoustics is the study of the human response to 
acoustic stimuli. 
Sound quality applies psychoacoustic principles to the study of how humans 
perceive sounds from various sound sources such as automobiles. The application 
of sound quality to automobiles is as follows. The first step is to obtain sound 
recordings preferentially with an artificial head setting of microphones. The second 
step is to conduct subjective evaluations of the perception of these sounds by a panel 
of listeners. 
The subjective 
evaluation step is crucial 
for without good subjective 
data 
the correlation with the objective data will be poor and hence little is gained from 
the experimental measurements. The third step is the objective characterization of 
the sounds in study. Psychoacoustics metrics such as loudness, sharpness, and 
roughness as well as narrow-band spectra, one-third-octave spectra, and other mea- 
surements are introduced and can help in categorizing the subjective data. The final 
step in the process is to correlate the subjective impressions with the characteristics 
of the sound that underlie these impressions. If a strong correlation is achieved, the 
design process can be much improved if sources can be related to effects. 
Quieter Wind 
Tunnels The reduction of wind tunnel background noise is one of 
the single most important actions that can be taken to improve the results obtained 
from automotive aeroacoustic measurements. There are several wind tunnels in 
operation today that are specially fitted for aeroacoustic developments. Examples 
of tunnels especially designed for this purpose are the DNW wind tunnel in Holland, 
the BMW Technik and AUDI acoustic wind tunnels in Germany, and the Nissan 
and Honda acoustic wind tunnels in Japan. Examples of tunnels that were not 
originally designed for acoustic work but that have recently been retrofitted to lower 
background noise are 
the IVK wind tunnel of the University of Stuttgart in Germany, 
the Lockheed low-speed wind tunnel in Marietta, Georgia, and the Pininfarina wind 
tunnel in Italy. 
There are number of actions that can be taken to decrease the background noise 
level. As one would expect, one major source of noise is the fan. Replacing the fan 
with a low rotation speed design can decrease the noise level considerably. Another 
important step is the treatment of the walls of the wind tunnel circuit with absorption 


14.4 SYSTEMS FOR 
GROUND 
VEHICLE EXPERIMENTS 
601 
material. The IVK tunnel uses a newly developed (and very expensive) treatment 
on the walls that is very effective. In the design stage of a wind tunnel an open 
section type of tunnel is attractive because the limiting walls are outside of the flow, 
which allows for a very efficient wall treatment to be used. 
Exterior Automobile Aerodynamic Noise Measurements A major application of 
exterior noise measurements data is the prediction of the effect of that noise on 
outside observers. However, there are other reasons why these measurements are 
important in an attempt to work on interior acoustics problems. These are the so- 
called indirect measurements. While the correlation between the exterior radiated 
noise and the interior SPL may not be loo%, the exterior measurements can indicate 
important qualitative changes. An immediate application is the use of microphones 
to evaluate the acoustic behavior of exterior rear-view mirrors in an early stage of 
development when clay models are being used. Outside microphones can be placed 
in the flow, in which case a nose cone must be inserted to allow the flow to pass 
smoothly over the microphone, minimizing the self noise caused by separation 
phenomena in the microphone itself. Or they can be placed outside the flow (in an 
open test-section wind tunnel), in which case the self noise is eliminated but a 
correction for the effect of the shear layer must he introduced. 
Imaging and Source Localization Localization of sources is usually accomplished 
using arrays of microphones or special-purpose microphones in reflectors called 
"directional microphones." In the next paragraphs these techniques are described 
in greater detail. 
Microphone Arrays Arrays of microphones together with the appropriate 
software 
for signal processing are a unique tool for locating and identifying individual sound 
sources on either stationary or moving bodies. A great deal of experience in using 
microphone arrays has been gained during studies of sound sources on high-speed 
trains, aircraft 
engines, and engine jets as well as in making 
directional measurements 
of noise emission by industrial machinery and processes over large distances. Arrays 
of flush-mounted microphones may be used to measure and evaluate surface pressure 
fields on surfaces exposed to flow. Finally, array technology is also used to locate 
and identify sound sources on motor vehicles. l b o  
data reduction techniques are 
commonly used: (1) evaluation in the time domain by summing the microphone 
signals and the synthetic antenna and (2) spatial transformation of sound fields 
(STSF) based on Fourier transforms of the correlation function of the array elements. 
These two processes are described next. 
Microphone Array: Time Domain Measuring Principle The principle is here ex- 
plained by refemng to a linear array of equally spaced microphones. Signals from 
the microphones are digitized in real time and recorded for subsequent analysis. 
The analysis is carried out by accounting for the propagation times for sound waves 
from any selected point to reach each of the microphones. This procedure is repeated 


602 
GROUND 
VEHICLES 
for each source position of interest. The signals from each microphone are summed 
according to 
where N 
is the number of microphones,pXt + 
tpi) 
is the sound pressure at microphone 
i at time t + t, (t being the time at which sound is emitted at the focal point and 
t
,
.
 the propagation time from the focal point to the microphone position), gi 
is a 
weighting factor, and hi is the amplitude correction for microphone i. 
Spatial Transjonnation of Sound FieMs Spatial transformation of sound fields is 
a Fourier-transform-related technique that enables a description of the sound field 
of a source to be obtained within a given solid angle. It involves a scan using an 
array of transducers (typically eight) over a planar surface close to the source of 
investigation. From the cross spectra measured during the scan a representation of 
the sound field is extracted. Any power descriptor of the near field (intensity, sound 
pressure, etc.) can be investigatedby means of near-field acoustic holography (NAH) 
while the more distant field can be determined by application of Helmholtz's inte- 
gral equation. 
In the automotive industry, STSF has been implemented in testing a variety of 
sources such as engines in test cells, whole vehicles, or gear boxes. It was not 
initially used in wind tunnels due to microphone self-induced noise problems and 
wind tunnel background noise. However, it is currently beginning to be used by 
some automotive companies in their wind tunnels. 
Acoustic Mirrors One of the systems developed for sound source location is the 
acoustic mirror telescope. Two versions are 
commonly used: one for static tests and 
wind tunnel tests and one for full-scale measurements of sound sources of vehicles 
passing by the mirror. Figure 14.21 illustrates the principle of the acoustic mirror 
telescope. 
The concave mirror shown on the left side is a section 
of an ellipsoid of revolution. 
It has two focal points that are 
marked by a small circle. A microphone is positioned 
at the focal point close to the mirror. Sound waves emanating from a source at the 
FIGURE 14.21 Acoustic mirror. 


14.4 SYSTEMS FOR 
GROUND 
VEHICLE EXPERIMENTS 
603 
other focal point are focused upon the microphone by reflection at the elliptical 
mirror surface. The intensity produced by this source is hence greatly enhanced as 
compared to its free-field value. Sound waves radiated from other locations are 
concentrated by the mirror upon other image points. The elliptical contour is chosen 
instead of a spherical or parabolic shape because it produces the best imaging effect 
in the vicinity of the focal points. In contrast to one-dimensional microphone arrays 
the acoustic mirror can resolve sound sources not only in one direction but in all 
directions normal to its axis. The spatial resolution of the acoustic mirror is limited 
only by diffraction of the sound waves at the edge of the mirror. When the acoustic 
mirror is used in wind tunnel tests, some additional corrections have to be applied 
to measure data. The apparent source position is downstream of the actual position 
because of the convection of the sound waves by the wind tunnel flow. Also, in the 
case of an open section wind tunnel, the turbulent free shear layer will cause an 
additional scattering of the sound waves. In this case the width of the image of a 
point source of sound increases with increasing flow velocity. 
Computational Approaches to Aeroacoustics A complementary approach to solv- 
ing for the aeroacoustic field around the automobile is a computational approach. 
Computational aeroacoustics techniques for aerodynamic noise prediction can be 
grouped into four main approaches: direct solution of the Navier-Stokes equation, 
perturbation techniques, Lighthill's acoustic analogy, and Kirchhoff's methbd. 
The first method makes use of NavierStokes equations to describe noise uroduc- 
- 
tion and propagation. In this way, the methodologies used in fluid dynamics can 
also be used in aeroacoustics, but there are some important aspects to be considered: 
(a) The time dimension must be introduced. 
(b) Pressure fluctuations are five orders of magnitude smaller than mean values. 
(c) Interesting frequencies are higher than unsteady aerodynamic frequencies. 
(d) Long-time solution is required to obtain a correct spectrum. 
In view of these aspects, a computational fluid dynamics (CFD) technique for 
noise prediction and propagation should satisfy the following requisites: 
- high accuracy numerical schemes both in time and space, 
low numerical dissipation and diffusion, and 
- nonreflective boundary conditions. 
Moreover long-time resolution, that is small time steps, and a fine grid over the 
volume around the body (not only near it, as in aerodynamic calculations) are 
required. Because of resulting long calculation time, this method is only used for 
low-Reynolds-number flows. 
Perturbation techniques reduce overall calculation time by solving separately for 
the incompressible and acoustic parts of the flow using two different grids. This 
method is based on the hypothesis that viscous effects are negligible with respect 
to acoustic fluctuations. 


604 
GROUND 
VEHICLES 
Methods based on acoustic analogy theory also allow the splitting of the problem 
into two parts: prediction of the sources and subsequent sound propagation using 
Ffowcs-Williams-Hawkings 
equation valid for cases with solid walls similar to the 
ones encountered in the automotive field. The advantage is that Ffowcs-Williams- 
Hawkings equation is an explicit equation that does not require iterative solvers. The 
main problem is the prediction ofnoise sources. Sometimes they can be analytically 
calculated, as in the case of open rotors. But other times they have to be calculated 
by means of suitable CFD techniques. However, in this case a sufficient number of 
grid points for CFD simulation is only needed near the body and dissipation and 
diffusion problems are less important. 
Methods based on Kirchhoff's theory are similar to the previous ones, but sound 
sources have to be placed and computed on a virtual surface around the body. The 
advantage is that there are only surface integrals. However, in the case of low 
Mach numbers (typical of automotive flows) the volume integrals in the Ffowcs- 
Williams-Hawkings equation can be neglected. Moreover, Kirchhoff's methods 
require derivatives of fluid dynamics quantities on the virtual surface. 
Aeroacoustics in the Automotive Field In automotive applications the fact that the 
flow velocity is very small compared to the velocity of sound allows a simplification 
of the inhomogeneous term Q, representing aerodynamic noise sources in the aeroa- 
coustic wave equation: 
In order to understand what kind of simplifications are allowed, we need to 
analyze the source terms included. We previously described monopole, dipole, and 
quadrupole sound radiation models. These pressure fluctuations are solutions of 
F
f
o
w
c
s
-
W
i
l
l
i
a
m
s
-
H
a
w
k
i
n
g
s
 
equation (inhomogeneous wave equation in the pres- 
ence of solid surfaces) and can be written as 
dS 
(dipole) 
4aaxi , 
~ 1 1  
- 
M cos 01 
where xi 
are the observer coordinates, y, 
the source coordinates, L the emission time, 
L
,
 the retarded time, Ti, Lighthill's stress tensor, R the distance between the source 
and the observer, M the Mach number, 0 the angle between R and the velocity K 
pa and p, the density and pressure of the undisturbed medium, V, the velocity 
components, .and n, 
the components of the local normal to the body. 


14.4 SYSTEMS FOR GROUND VEHICLE EXPERIMENTS 
605 
The analysis of relative magnitude performed above is again useful. In the 
presence of dipole or monopole sources the quadrupoles are negligible and the 
volume integrals vanish. Also, the dipole sources are obtained from the calculation 
of the pressure fluctuations at the wall p - 
po. This means that we can couple a 
CFD technique with an acoustic analogy for vehicle external noise prediction. This 
process is described next. 
The simplifications above directed the approach to the acoustic analogy. The 
approach is as follows: Through a suitable CFD solver aeroacoustics sources are 
calculated and through the Ffowcs-Williams-Hawkings equation noise around the 
body is calculated. Only dipole sources are considered, for the unsteady mass 
addition term regards sources that are expected to be well dealt with in the design 
process and hence can be neglected. 
In the first phase of the process a CFD solver is used to output the pressure 
fluctuations at each grid point over the body surfaces that are representative of 
equivalent aeroacoustic dipole sources. In the second phase, the Ffowcs-WiUiams- 
Hawkings equation is solved neglecting the quadrupole term. The following condi- 
tions must be satisfied: 
low Mach number, 
viscous distribution negligible with respect to pressure, 
- the body moving in a steady medium, and 
- the observer located outside the source region (i.e., boundaq layers, separated 
flow, or wakes). 
The observer should also move at the same speed as the body since we wish to 
reproduce the conditions of a wind tunnel test. The acoustic solver reads in wall 
pressure histories from the CFD solver and computes acoustic pressure fluctuations 
at each observer location. Pressure-time histories output by the acoustic solver are 
then translated into frequency domain through fast Fourier transforms ( m s )  
in 
order to get dominating frequencies and sound pressure levels. An example of such 
a calculation is given by Kumarasamy, Korpus, and bar lo^.'^ 
Much is yet to be done in the field of experimental and computational aeroacous- 
tics. The current stage of development is far from being very useful in terms of a 
rational design methodology, but in the next years greater developments 
are expected 
as the interest in the field grows and so do the human and material resources devoted 
- 
to it. However, for now the wind tunnel remains as the most important tool to 
evaluate and improve the aeroacoustic field around an automobile. 
Other Issues 
Other issues that must be kept in mind when it comes to wind tunnel testing have 
to do with phenomenon that exists on a real road condition but is not simulated in 
the wind tunnel. On the road a vehicle encounters a highly distorted flow with 
rotation that is unsteady and turbulent. The scales of turbulence are often of the 
dimension of the vehicle itself. Passing vehicles and wind gusts induce vibrations 


606 
GROUND 
VEHICLES 
and aerodynamic forces that are not experienced in a wind tunnel. Le Good et al.= 
present an interesting comparison between aerodynamic coefficients obtained from 
road testing and wind tunnel testing. A coastdown methodology was used; for details 
on the methodology and on the configurations used the reader is referred to the 
original paper. However, it is relevant to point out that in general the drag values 
generated from the coastdown methodology were higher than the ones obtained in 
the wind tunnel. Also it was apparent from the results that drag variation from small 
configuration changes were essentially the same for the two techniques. EakeS6 
presents a similar study using an improved coastdown methodology and arrives at 
different results. The coastdown and wind tunnel drag values are found to be in 
great accordance. This improved coastdown method is however much more time 
and work consuming, reducing 
its efficiency. 
The results 
from the standard coastdown 
technique produce significant differences from the wind tunnel measurements, just 
as in the study by Le 
Good et al.25 
Climatic factors such as radiation from the sun and the consequent heating up 
of the road surface, radiation from the road surface and conditions of snow and rain 
that change the flow around the body, and possible irregularities on the road that 
add vibrations to the car that are not simulated in a wind tunnel, all make road 
testing extremely important in the design program. The wind tunnel data is only a 
part of what is necessary to make decisions in the design process. 
Yet another commonly overlooked aspect of wind tunnel testing of automobiles is 
the effect of the longitudinal position of the vehicle in the test section. Gany et al." 
performed a study involving 
flat plates and automobile 
shapes in three different wind 
tunnels. The effect of longitudinal position changes was studied. It was found that the 
drag decreased as the bodies were moved back closer to the diffuser. This effect is 
most probably due to the change in base pressure as the body is moved further toward 
the diffuser region. The authors suggest that this effect may contribute 
to some of the 
lack of correlation between different tunnels. In particular, lower drag was measured 
in shorter, open jet wind tunnels when compared to longer, closed section tunnels. 
Advanced Experimental Techniques 
A number of experimental techniques can be categorized as advanced techniques 
because they are not extensively used in automotive aerodynamics. This is because 
of both cost and setup difficulties but most of all because the results obtained are 
usually not good enough to justify the effort required to obtain them. It is believed, 
however, that as the technological level of automobile aerodynamics laboratories 
increases some of these techniques will become common and will be widely used. 
. 
Examples are laser Doppler anemometry, pressure-sensitive paint, and particle image 
velocimetry. Durst et aLZ8 
present a good discussion and results of an experimental 
campaign using laser-based anemometry, flow visualization, and frontal area mea- 
surement. The reader is referred to more specialized publications 
on these techniques. 
REF'ERENCES AND NOTES 
1. Hucho, W
:
 H., Ed., Aerodynamics of Road Vehicles, from Fluid Mechanics to Vehicle 
Engineering, 4th ed., SAE International, Warrendale, PA, 1998. 


REFERENCES AND NOTES 
607 
2. Volkert, R., and Kohl, W., "The New Ford Aerodynamic Wind Tunnel in Europe," 
SAE 
Paper 870248, Feb. 1987. 
3. Nilsson, L., and Berndtsson, A,, "The New Volvo Multipurpose Wind Tunnel," SAE 
Paper 870249, Feb. 1987. 
4. Ogata, N., Lida, N., and Fujii, Y., "Nissan's Low-Noise Full Scale Wind Tunnel," SAE 
Paper 870250, Feb. 1987. 
5. Hucho, W. H., Ed., Aerodynamics o
f
 Road Vehicles, Butterworths, London, 1987, Chap- 
ter 10. 
6. Ibid., Chapter 4. 
7. Cogotti, A,. "Experimental 
Techniques 
for the Aerodynamic Development 
of Convertible 
Cars," SAE Paper 920347, Feb. 1992. 
8. Federation Internationale 
de L'automobile, 8 Place de La Concorde, 75008 Paris, France, 
URL: www.fia.com 
9. Championship Auto Racing Teams, Inc., 755 West Big Beaver Road, Suite 800, Troy, 
MI 48084, URL: 
www.cart.com 
10. lndy Racing League, 4565 W. 16th Street, Indianapolis, IN 46222, URL: 
www.indyracingleague.com 
11. National Association for Stock Car Auto Racing, Dayton Beach, FL, URL: 
www.nascar.com 
12. Zabat, M., Stabile, N., Frascaroli, S., and Browand, F., "Drag Forces Experienced by 2, 
3, and 4 Vehicle Platoons at Close Spacings," 
SAE Paper 950632, Feb. 1995. 
13. See web site http://www.rtri.or.jp. 
14. Klemin, A., "A Belt Method of Representing the Ground," J. Aeromut. Sci., 
1, 198- 
199, 1934. 
15. Wiedemann, J., "Some Basic Investigations into the Principles of Ground Simulation 
Techniques in Automotive Wind Tunnels," 
SAE Paper 890369, International Congress 
and Exposition, Detroit, MI, Mar. 1989. 
16. Vagt, J. D., and Wolff, B., "Special Design Features and Their Influences on Flow 
Quality: Test Results from Porsche's New Wind Tunnel," paper presented at AutoTech 
1987, London, Dec. 1987. 
17. Eckext, W., Singer, N., and Vagt, J. D., "The Porsche Wind Tunnel Floor-Boundary Layer 
Control-
A Comparison with Road Data and Results from Moving Belt," SAE Paper 
920346, Feb. 1992. 
18. Cam, G. W., and Eckert, W., "A Further Evaluation of the Ground-Plane Suction 
Method for Ground Simulation in Automotive Wind Tunnels," SAE Paper 940418, 
Feb. 1994. 
19. Mercker, E., and Wiedemann, J., "Comparison 
of Different Ground SimulationTechniques 
for Use in Automotive Wind Tunnels," SAE Paper 900321, Feb. 1990. 
20. Hackett, J. E., Baker, J. B., Williams, J. E., and Wallis, S. B., "On the Influence of 
Ground Movement and Wheel Rotation in Tests on Modem Car Shapes," SAE Paper 
870245, Feb. 1987. 
21. Hackett, J. E., Williams, J. E., Baker, J. B., and Wallis, S. B., "On the Influence of 
Ground Movement and Wheel Rotation in Tests on Modem Car Shapes," SAE Paper 
870245, Feb. 1987. 
22. Coggotti, A,, "Ground Effect Simulation for Full Scale Cars in the Pininfarina Wind 
Tunnel," SAE Paper 950996, 1995. 


608 
GROUND VEHICLES 
23. Watkins, S., and Saunders, J. W., "Turbulence Experienced by Road Vehicles under 
Normal Driving Conditions," SAE Paper 950997, Feb. 1995. 
24. Kumarasamy, 
S., Korpus, R., and Barlow, 
J
.
,
 
"Computation of Noise Due to the Flow Over 
a Circular Cylinder," 
Proceedings of Second Computational Aeroacoustics Workshop on 
Benchmark Problems, NASA Conference Publication 3352, Langley Research Center, 
.- 
Hampton, VA, June 1997. 
25. Le Good, G., Howell, J., Passmore, M., and Gamy, K., "On-Road Aerodynamic Drag 
Measurements Compared with W~nd 
Tunnel Data," 
SAE Paper 950627, Feb. 1995. 
26. Eaker, G., "Wind Tunnel to Road Aerodynamic Drag Correlation," SAE Paper 880250, 
Feb. 1988. 
27. Garry, K., Wallis, S., 
Cooper, K., Fediw, A., and Wildsen, D., "The Effect on Aerodynamic 
Drag 
of the Longitudinal Position of a Road Vehicle Model in a Wind Tunnel Test Section," 
Proceedings of SAE International Congress and Exposition, Detroit, MI, Feb. 1994. 
28. Durst, F., Buchheim, R., Beeck, M., Hentschel, W., 
Piatek, R., and Schwabe, D., "Ad- 
vanced Experimental Techniques and Their Application to Automotive Aerodynamics," 
SAE Paper 870244, Feb. 1987. 


13 Marine Vehicles 
At first thought, it may seem that wilid tunnel work for marine vehicles would be 
primarily focused on sail rigs for sailing boats. These are the subjects of wind tunnel 
tests, but the majority of wind tunnel tests for marine vehicles address hydrodynamic 
questions. Chapter 1 can be consulted for basic data on water and air. The Navier- 
Stokes equations are considered an accurate mathematical model for the behavior 
of both a
i
r
 and water. The density of water remains essentially constant until the 
pressure drops sufficiently low so that cavitation will occur. Air is compressible, 
of course, but the behavior is very little affected for Mach numbers below about 
0.3, as discussed in Chapter 1. So air flow at low Mach number gives a completely 
satisfactory model of the behavior of water flow. Tests conducted in wind tunnels 
are often easier and more productive than equivalent tests in water facilities. 
The boundary conditions for the flow problem of interest must be modeled 
properly, as is the case for any engineering test. This rules out wind tunnel tests 
for situations where free-surface effects play a dominant role. These are 
the domain 
of towing tanks. However, underwater portions of surface ships such as the append- 
ages of sailing boats as well as hydrodynamics and hydroacoustics of submarines 
are common subjects for wind tunnel experiments to support design decisions. Wind 
tunnel experiments can also be useful for studying wind loading that acts on the 
portion of surface ships that is above the water. 
This chapter will survey the most frequent wind tunnel experiments for marine 
vehicles at a level appropriate for the conceptual design of the test apparatus and 
experimental programs. While the experiments are in themselves somewhat unique, 
the experimental procedures follow the same logic as those for purely atmospheric 
vehicles. Experience has shown that these procedures, when modified appropriately 
and interpreted correctly, can generate a wealth of valuable information for the 
design and analysis of marine vehicles. 
15.1 SURFACE VESSELS: ABOVE THE WATER 
Most marine vehicles operate at the interface of the a
i
r
 and water; consequently, 
wind tunnel experiments for marine vehicles involve examining phenomena both 
above and below the surface. Those occurring above the water, with the exception 
of those generated by sails, will be the subject of this section. A discussion of 
experiments on sails is given in Section 15.4. 


610 
MARINE VEHICLES 
Ship Wind Loads 
Wind acting on the topsides and superstructure of ships can generate considerable 
loads that frequently must be accounted for in the design process. When the ship 
is intact, these forces affect the sizing of propulsion machinery and maneuvering 
thrusters and mooring and berthing arrangements. In the case of precision-maneu- 
vered ships, such as minesweepers, buoy tenders, or mineral exploration drillships, 
identifying and counteracting these forces and the forces created by water currents 
and waves can determine the selection of the propulsion machinery and related 
controls. When a ship is damaged, these forces can determine the very survival of 
the ship and its crew. While hull subdivision enables ships to sustain flooding of 
significant portions of their volume, the ship is almost always left in a state of 
diminished stability. So the immediate problem of sinking is replaced by the only 
slightly less catastrophic possibility of capsizing. An excellent technical discussion 
of ship maneuvering and stability issues is presented by Lewis.' This reference also 
defines the terminology used in this and other sections. 
A good overview of published results for wind loads is presented by McTaggart 
and Sa~age.~ 
There is a fair amount of published data for typical intact merchant 
ship forms exposed to beam winds but not much published data for damaged or 
heeled ship forms or data for ship fonns at other heading angles. 
Like the wind ashore, the wind sweeps over the ocean in a thick boundary layer. 
This boundary layer creates a velocity distribution with respect to height above the 
surface that obeys the approximate relationship? 
Where U(z) is the wind velocity at height z meters above the ocean surface, 
U(10 m) is the wind velocity at 10 m above the ocean surface, and a is a constant 
that varies between 0.118 and 0.125 depending on the local wind characteristics. 
The best value for most locations is 0.125. 
This velocity distribution needs to be modeled in a wind tunnel experiment. The 
most common solution is to introduce blockage in the airstream upstream from the 
model, which will create a similar velocity distribution in the test section. This 
technique is identical to that used in experiments on buildings and other ground 
structures exposed to similar conditions. There is a variation in the planetary bound- 
ary layer profiles for marine conditions, open plains, urban cityscapes, and so on. 
The distribution of velocity and turbulence levels in the vicinity of the model should 
be measured prior to testing to ensure they match full scale to the degree required 
for the objectives of the experiments. The topic of atmospheric boundary layer 
simulation is discussed in Chapter 16. 
A ship model can create significant blockage, particularly when tested in beam 
winds. The chapter on blockage corrections should be consulted for guidelines 
regarding blockage. As a rule of thumb, the model size should be such that when 
the model is at 90" yaw the bow and stem remain no less than half a ship length 


15.1 SURFACE VESSELS: 
ABOVE 
THE WATER 
611 
from the tunnel walls. This leads to a guide that the model length is to be no greater 
than half the tunnel floor width. 
Some elements of the superstructures of ships have shapes for which the flow 
can be very Reynolds number dependent. We have discussed this issue in Chapter 
8 in a broader context. There are 
typically elements with curved surfaces including 
circular cylinders (e.g., cylindrical exhaust stacks or hemispherical cargo tanks) for 
which the separation locations vary significantly with Reynolds number. Since most 
ship model experiments are necessarily done at relatively small scale, the Reynolds 
numbers achieved in the wind tunnel experiments are much smaller than full-scale 
values. Attempts must be made to obtain separation locations on the elements that are 
representative of full-scale behavior. Among these means are increasing roughness 
of 
portions of the model with sand or the like, attaching trip wires or other devices to 
fix separation points, or distorting the model scale. Each test program should include 
a preliminary set of runs to identify portions of the model that have these strongly 
Reynolds dependent characteristics and insure that they are modeled adequately to 
meet the test objectives. This is typically a greater issue for ship studies than is the 
case for buildings only because typical building geometries are more angular, and, 
therefore, practically fix the separation locations independent of Reynolds number. 
Experiments of this type are ideally suited for the floor of the wind tunnel test 
section. The model should be mounted in such a manner that the forces experienced 
by the floor surrounding the model are not measured and in such a way that no air 
can pass between the floor of the test section and the bottom of the model. If several 
combinations of list, sinkage, and trim are being investigated, several models will 
be required. In some instances as shown by Deakin4 
and SNAME3 the model of the 
hull is mounted in water or some other viscous liquid that will not transfer wind 
loads to the model. The test rig described by Deakin is discussed in more detail in 
the section on sail testing. A typical mounting arrangement for a ship in the intact 
condition is shown in Figure 15.1. 
It is important to ensure that the critical conditions for the ship are included in 
an experimental program. For example, in the case of an intact ship the draft and 
consequently the exposed freeboard of a ship can change by as much as 30 ft or 
more, depending on whether the ship is in a loaded or an unloaded condition. This 
can represent as much as 50% of the freeboard. If the experimental program is 
intended to obtain information to use for sizing a bow thruster or determining the 
wind loads on a mooring buoy or anchor chains, then the maximum freeboard 
(minimum draft) condition should be included in the configuration matrix. However, 
if the data are being generated for a computer simulation of the ship transiting a 
canal in a loaded condition, then the minimum freeboard (maximum draft) condition 
will be more important. Care should be exercised when simulating damaged ships 
as well. A damaged or foundering ship can assume an almost infinite combination 
of sinkage, list, and trim angles and the experimental matrix of configurations 
should include those that are expected to be the "worst case" for the problem 
being investigated. 
In crowded navy anchorages, groups of ships are frequently moored together 
rather than individually. This has led to the conduct of wind tunnel simulations 


612 
MARINE VEHICLES 
FIGURE 15.1 Ship model for determining wind loads. (Photograph courtesy of the Glenn 
L. Martin Wind Tunnel.) 
of groups of moored ships? The models in these experiments were individually 
instrumented for longitudind and lateral forces and yaw moments. 
Stack Gas Dispersion 
With the exception of nuclear reactors, all ship main propulsion machinery requires 
air for combustion and releases exhaust gases into the atmosphere. The exhaust 
gases are usually at higher temperature and can contain corrosive combustion by- 
products such as sulfuric acid that need to be dispersed clear of the ship. These 
stack gases can affect operation of the ship by, for example, obscuring vision or 
asphyxiating the crew. Wind tunnel experiments are frequently used to investigate 
these design issues. 
The simulated intake and exhaust ducts need to obey certain scaling laws for the 
tests to be meaningful. Consider the condition when the vessel is underway moving 
forward with the velocity vector in the plane of symmetry for the vessel. This 
situation is shown in Figure 15.2. If viscous forces are neglected, the variables 
involved in the flow dynamics are as follows: 
p
.
 = density of ambient air 
p, = density of exhaust gas 
V = speed of vessel relative to ambient air 
W = speed of exhaust gas relative to vessel 


. 
- .
-
 . - 
- 
15.1 SURFACE VESSELS: ABOVE THE WATER 
613 
Exhaust Velocity, W, which is inclined at angle, 8, to the horizon 
FIGURE 15.2 Illustration for considering plume dynamics. 
0 = initial angle of exhaust gas velocity (W) relative to the vessel speed I
!
 
A = vessel reference area, taken to be frontal area 
D= initial exhaust stream "diameter" equal to m, 
where A
,
 is the ex- 
haust area 
g = local gravitational field acceleration 
If the geometry of the vessel is assumed to be fixed, and nondimensional groups 
are 
formed, the following similarity parameters are found: 
1. 0, initial angle to the mean flow direction 
2. p,VZlp,W2, initial plume momentum = P
,
,
 
3. ppWD2/p,VA, plume mass flow rate = Pmd, 
4. ApgDlp,W2, plume buoyancy = Pbuoyr 
and Ap = p, - 
p
,
 
Note that we are assuming relative insensitivity to Reynolds number. The Rey- 
nolds number would be an additional parameter if viscosity were included in our 
list of variables. 
To obtain dynamic similarity in two flows, say the full-scale and the wind tunnel 
model-scale flows, the values of the above groups need to be the same for the two 
flows. This is not practical in most cases, so we must choose the groups that are 
most important for the particular situation under consideration. 
In many cases the nondimensional group called "plume buoyancy" 
in the preced- 
ing discussion is found to be quite small for the full-scale ship. This indicates that 
the buoyancy forces are small with respect to the momentum forces and thus will 
have a minimal effect on the near-field dynamics 
of the plumelvessel flow interaction 
although buoyancy will have a significant effect on the eventual plume motion far 
from the vessel. Under these circumstances the plume buoyancy may be ignored 
and only the plume momentum and plume mass flow need be considered further. 
Of the two, plume momentum is usually the most significant similarity parameter 
and efforts should concentrate on matching this. 
The baseline model setup for these studies is similar to that used for studying 
ship wind loads. The model is mounted on the floor of the test section such that it 


614 
MARINE VEHICLES 
can be rotated to study all wind incidence angles. Since forces and moments do not 
have to be measured, the model does not need to be attached to the balance. 
Appropriate air pumps must be fitted to provide the scaled volume of intake and 
exhaust air at the appropriate positions on the ship. 
Investigating the dispersion of stack gases can be done in several ways. The 
simplest method is to introduce $make into the modeled stack gas flow and photo- 
graph the smoke plume. Another approach is to heat the stack gas and survey the 
temperature 
at various points on the modeL6 
Chapter 5 can be consulted for additional 
information regarding flow visualization. 
Passenger Comfort on Recreational Yachts 
A related problem is wind invasion on the external passenger spaces of ships and 
recreational yachts. Examples of these spaces include flybridges on a motor yacht 
or outdoor recreational areas on a cruise ship. These spaces are usually protected 
from excessive wind by carefully shaped superstructures, coamings, railings, and 
windbreaks surrounding the area affected. 
Model arrangements for studies of this type of flow are similar to those described 
in the previous section. A model of the ship is placed in the wind tunnel and smoke 
or some other flow visualization tool is used to investigate the intrusion of wind 
- 
upon the passenger spaces. Quantitative 
measurements may be done with omnidirec- 
tional flow probes such as spherical pressure probes or multielement hot-film probes. 
The model must be constructed so that a variety of configuration options can be 
explored to provide the best environment possible. If aerodynamic drag is judged 
to be important, the model will be connected to the balance so that the impact of 
modifications on both wind intrusion and overall drag can be assessed simulta- 
neously. 
Ship Flow Fields: Effects on Aircraft 
Aircraft are frequently called upon to operate in the vicinity of ships. Examples of 
such applications include airplanes landing on the flight decks of aircraft carriers 
and helicopters returning to their hangars aboard destroyers after completing antisub- 
marine warfare operations. These operations usually result in the aircraft operating, 
to some degree, in the air wake of the ship and its superstructure. The safety of 
these flight operations requires that these effects are carefully studied. While these 
studies have been performed by full-scale wake surveys aboard the ships themselves,' 
they are frequently the subject of wind tunnel tests.',' 
These tests are performed for two main reasons: to explore ship configuration 
issues during design and to establish operational limits for existing ship designs. 
Less frequently these tests are used to collect data for aircraft simulation studies 
and for calibrating shipboard anemometers. 
Tests for aircraft interaction fall into two groups: flow visualization and measure- 
ment of velocity and turbulence levels in regions of concern. The models used are 
similar to those described in the sections on stack gas dispersion and ship wind 


15.2 SURFACE VESSELS: BELOW THE 
WATER 
615 
loads. A model of the superstructure above the waterline is usually mounted on the 
floor of the test section with sufficient upwind blockage to simulate Earth's boundary 
layer, as discussed in the section on ship wind loads. Attention should be paid to 
turbulence levels in the simulated atmospheric boundary layer to ensure that full- 
scale conditions are reasonably reproduced. The influence of propulsion machinery 
intakelexhaust should be modeled in accordance with the guidelines presented earlier 
regarding stack gas dispersion. The model should be arranged so that all wind speeds 
and wind angles of incidence under consideration can be measured. In the case of 
- 
an aircraft carrier this may be considerably simplified because they are usually 
turned into the wind for aircraft launch and retrieval. This may not be the case for 
helicopter operations, however, so the purpose of the test data needs to be carefully 
considered before finalizing the test plan. 
Visualization of the flow can be achieved with yam tufts, smoke, or helium 
bubbles as described in previous sections. The velocity and turbulence surveys can 
be performed with hot-wire anemometer probes or other means as discussed in other 
sections of this book. 
If the tests are being performed as a part of a design study rather than to 
characterize an existing ship, the model should be arranged so that configuration 
changes can be made quickly. For example, a study designed to eliminate the 
influence of vortices developed by the flight deck on an aircraft carrier may require 
many subtle configuration changes to achieve adequate performance. The model 
should accommodate these changes with a minimum of fuss and effort during the 
test program. 
Sometimes, such as in the studies by Cahill and Biskaduros: motions of the ship 
have been included. In these studies, time domain predictions of typical ship motions 
in the sea state corresponding to the wind velocity under study were used to actuate 
the model during the flow field visualization. Excellent photographic results of the 
resulting flow field are reported. 
Figure 15.3 shows a picture of smoke being used for visualization of the flow 
over the deck of a ship. In this case there is an upflow at the front of the ship that 
produces a leading-edge separation and a wakelike flow encompassing the entire 
deck area. 
15.2 SURFACE VESSELS: BELOW THE WATER 
This section discusses experiments to investigate flow below the water line on 
surface ships. One motivation for these tests is that wind tunnels can frequently 
achieve Reynolds numbers much closer to full scale than can be obtained in a tow 
tank. 
Thus these experiments frequently focus on the viscous aspects of the flow 
about the hull and appendages. 
A discussion of experiments related to underwater sailing yacht appendages is 
contained in Section 15.4. 


- 
- 
616 
MARINE VEHICLES 
FIGURE 15.3 Visualization of the flow over a ship aircraft deck. 
Viscous Hull Resistance 
Dimensional analysis of the ship powering problem reveals that two similarity 
parameters must be matched to perform meaningful scale model tests, the Reynolds 
number and the Froude number? The Reynolds number has been discussed pre- 
viously. The Froude number is given by 
where the terms on the right-hand side are the ship velocity, length, and acceleration 
due to gravity in consistent units. 
The need to match both Reynolds and Froude numbers creates a significant 
difficulty. If water is used as the fluid medium for the model experiments and if 
there is a significant scale ratio between the model and the full-size vessel, it is 
impossible 
to match both similarity parameters. The historic solution to this dilemma 
is known as Froude's hypothesis. Froude's hypothesis involves assuming that the 
drag coefficient of the ship is made up 
of two components: a frictional drag coefficient 
that is dependent solely on the Reynolds number and a residual drag coefficient 
that is dependent solely on the Froude number? This assumption yields 
The frictional drag coefficient CDf(Re) 
is commonly estimated from data for flat 


15.2 SURFACE VESSELS: BELOW THE WATER 
617 
plates using the speeds of the ship and model and their wetted surface areas. The 
experimental procedure this assumption suggests is as follows. The ship model is 
tested at Froude numbers that match the range of full-scale Froude numbers of 
interest. Then the values of CDJ(Re) for the model are calculated and subtracted 
from the drag coefficients. Finally the values of &(Re) for the full-scale ship are 
calculated and added to the drag coefficients. This produces the full-scale drag 
coefficients. Current developments in computational solutions of Navier-Stokes 
equations suggest obvious alternatives to this procedure, but they continue to be 
quite costly and not sufficiently validated to date. 
Unfortunately Froude's hypothesis has proven to be unsatisfactory under certain 
circumstances. This is usually attributed to the inaccurate calculation of CDJ(Re) 
based on flat-plate data, a consequent of the fact that viscosity contributes to drag 
not only through skin friction but also through other mechanisms, such as separation, 
collectively referred to as viscous form drag. This problem has been handled by 
including a "correlation allowance" 
in the calculation of CDJ(Re) 
for the full-scale 
ship that, in effect, modifies the flat-plate frictional drag data for a particular hull 
type based on correlation studies of models and full-size ships. In recent years this 
approach has been extended by developing techniques for calculating correlation 
allowance or similar parameters for full-scale data extrapolation based on very low 
speed model tests where the wave-making component (the Froude scaled portion 
of resistance) is negligible.' This approach has led to the use of increasingly large 
models for ship tow tank studies. 
This subject has received considerable attention, and efforts to improve viscous 
drag estimates have involved studying them directly in a wind tunnel.1o 
The total 
viscous drag can be measured at Reynolds numbers approaching full scale by direct 
force and moment measurement. The viscous skin drag and viscous form drag can 
then be separated by making careful measurements of the boundary layer velocity 
profile and integrating the results < s 
the surface of the body. Direct measurement 
of the viscous pressure drag can also be made by measuring the pressure distribution 
over the model surface 
and likewise integrating these pressures 
over the body surface. 
A reflection plane model as described in the section on propulsion system testing 
is usually used for these investigations. The model is mounted on a stmt with 
suitable tare and interference corrections calculated with an image system. The 
boundary layer surveys can be performed with Preston tubes, pitot tubes, hot. wires, 
laser velocimeters, or other suitable arrangements. 
Propulsion System and Powering Requirements 
Wind tunnels are used to study the environment in which the ship propeller operates. 
This is usually done by preparing a model of the underwater portion of the ship 
with control surfaces, shafts, shaft supports, and any other underwater appendages 
and performing a wake survey in the volume to be occupied by the propeller. In 
one study wind tunnel experiments have been demonstrated to provide data that 
more closely agree with full-scale measurements than data measured by more tradi- 
tional means in a tow tank." 
This is aresult of the ability to more closely approximate 


618 
MARINE VEHICLES 
full-scale Reynolds numbers in the wind tunnel experiments and the strong depen- 
dence of the flow in the plane of the propeller disc on viscous effects. 
The ship models can be one of two types. The first approach is to model the 
underwater portion of the hull and mount it inverted on the floor of the wind tunnel. 
The second method is to mount two models of the underwater portion of the hull 
against one another in a "clarnsliell" arrangement along the waterline and mount 
the whole arrangement on a strut. The floor method has the advantage of allowing 
a larger model for a given tunnel blockage but it has the disadvantage of placing 
the hull in the test-section floor boundary layer. This can be alleviated to some 
degree by using a raised floor or a boundary layer control on the tunnel floor to 
provide a thinned boundary layer. This boundary layer was useful when modeling 
flows that occur in the atmospheric boundary layer but is not needed when modeling 
flows below the waterline. Means of controlling the floor boundary layer are dis- 
cussed at some length in Chapter 14 in connection with simulation requirements 
for ground vehicles. An example of the reflection plane or clamshell arrangement 
is shown in Figure 15.4. 
Careful attention must be paid to boundary layer thickness on the model itself 
to achieve accurate modeling of the flow, as has already been mentioned. The model- 
scale boundary layers will be too thick and will need to be thinned. Suction may 
be used to reduce the thickness of the boundary layer. The survey of the wake can 
be performed in accordance with methods indicated in Chapter 4. 
In some cases the performance of the propeller must be evaluated. In this case 
the propeller must be operated over the same range of advance coefficient as will 
FIGURE 15.4 
Reflection plane model of the underwater portion of a ship hull. 


15.2 SURFACE VESSELS: BELOW THE 
WATER 
619 
occur in full scale. Propeller modeling was discussed in Chapter 13 in the context 
of propeller-driven aircraft. The modeling issues are the same here although the 
design choices will be very different. 
We include here a discussion of ship powering from the point of view of a naval 
architect responsible for the entire program of experiments, including tow tank work 
and wind tunnel work, as appropriate. This will provide wind tunnel engineers a 
broader perspective when they are involved in some portion of such programs. 
Ship and submarine powering performance is usually determined from a series 
of model experiments. The first two are the unpowered hull resistance experiments 
and the open water propeller experiments. The results from these two experiments 
are used to determine several interaction coefficients in the captive model self 
propulsion experiments.' 
Unpowered hull resistance experiments can be performed in a model basin by 
using Froude's hypothesis as outlined earlier in this chapter. In this approach a full- 
scale drag coefficient as a function of Froude number is determined by testing the 
model at a full-scale Froude number, subtracting the contribution of viscous friction 
at model scale, and then adding in the contribution of viscous friction at full scale. 
Wind tunnel experiments may be useful to help in obtaining the viscous friction for 
the full-scale hull. If the body is to be completely submerged, as in the case of a 
submarine, Froude scaling is no longer required and the model tests may be per- 
formed in a wind tunnel, as discussed later in this chapter and the resulting drag 
coefficients used directly. Ship model basin test and data reduction techniques are 
discussed in more detail in Lewis.' 
The open water propeller experiments determine the thrust and torque coefficients 
as a function of advance coefficient. These experiments are done in a condition 
where flow into and out of the propeller is undisturbed by the presence of the hull, 
rudder, or shaft support structure. At a minimum data are collected over a range of 
advance coefficients and thrust coefficients that bracket the expected steady-state 
powering condition of the ship. Torque data need to be collected as well to aid in 
the selection of propulsion machinery. The usual procedure is to fix the speed of 
advance, collect measurements for a range of rotational speeds of the propeller, and 
repeat this sequence for the needed range of advance speeds. These experiments 
are traditionally done in a tow tank with a device called a "propeller boat" but seem 
also to have been done in wind  tunnel^.'^^'^ 
Several different definitions for advance coefficients and torque and thrust coeffi- 
cients can be used for propeller testing. The two most common advance coeE- 
cients are 
that corresponds to aeronautical usage as introduced in Chapter 13, and 


620 
MARINE VEHICLES 
where D is the propeller diameter, V, 
is the speed of advance, and n 
is the propeller 
speed, which by convention, is expressed in revolutions per second. In each case 
the advance coefficient is directly related to the angle of attack a particular blade 
element is experiencing. The first form of the advance coefficient, verify J, is most 
common, particularly in studies concerned only with the steady-state powering 
condition. The second form, v, 
i&ed where dynamic conditions are to be investi- 
gated since J = 
if n = 0. This situation might be encountered in a condition of 
interest if the shaft was stopped but the ship was still moving. 
The two most common forms of the thrust coefficient are given by the expressions 
and 
and the two most common forms of the torque coefficient are given by 
and 
where T and Q are the propeller thrust and torque. The coefficients KT 
and Kp are 
used most frequently with advance coefficient J as the independent variable while 
CT 
and CQ 
are used most frequently with advance coefficient v. Sample plots of 
ship propeller thrust and torque coefficient in both forms are shown in Figure 15.5 
and Figure 15.6. 
Once the hull resistance and propeller tests are completed, the interaction coeffi- 
cients for the hull and propeller can be determined from the model self-propulsion 
test. In this test the ship model is fitted with model propellers that are powered and 
connected to a thrust and torque dynamometer 
and means for powering the propeller. 
The model is then attached to the carriage and the model is towed at a fixed speed 
V corresponding to a full-scale Froude number of interest. In sequential runs while 
the ship Froude number remains constant, the propeller speed is varied over a range 
of values that result in slightly positive and slightly negative drag force as measured 
on the carriage. Propeller torque Q and thrust Tare also recorded. 
The data are reduced for a particular operating point as follows. First the powered 
model hull drag and propeller thrust are plotted as functions of propeller speed. 


15.2 SURFACE VESSELS: BELOW THE WATER 
621 
0
.
5
 
- 
Thrust Coefficient KT 
. . . . . . .  
0.4 
. . - . . . . -  
- 
- 
10"Torque Coefficient KQ 
Advance coefficient J 
FIGURE 15.5 Typical propeller thrust and torque coefficients, first form. 
The propeller speed at which the hull drag curve crosses over from negative to 
positive values is known as the self-propulsion point. The propeller speed that 
corresponds to this can be called n
,
.
 The propeller thrust corresponding to n
,
 can 
be called the self-propulsion thrust. T
,
,
.
 These values are shown graphically in 
Figure 15.7. 
The first interaction coefficient, the thrust deduction fraction, can now be calcu- 
lated. It is defined as the ratio between the bare hull resistance at a particular speed 
and the measured propeller thrust required to drive the ship at that speed: 
Rbm hull 
tdf = --- 
T 
(15.10) 
Values are usually around 0.85-0.95 because it requires more propeller thrust to 
drive the hull at a given speed than it takes to simply pull the ship through the 
water. Physically this is because the flow into and out of the propeller increases the 
speed of the water over the bottom of the ship, thus increasing its effective resistance. 
In many references a thrust deduction factor is defined that is similar to the one 
shown in (15.10) and given by 


622 
MARINE VEHICLES 
Advance Coefficient, 
v 
FIGURE 1
5
.
6
 Typical propeller thrust and torque coefficients, second form. 
Now, notice that all the information is available to calculate the thrust coefficient 
for the propeller at the self-propulsion point Kr,. We can use this information to 
calculate the effective "average" 
speed of advance by using the open water propeller 
data. In the open water tests we determined the functional relationship KT = 
A
J
)
.
 
This function can be inverted to provide J = 
f-'(KT). 
If we enter this function with 
our value of K,, we can find the effective advance coefficient as J, = f 
'(KT,). 
Now the effective speed of advance can be found from J, from the definition of 
the advance coefficient as VaT 
= JIPnD. 
This is known as the speed of advance by 
thrust identity. It can be used to calculate the Taylor wake fraction by thrust identity, 
our second hull-propeller interaction coefficient, from the relation 
This procedure can be duplicated with the torque coefficient for the propeller at the 
self-propulsion point K,,. The analysis proceeds in an identical manner and yields 
our third hull-propeller interaction coefficient, the Taylor wake fraction by torque 
identity: 


15.2 SURFACE VESSELS: BELOW THE WATER 
623 
Propeller Speed [rpm] 
FIGURE 15.7 
Ship hulUpropeller interaction calculations. 
Test Section Velocity = 
Constant 
Propeller Thrust 
Behind Model 
Model Self-Propulsion Point . 
. 
. 
. 
.. 
Resistance of Model 
The final steady-state powering estimates are prepared by using the bare hull 
resistance data, the open water propeller data, and the interaction coefficients from 
the self-propulsion tests. 
F 
= 
- 
V) 
3 
,- 
i
r
 
b 
Stabilizing and Control Surface Design 
With Propeller 
Resistance of Model 
Without Propeller 
Ship control surfaces are generally required for two purposes; steering the ship and 
active roll abatement. Both types have been the subject of wind tunnel studies. In 
fact, the basic design data that naval architects frequently use of designing these 
systems were obtained from wind tunnel experiments.' Performing scale model 
experiments on submerged foils in a wind tunnel is preferable to using a water 
tunnel or a towing tank because the wind tunnel can come closer to matching the 
full-scale 
Reynolds number and thus provide more complete modeling of the viscous 
effects. This is true primarily because one cannot simply increase model speed by 
the inverse of the scale ratio to maintain Reynolds number when testing scale 
underwater foils in water because cavitation conditions limit the maximum speed 
that can be used. Cavitation limits will be discussed later. Mach effects limit the 
speeds that can be used in wind tunnels, but it turns out that this is a less severe 
restriction than the cavitation l i t  
in a water facility. 
The models of the foils to be evaluated are usually mounted on the floor of the 
wind tunnel test section. The control surfaces on a ship are influenced by the state 
of the boundary layer on the hull as it approaches the foil. It may be considered 
desirable to model the expected boundary layer properties. If this is needed, the 
thickness of the boundary layer in the vicinity of the proposed location of the foil 
can 
be estimated 
and simulated using upwind floor treatment. The achieved boundary 
a
,
 4 
0 
C 
m 
- 
V) 
.- 
In 
a
,
 
n 
I 
...... 
I 
Augment of Resistance 
I 


624 
MARINE VEHICLES 
layer must be carefully documented. The model must be operable over a range of 
angles of attack. In some cases operation of the foil in a reversed flow (i.e., leading 
with the trailing edge) should be explored. This corresponds to the condition where 
the ship is operating in reverse. Since the rudder shaft, for example, is usually 
located near the quarter-chord point of the foil and since backing speeds of a ship 
can be a significant percentagesof the maximum forward speed, it is possible that 
the worst case torsional loading of the rudder shaft may be in the astern condition. 
The best evidence of this isthe fact that the limiting astern speed on many ships 
is determined during sea trials and corresponds to the speed at which the steering 
machinery loses control of the rudder. 
Cavitation occurs when the pressure at a point in the flow field drops below the 
vapor pressure of the fluid. At this point the fluid element "flashes" 
into vapor until 
the pressure increases to a value greater than the vapor pressure. The condition for 
cavitation can then be stated by the expression 
The vapor pressure for seawater is given in Table 15.1.' 
Cavitation on control surfaces cannot be simulated in the wind tunnel. The 
occurrence of cavitation can be estimated, however, by measuring surface pressure 
disttibution with pressure taps or pressure-sensitive paint and then using the result- 
ing data for calculating pressure coefficients. The pressure coefficient data can then 
be used to calculate the local pressure (in psi) at a point on the actual control surface 
from the definition of pressure coefficient and from basic hydrostatic relations as 
where p, is the atmospheric pressure and h is the water depth at the point in 
question. The dynamic pressure used in this calculation should be the equivalent 
speed used to nondimensionalize 
the data. For example, suppose the control surface 
is tested in a simulated boundary layer in the wind tunnel and the air speed at the 
outboard tip of the control surface is used to nondimensionalize the wind tunnel 
pressure measurements. Then the velocity at the tip of the control surface in the 
actual installation should be used to dimensionalize the data to check for cavita- 
TABLE 15.1. Seawater Vapor Pressure 
Temperature 
Vapor Pressure 
"F 
"C 
psi 
kpa 
32 
0 
0.09 
0.621 
59 
15 
0.25 
1.724 
212 
100 
14.70 
101.325 


15.2 SURFACE VESSELS: BELOW 
THE WATER 
625 
tion. This velocity is probably not the same as the speed of the ship owing to the 
ship's boundary layer and the acceleration of fluid flow into and out of the propeller 
disk. 
Wind tunnels have also been used to explore the performance of control surfaces 
as mounted on the hull of the ship.I4 
For these simulations a model of the underwater 
portion of the ship is prepared and mounted on the floor of the wind tunnel. The 
control surface(s) and other necessary appendages, such as propeller shafting and 
shafting support structure, are mounted on the hull. The control surface can be 
mounted with its own strain gauge balance to determine fin forces. Interference 
effects can also be studied by tracking the trajectory of the tip vortices with neutrally 
buoyant soap bubbles or smoke. Since these tests are performed on models of 
the entire ship, the full-scale Reynolds number can be duplicated only rarely. 
Since much of the control surface span is likely to be operating in the hull bonnd- 
ary layer, it is likely that boundary layer control on the model hull will be needed 
in order to duplicate the expected boundary layer on the full-scale 
ship. The boundary 
layer thickness can be estimated by first using a potential flow analysis to obtain 
surface streamlines and then using a two-dimensional boundary layer method from 
a standard reference, for example, Young,15 to compute predicted boundary layer 
development. 
If the interference tests concern the propeller, then the propeller needs to be 
modeled as well. Propeller modeling was discussed in the previous section on ship 
powering. The key result was that the advance coefficient is the most important 
similarity parameter to match for propellers when performing wind tunnel exper- 
iments. 
Acoustic Sources 
Measurement of the strength of underwater acoustic sources is another marine topic 
that can be studied in the wind tunnel. Aboard most ships underwater noise is 
generated by four mechanisms: machinery vibration conveyed to the hull structure, 
flow of water past the hull, propeller operation in an unsteady flow environ- 
ment, and cavitation. Of these four, wind tunnels can be used to study the second 
and third. 
Much of the work on evaluation of acoustic sources on surface ships is classified 
and has been performed in purpose built facilities at government laboratories. A 
description by Leggat et al.,I4 of one such experiment does appear in the open 
literature. Figure 15.8 shows the experimental arrangement. 
The goal was to study the noise generated by a propeller on the back of a frigate, 
particularly the higher blade rate harmonics. An upside-down model of the ship's 
underbody was mounted on the floor of the test section. The hull was fitted with 
antiroll fins, bilge keels, shafts, struts, propellers, and the rudder. The model was 
arranged so the propellers were powered. The model was fabricated in such a way 
that the appendages could be modified. The influences of propeller tip to hull 
clearance, propeller blade type, propeller strut type, axial clearance from the propel- 
ler, propeller-to-rudder clearance, shaft angle, and hull boundary layer thickness at 


Inverted 
FIGURE 
15.8 Arrangement for measuring acoustic radiation from a propeller. 
the propeller plane on the strength of the blade rate harmonic noise levels were inves- 
tigated. 
Propeller noise is critically dependent on the flow field in which the propeller 
operates. Nonuniformities in this flow field can cause local cavitation and pressure 
pulses, that can in turn create noise. As a consequence, correctly simulating the 
flow field in the vicinity of the propeller disc was a high priority. Since the full- 
scale Reynolds number could not be achieved, suction boundary layer control was 
introduced upstream of the propeller blades to control the boundary layer thickness. 
The upper limit on the test-section velocity was the compressibility limit on the pro- 
peller. 
The goal of the test was to obtain good measurements of the first seven or eight 
harmonics of the blade rate. This required the shaft speed to be held steady within 
1% for 30 sec. Extracting the blade rate harmonic noise levels from the acoustic 
signal was facilitated by generating a shaft rate pulse sequence that was recorded 
along with the acoustic data. The cross-power spectrum of the shaft rate pulses and 
the microphone signal produced data at integer multiples of shaft frequency. By 
this means the signal processing was tightly coupled to the constantly varying 
actual shaft rpm. This approach allowed resolution out to eight times the blade 
rate frequency. 
The rigid plane that supported the model (the test-section floor) provided an 
incorrect acoustic boundary condition. The result was increased reflected noise from 
the hard wall rather than the pressure relief that would have occurred from a free 
surface. Published techniques14 
for correcting these effects are beyond the scope of 
this book. 
The acoustic tests were preceded by a hot-wire survey of the boundary layer to 
adjust the suction control and to assess the turbulence levels. This was done to 
quantify the magnitude of the change in the angle of attack experienced by a typical 
propeller blade while rotating in the stem wake. These variations are the important 
flow field quality for determining acoustic energy levels. 


15.3 UNDERWATER 
VEHICLES 
627 
Far-field acoustic surveys were performed with microphones supported near the 
propeller. The microphones were connected to a spectral analyzer that could do 
512-point fast Fourier transforms and also perform cross-spectral analysis of the 
acoustic signals and the propeller rate. Extreme care was required to minimize 
mechanical noise from the drive shafts, motors, and bearings, including complete 
vibration isolation of the shaft struts from the model base, oil-impregnated bronze 
journal bearings, and extremely careful shaft alignment and balance. The shaft and 
propeller construction, alignment, and balance were made all the more critical by 
the operation of the shaft at speeds above its first vibratory mode. 
In addition to the specific blade rate harmonic acoustic surveys, broad band 
acoustic data were collected as well. All the results were corrected for background 
noise and combined to evaluate the configurations considered. The background 
noise corrections were generated with the tunnel on, the model propeller drive 
system turned off, and the boundary layer control and shaft drive system turned on. 
15.3 UNDERWATER VEHICLES 
This section discusses wind tunnel experiments to support design decisions for 
underwater vehicles. These experimental programs can be quite effective when 
the operational domain of interest is sufficiently far from the free surface. These 
experiments are in many respects similar to conventional aircraft experiments, so 
much useful information can be gleaned from preceding chapters. The design con- 
straints are almost always different, however, and this leads to differing selections of 
geometries, and therefore differences in the details of the experimental requirements. 
Forces, Moments, and Control Surface Effectiveness 
Stability and control of underwater vehicles is an issue that generally requires more 
attention than the stability and control of marine surface vehicles. There are two 
reasons for this. First, underwater vehicles have more degrees of freedom in which 
to maneuver. Second, underwater vehicles 
are frequently unstable. As a consequence, 
the formulation of the maneuvering and control analysis is frequently more sophisti- 
cated than comparable analyses for surface ships. The analyses typically include all 
six degrees of freedom and explicitly consider coupling relationships that are usually 
simplified or ignored in the case of surface ships. As a result the characterization 
of the forces and moments experienced by the body, as it maneuvers, needs to be 
more complete and more accurate. 
The static hydrodynamic characteristics of underwater vehicles are frequently 
determined in a wind tunnel. Since most underwater vehicles operate far from the 
free surface, Froude scaling (discussed in an earlier section) is no longer relevant 
and the single most important similarity parameter is the Reynolds number. Wind 
tunnel experiments have an advantage over those performed in a tow tank because 
Reynolds number that are much closer to full-scale values are achievable in a wind 
tunnel. These test programs are also frequently more productive than tow tank tests 


628 
MARINE VEHICLES 
since model attitude, control surface deflection, and model configuration changes 
can usually be made much faster in a wind tunnel. 
Numerous examples of wind tunnel experiments to characterize static forces and 
moments of underwater vehicles appear in the literature (see, e.g., Watt, Nguyen, 
Cooper, and Tanguay," Fidler and Smith,16 Goodman," and Barlow, Harris, and 
Ranzenba~h'~). 
These studie&ically 
explore the forces and moments of the bare 
body and the effectiveness of various control fin configurations and deflections. 
The model construction, mounting, and data corrections required for these experi- 
ments are similar in all respects to those for aircraft studies. The main difference 
is that underwater vehicles generate most of their lift from buoyancy forces on the 
body so the lifting surfaces appended to the body are exclusively for control of the 
body. They tend to be much smaller than aircraft wings, so interference effects tend 
to be of much greater importance. If the control surfaces are located near the 
propeller, then the model should include the propeller. The propeller should be 
operated at the correct advance coefficient. 
A generic torpedo-like body that was used in the study by Barlow, Harris, and 
RanzenbachlB 
is shown in Figure 15.9. This test used a single strut mount. Standard 
image strut tare and interference corrections, as outlined in Chapter 9, were used. 
The control surfaces on the model shown in Figure 15.9 are obviously very short 
in span compared to any airplane. It is common for specifications to call for control 
surfaces to have spans that do not extend beyond the maximum diameter of the 
main body. This inevitably leads to the possibility of a serious deficiency in the 
FIGURE 15.9 Generic submarine like body on single strut mount. (Photograph courtesy 
o
f
 the Glenn L. Martin Wind Tunnel.) 


15.3 UNDERWATER VEHICLES 
629 
force-generating capability of the surfaces, and a need to carefully evaluate the 
effects of body shape ahead of the surfaces, the foil cross sections, and the effect of 
propulsion-system-induced flows. All of the issues discussed previously concerning 
Reynolds number effects apply to this type of experiment. 
We show in Figure 15.10 the effect of varying the span of stabilizing surfaces 
on the pitch moment coefficient of the body-fin combination shown in Figure 15.9. 
Another issue of importance in the design of underwater vehicle control surfaces 
is the effect of gaps at the inboard end of a movable control surface. Figure 15.11 
shows a setup in a wind tunnel for investigating this effect. 
Researchers have also conducted experiments to determine dynamic effects for 
underwater vehicles.19 
These studies are difficult to perform, however, because the 
frequencies at which the body needs to be manipulated are very high. At the same 
time, the low density of air makes the magnitude of the forces due to unsteady 
motion quite small and therefore difficult to separate from the inertial dynamic 
forces associated with the body motion. 
Propulsion System and Powering Requirements 
Surveys of the propeller environment, l i e  
those discussed in the section on surface 
ships, can be performed on underwater vehicles as well. Sample results are contained 
in reports by, for example, Ohman and NguyenZo 
and Fry.Z1 
... 
: - - - . - -  
....... -.- 
- - - -  
- 
- 
' Fin 
Span - 
1 
.W x (Body Diameter) 
. 
- - 6 7  
Span = 1 
.?Ox (Body Diameter) 
: 
........ 
; 
-qinspam=.y.+3x(~yDi~meter)- 
- -:- 
......... 
Angle of Attack 
FIGURE 1
5
.
1
0
 Effect of varying span of fins on stability of vehicle. 


630 
MARINE VEHICLES 
FIGURE 15.11 A wind tunnel installation for investigating the effect of gap on control 
surface effectiveness. (Photograph courtesy of the Glenn L. Martin Wind Tunnel.) 
The material in the previous section on surface ship powering should also be 
consulted for a background discussion of the underwater vehicle powering problem. 
This discussion applies to underwater vehicles as well, except that Froude scaling 
is not required so that the body and propeller can be tested at the same time. 
Powering experiments are mentioned in publications by Watt, Nguyen, Cooper and 
Tang~ay.'~ 
Here the authors point out that the very high propeller speeds (e.g., 
10,000 rpm) required to match full scale advance coefficient make it difficult to 
measure accurately the propeller torque and thrust. 
Acoustic Sources 
The study of hydroacoustics has led to special facilities such as the anechoic facility 
described in Section 2.7. See the earlier section on acoustic sources for surface 
ships for a discussion of experimental technique. 
15.4 
SAILING VESSELS 
While wind tunnels may appear to be an ideal environment for studying sailboat 
design issues, meaningful experimental investigations are difficult. Part of the prob- 
lem rests in the fact that no single experimental facility is completely equipped to 
simultaneously consider the influence of the interacting aerodynamic and hydrody- 


15.4 SAILING VESSELS 
631 
namic systems. The study of hull behavior is the natural domain of towing tanks. 
Sails are best, though to date imperfectly, studied in the wind tunnel, and the strictly 
underwater parts like keels and rudders are studied in both tow tanks and wind 
tunnels. The overall performance of a particular design can only be determined 
accurately by blending the data for the aerodynamic and hydrodynamic subsystems 
(and supporting numerical investigations) numerically with what has come to be 
known as a velocity prediction program (VPP). The VPP does exactly what its name 
suggests, it predicts the velocity a yacht may obtain under specific sailing conditions. 
This section presents a discussion of typical design issues and related wind 
tunnel experiments for sail powered vehicles. These include sail experiments and 
experiments on underwater appendages such as keels and rudders. 
Basic Aerohydrodynarnics of Sailing 
We present a brief introduction to terminology for sail boats in upwind conditions 
and in downwind conditions. Figure 15.12 shows a typical sloop rigged sail boat 
under way in an upwind sailing condition. Names of major elements of the rig are 
shown. Figure 15.13 shows similar information for a sail boat in a downward 
configuration. We will refer collectively to the rudders and keels as underwater 
appendages. The main sail and the jib will be referred to as upwind sails while the 
main sail and spinnaker will be referred to as offwind sails. 
A sense of the complexity of the coupled aero and hydrodynamic forces can be 
gained from studying Figure 15.14. In the horizontal plane the driving force and 
the resistance must cancel each other, as must the aerodynamic and hydrodynamic 
FIGURE 1
5
.
1
2
 Sloop rigged sail boat in upwind configuration. 


632 
MARINE VEHICLES 
side force. In the vertical plane the weight and vertical component of the aerodynamic 
force must be offset by the buoyancy and the vertical hydrodynamic forces. A 
similar balance involving the moments must be achieved as well. The attitude of 
the boat is determined by these forces, but the forces are in turn determined by the 
attitude. Just where the optimum point of operation for the boat lies has been 
determined primarily by experience in competition rather than by analysis. 
The complexity of the task performed by the VPP 
can also be appreciated by 
considering the polar plot of the sailing vessel's performance. This plot shows the 
sailboat velocity as the radial component and the heading of the boat relative to the 
true wind direction as the angle. The polar plot is prepared by selecting a wind 
strength and heading and then optimizing the sail trim until the maximum driving 
force is obtained in the desired direction. An example of a polar plot is shown in 
Figure 15.15. One result from the polar plot shown is that the fastest way to sail 
directly away from the wind when the wind speed is 7 knots (shown as a 180" 
true 
wind angle on the diagram) is to sail with a true wind angle of approximately 
140"-15O0, zig-zagging back and forth. This somewhat counterintuitive result is 
quite realistic with real boats and shows how optimization of the rig and hull for 
sailing away from the wind may actually involve optimization of the boat velocity 
while sailing in a different direction! 
Since progress toward a design objective can only be truly determined in the 
VPP, it is difficult at times to optimize the design of a component during a model 
test. For example, the viscous drag of a keel might be reduced by decreasing the 
volume of a torpedo-shaped lead weight attached to the bottom of it, but doing so 


- - 
15.4 SALING VESSELS 
633 
Apparent 
Wind 
Weigh 
Buoyancy 
FIGURE 
15.14 Force systems acting on a sail boat. 
will decrease the righting moment and hence the stability of the sailboat, thus 
allowing it to carry less sail and reduce driving force. Where is the optimal point 
in this particular design tradeoff? Only the VPP can tell. And the VPP itself is 
always evolving as predictive techniques improve. The consequence of this is that 
a significant amount of planning must go into any optimization study and develop- 
ment of the wind tunnel test plan to make efficient use of time available for 
the experiments. 


Direction 
of True 
' Wind 
RUNNING 
FIGURE 15.15 Trimmed polar velocity plot. 
This design exercise is further complicated by the fact that sailboat competitions 
are almost always constrained by rating rules. Thus the problem is not only to build 
a fast boat but to not incur unreasonable rating penalties in the process. 
One should bear in mind during the remainder of this section that yacht races 
are frequently decided by only a few seconds after hours of racing. As a consequence 
small differences in resistance can have enormous effect on the performance of the 
yacht in question. Thus testing yacht components is one of the most demanding 


15.4 SAILING VESSELS 
635 
applications for a wind tunnel. This is parallel to other competition vehicles for 
which even the smallest performance increment is diligently pursued. 
Keels and Rudders or "Appendages": Design Issues 
Traditionally the underbody of sailing yachts was fitted with ballasted keels and 
movable rudders located at the back or aft end of the boat. In recent years, however, 
the underwater arrangements of sailing vessels have become more diverse so the 
all-encompassing term "appendage" has come into common usage to describe the 
variety of configurations that have been developed. This section will briefly discuss 
the design issues relating to underwater appendages. More information can be found 
in Larsson and Eliass~n.~ 
In all cases the underwater appendages of sailing vessels need to provide hydrody- 
namic side force to counteract the forces of the sailing rig. W~th 
the exception of 
sailboards (windsurfers) they also need to provide some means for maneuvering 
the vessel, most frequently a rudder. Finally, with the exception of small unballasted 
dinghies and multihulls (catamarans and trimarans, which derive their stability from 
widely space hulls) they need to provide ballast to provide stability. To date almost 
all wind tunnel investigations have focused on appendage packages that provide all 
three functions: side force, maneuvering, and ballast. The remainder of this section 
will concentrate on underbody configurations designed to meet all three require- 
ments. Designers have explored a considerable range of appendage configurations 
to satisfy these requirements. 
Figure 15.16 shows two of the basic configurations that have been built. The 
first configuration is the most conventional, where the forward appendage is a keel 
that carries the ballast and provides most of the hydrodynamic side force. The other 
FIGURE 1
5
.
1
6
 Yacht keels with ballast bulbs and winglets. 


636 
MARINE VEHICLES 
configuration shown attempts to combine the functions of the rudder and keel into 
two equally sized appendages plus a torpedo for ballast between the two foils. Both 
of these appendage configurations employ torpedo or bulb shaped ballast packages 
at their lowest extremes. 
Consideration of the force diagrams given in Figure 15.14 shows that the append- 
age system must provide hydrodynamic side force and trim in yawing moment. 
This can be seen to be analogous to the lift and pitching moment for an airplane. 
There will be induced drag based on the same physics as for the airplane. The 
methods to minimize induced drag will therefore be the same for the two applications. 
The most potent way to reduce induced drag is to increase span. This is more often 
possible for airplane designers than for designers of sail boat keels. Efforts to reduce 
induced drag have also led designers to affix "winglets" to the ends of the keels or 
to provide special shaping of the keel bulbs to control spanwise flow and reduce 
the intensity of the tip vortices, as shown in Figure 15.16. 
Winglets have also been attached to the ends of the rudders in the conventionally 
arranged appendages in an effort to both control induced drag and decrease seaway- 
induced pitching motions. These rudder winglets have also been shown to conbibute 
to driving force when the boat pitches. 
- 
Limits on the lengths of appendages are necessary in order to allow operation 
in shallow water. Since both induced drag and stability are improved by increased 
draft, the practical necessity of reasonable draft limits has caused rating rules to 
penalize designs that have excessive draft. Also, appendages must be strong enough 
to support the loads they experience and also need to be strong enough to survive 
grounding damage. If the keel is not fitted with a bulb, the volume of the keel 
section needs to be thick enough to carry required ballast. 
Rudders need to be of adequate size to control the vessel and thick enough to 
withstand the hydrodynamic loads they generate. They need to be thick enough to 
allow a rudder shaft of sufficient strength to connect the rudder to the hull and must 
mesh with the hull surface with clearances that allow adequate rotation. Rudders 
usually need not be as tolerant of grounding damage as keels because they are 
usually shorter than keels and therefore are protected when grounding. 
These design issues are discussed in more detail in Larsson and Eliass~n.~~ 
Wind 'lbnnel Arrangements for Appendage Testing 
Yacht appendages are usually deeply submerged where free-surface effects usually 
are not important so their steady-state operation can be studied in wind tunnels. 
Certain appendage configurations, however, are designed to yield benefits only in 
the actual unsteady operation of a yacht in a seaway. The principal example of this 
is winglets attached to the rudder that are intended partially to reduce the induced 
drag of the rudder but also to alleviate pitch motions. In addition there is some 
thought that these winglets can also generate thrust when subjected to unsteady 
flow due to the Katzrnayer effect, as discussed in Sclavounos and H ~ a n g . ~ ~  
In 
these cases the aerodynamic coefficients as a function of pitch and yaw should be 


15.4 SAILING VESSELS 
637 
determined and the resulting data used to study their effectiveness in a simulation 
of a yacht in an unsteady condition. 
Appendages are tested in two ways: reflection plan models and floor mounting. 
We will discuss each method in t
u
r
n
 in the following sections. In both cases only 
one appendage is usually tested at a time. But novel configurations, particularly 
those that may have interacting vortex systems, may require interaction studies in 
which models of all the interacting appendages are mounted on the model. 
In both test types foil pressure measurements can be used to predict the onset 
of cavitation, but usually yacht appendages are designed so that the loading is well 
below that required to produce cavitation. 
Wake surveys and flow visualization studies can be used in either modeling 
approach to investigate the vortex systems for each appendage and to help reduce 
the strength of these systems. 
Reflection Plane Models 
In the reflection plane method a model of the appendages 
and hull below the waterline and its image is constructed, as shown in Figure 15.17. 
This method has the advantage of including the interaction between the hull and 
the appendages in the study. It also allows heel and side slip to be studied since 
the model can be prepared for a condition where the boat is heeled. This is a 
fundamentally different flow regime than can usually be studied with a floor model 
FIGURE 15.17 
Relfection plane model with oil stripes applied prior to oil flow visualiza- 
tion run. 


638 
MARINE VEHICLES 
because the rotation that occurs when side slip is investigated will be about a 
different axis with respect to the appendage than with the floor model. 
An example of a reflection plane model test is given in Draijer and Menkveld.llJ 
This study, mentioned earlier, was intended to clarify issues related to viscous drag 
estimation for towing tank investigations of sailing yachts. 
These tests are good for examining interference effects and the total side force 
developed by the hull-appendage system. This can be particularly useful in cases 
where the distinction between the hull and appendages is blurred by the details of 
the shape. In most modem underbody configurations, though, the detailed design 
of the appendage should use the larger foils found in floor-mounted models, particu- 
larly when bulblwinglet details are being investigated. 
The aero-zeroing of the model in the pitch plane should use yacht side force 
rather than yacht pitching moment since side force is the quantity of greatest interest. 
Floor-Mounting Arrangements In this arrangement a model of the foil is mounted 
upside down on the floor of the wind tunnel. A portion of the hull and/or other 
foils should be included if interaction is considered important. The foil should be 
free to pivot to examine different side-slip angles. This arrangement is similar in 
most respects to arrangements for control surface testing for surface ships and 
submersibles. The chief difference is that the yacht can be both yawed and rolled 
in a way that puts the yacht appendage into a flow regime that is different from 
that experienced by a ship control surface. 
The chief advantage of this technique is that the model of the appendage can be 
bigger for a given test-section size so the resolution of the resistance measurements 
and flow visualization studies can be greater. A picture of such an appendage test 
is shown in Figure 15.18. An example of floor mounting a keel model, which 
included the underwater part of the hull, is described by Flay and McMillan.?' 
Sails and Sail Rigs: Design Issues 
Sail design involves two issues: the shaping of the sail to provide "optimum" 
aerodynamic performance and the structural design of the sail. The structural issues 
are of themselves extremely complex but are beyond the scope of this discussion, 
except as to how the structural deformation of the sails affects aerodynamic proper- 
ties. What follows is a discussion of the purely aerodynamic design of sails. 
A conventional sail is a flexible membrane made of some combination of woven 
fibers and homogeneous plastic films supported by flexible spars and wires. The 
shape of the sail is influenced by several factors. First, shape is introduced into the 
sailcloth itself by making the sail out of panels of cloth. The panels are cut with a 
curved edge, or "bmadseam," so that when the panels are stitched together a three- 
dimensional shape is introduced. This process is shown in Figure 15.19. 
Next, shape is introduced by placing, or "flying," 
a sail on the spars andlor wires 
meant to support it, as shown in Figure 15.20. This process is similar to introducing 
shape into the sail by broadseaming except now a degree of control is retained 
because by altering the shape of the spar (by carefully bending the mast in different 


Broadsearn 
FIGURE 15.18 
Floor-mounting yacht keel arrangement. 
Panels are cut with a curved edge 
or broadseam 
FIGURE 15.19 
Introducing sail 
broadseaming gives the sail a 
"builtin" shape. 
shape by broadseam. 


640 
MARINE VEHICLES 
Foot Curve 
Extra Material i
s
 added to 
When flown, extra material 
lull and foot. 
helps to determine flying shape 
FIGURE 15.20 Introducing shape by mounting hardware. 
ways) the shape of the sail can be controlled. However, this only works with certain 
sails. The main is highly influenced in this manner, and all sorts of mechanisms 
are fitted to boats to either passively or actively control the amount and distribution 
of mast bend. The jib is not much influenced by mast bend, but it is greatly influenced 
by what is called "headstay sag." This is the degree of deflection in the catenary 
curve of the headstay that supports the leading edge of the jib and is determined 
primarily by the amount 
of tension on the headstay. The attempt to decouple headstay 
tension from mast bend or at least achieving correct mast bend and headstay sag 
simultaneously is one of the main goals of the design of the mast and staying 
arrangement. The spinnaker is relatively unaffected by mast bend. 
The "sheeting" of a sail also influences its shape. In the case of a mainsail the 
sheeting influences the position of the boom. The sheeting is usually accomplished 
by the mainsheet, which primarily controls the angle of the boom with the centerline 
of the yacht and the boom vang, which controls the angle the boom makes with 
the deck. Both controls critically influence sail shape. For example, the mainsheet 
primarily controls the angle of attack that the sail as a whole has with the wind 
while the vang influences the distribution as a function of distance along the mast. 
Jibs are likewise influenced by the sheeting, although in this case the position of 
the sheet lead is normally all that can be adjusted. Usually the fore and aft location 
of the lead determines twist distribution and the athwartship location of the lead 
determines the final angle of attack. 
The spinnaker is usually flown almost completely free of the supporting rigging 
so mast bend has little influence on sail shape. The shape of the spinnaker is entirely 
controlled by the construction of the sail and by the sheeting of the sail, which is 
determined by the location of the spinnaker pole and the sheet lead. 
The desired shape for a sail depends on many considerations too numerous to 
list here, but there are three basic considerations, the direction that the boat is sailing, 


1
5
.
4
 SAILING VESSELS 
6
4
1
 
the uneven distribution of wind velocity and direction over the sailplan, and the 
wind speed and sea state. The first of these requires no explanation but the second 
and third do. Consider a sailboat operating in the atmospheric boundary layer, as 
shown in Figure 15.21. Since the boat is moving through the water, the air flowing 
into the sails increases velocity and increases angle of attack with height. This effect 
can be quite pronounced and must be accounted for by introducing twist into the 
sail, as shown in the figure. Also, if a sailboat heels past a certain point the hull 
appendages become ineffective and the boat begins to slip sideways to an unreason- 
able degree. When this happens, the rig needs to be "depowered" by reducing the 
camber of the sails through sheeting and mast bend or, if this is insufficient, reducing 
sail area. As a consequence sails designed for higher wind speeds tend to be flatter 
than sails designed for lower wind speeds. 
Rating rules often allow the designer to provide a wide range of sails of different 
planform for specific uses. For example, some boats carry multiple jibs and spinna- 
kers of widely different sizes for the broad range of conditions that may be encoun- 
tered. Decisions regarding the size and distribution of inventories of sails are an 
Wind (Magnitude Increases 
Sailboat 
\with 
Altitude) 
FIGURE 15.21 Sailboat operating in an atmospheric boundary layer. 


642 
MARINE VEHICLES 
ideal subject for wind tunnel investigation. For example, if you are going to c
-
 
five spinnakers for offwind sailing at apparent wind angles ranging from 85" to 
180" over a wind speed range of 5-50 knots, what are the best five sails to carry? 
By testing candidate sails over the range of apparent wind angles and plotting the 
driving force 
as a function of heading angle, a well-rounded set of sails can be chosen. 
Other issues related to sall design include effective "endplating" of the bottom 
end of a sail against the deck to reduce the strength of the vortex formed along the 
foot of the sail and the interference of the mast on the flow over the main. Excellent 
discussions regarding the design of sails can be found in books by MarchajZS 
and 
WhiddenZ6 
and references contained therein. 
Wind lhnnel Arrangements for Sail Testing 
As of this date the "perfect" 
wind tunnel test of sailboat sails has not been performed. 
The impediments have been many and include the following: 
difficulty in modeling the atmospheric velocity gradient and the resulting 
variation in angle of incidence along the spanwise position of the sail, 
inability to match full-scale Reynolds number without destroying the sails, 
difficulty in reproducing full-scale sail shape and cloth properties (porosity, 
finish, etc.) and mastirigging flexibility, and 
- difficulty in measuring the miniscule differences in force that separate a good 
sail shape from a great one. 
All is not lost, however. Even though sail performance tests in a wind tunnel are 
not completely accurate representations of the full-scale phenomenon, wind tunnels 
can be useful for studying the aerodynamic forces at work and relating these forces 
to design parameters. These tests therefore can be a useful component in a sail 
development program but cannot completely replace on-water evaluation of the 
designs. 
Researchers have attempted to surmount the problems mentioned above. The 
atmospheric velocity gradient can be simulated by introducing blockage upstream 
of the test section, as discussed earlier in this chapter. The best modeling of this 
aspect of the flow is achieved in facilities that have a long flat floor upwind of the 
model to allow the boundary layer to develop to a sufficient thickness. 
Modeling the variation in the angle of incidence is a bit more difficult, however. 
Recently researchers in New Zealand have attempted to simulate twist by introducing 
helically curved vanes upwind of the test section. Results of this effort have been pub- 
lished,27.28,29 
Matching, or at least approaching, 
the full-scale 
Reynolds number is only possible 
when the model-scale ratio is small or the sails are made from some rigid material, 
the so-called tin sail. Solid sails can survive higher test-section velocities but do 
not allow the careful trimming of sails required to extract peak performance. It also 
negates whatever influence cloth properties have on the test results. 


15.4 SAILING VESSELS 
643 
Reproducing sail shape and cloth characteristics can be achieved with careful 
model construction. Marchaj" quotes a sailmaker's recommendation that the luff 
(leading-edge) dimension of a conventional sail be a minimum of 7 ft long for 
accurate modeling of a sail. The rigging details of the boat model and the rig can 
be modeled to whatever accuracy is required by careful construction. 
The portion of the boat's hull that is above the waterline should be carefully 
modeled. Flow below the model should be eliminated. It should also be arranged 
in such a way that it can be heeled to whatever degree is required to meet the test 
objectives. The support structure on the floor around the model should not be 
attached to the tunnel balance, if at all possible, but if it is, a correction scheme 
should be introduced to correct the data. Errors of this kind will have a great 
influence on the calculation of the heeling moment. 
Meeting all these mounting requirements is not an easy thing. An effective 
solution is the sailboat-mounting arrangement used by the Wolfson Unit of the 
University of Southampton and described in Deakin4 
and illustrated in Figure 15.22. 
This test rig suspends a model of the hull and rig in a pool of water that is 
approximately coincident with the floor of the wind tunnel. The model is restrained 
by passing a bar through a hole in the hull. This bar is then attached to force blocks 
and the bow of the boat is supported by a rod attached to a force block as well. By 
having a model with several holes drilled through the hull, a variety of heel angles 
can be investigated with the same model. The forces are resolved as illustrated in 
Figure 15.22. 
- 
Moment 
Driving 
Force 
Side 
Yawing 
Pitching 
Force 
Moment 
Moment 
I 
Flexure 
f 
Vertical 
a 
Force 
a 
4 
I C-9 
a - 
# - 
k 
F4 
4 ' '  
Sigid Strut 
- 
I 
F5 
~ransverse- 
Support 
/ 
F1 
IF6 
F
3
,
 
F 2  
FIGURE 15.22 The Wolfson unit sail model test rig. 


644 
MARINE VEHICLES 
The test instrumentation 
should be arranged so the forces and moments developed 
by the sails can be monitored in real time while the test proceeds. Ideally the forces 
should be resolved into body frame axes so the driving force, heeling moment, and 
side-force coefficients are displayed to aid the adjustment, or "trimming," process 
of the sails. Sails are sensitive to slight adjustments to the sail shape and position 
so when the model is moved-To a new heading angle the sails need to be adjusted 
in accordance with the trimming objectives of the test. These trimming objectives 
need to be carefully formulated and are discussed in the sections that follow on 
specific types of sail tests. 
The trimming of the sails needs to be done by a person who has significant 
experience performing this task on a full-size racing sailboat. There is simply no 
substitute for this critical role in the test program since the setting of the sails 
involves so many variables that the only way to make any practical progress through 
a test matrix is to hand trim, or "eyeball," many of these adjustments. Fortunately, 
since most sail test programs involve the cooperation of a sail loft, experienced 
personnel are usually available for this purpose. 
Once the sail is eyeball trimmed, people should be cleared from the test section 
and the force coefficients should be allowed to settle. This can take 1630 sec 
depending on the size of the wind tunnel, the size of the model, and the number of 
people who were in the test section. At this point the force, moment, and attitude 
data should be recorded. 
Next the "optimality" of trim should be checked. Different investigators have 
used different techniques for this. At a minimum (assuming that automated yaw 
control is available) the model should be yawed over a range of values to see if 
the trimming objectives are improved. Another approach is to outfit the model with 
remote control of the sails so that they can be adjusted without anybody entering 
the test section and disturbing the flow conditions. Thus fine tuning of the sail trim 
can be performed by watching the force coefficient displays. A picture of a model 
outfitted with remote-control winches is shown in Figure 15.23. 
Deakin4 
reports that gusts were simulated at the 
Southampton 
tunnel by manipulat- 
ing overlapping vertical blinds located downstream of the test section. In these tests 
a ballasted model of the boat was floated in a pool of water and located in the tank 
so that it was free to roll and sway but was restrained in surge. The heel angle was 
recorded with a roll gyro and the velocity shear was modeled. The gusts increased 
wind speed by 40% over a few seconds by first closing and then opening the blinds. 
Blockage corrections will likely be required for both the drag force and the 
apparent wind angle (from distortion of the downwash by the tunnel walls). These 
topics are discussed in Chapters 9, 10, and 11. In addition, a review of techniques 
for downwind sail tests is given by Main and Ran~enbach.~' 
The performance 
of sails decreases with use. The porosity, stress-strain character- 
istics, and surface finish of the cloth all degrade and the unstressed dimensions of 
the cloth panels distort and alter the shape of the unloaded sail. For this reason a 
careful log should be kept of the amount of test time each sail has experienced. 
Degradation should be checked during any test involving detailed analysis of sail 
performance by checking the repeatability of the measurements for some portion 


15.4 SAILING VESSELS 
645 
- - 
FIGURE 1
5
.
2
3
 Picture of a sail test model fitted with remote-control winches. (Photograph 
courtesy of Glenn L. Martin Wind Tunnel.) 
of the inventory to be tested. For comparison tests each sail being compared should 
have the same amount of use as the others in a test matrix. 
Upwind Sails The trimming objectives for upwind sails should consider the rela- 
tionship between driving force and heeling moment. For example, consider two 
trim conditions having equal driving forces but unequal heeling moments. The trim 
condition with the lower heeling moment will be preferable. As the wind speed 
increases on an actual boat, the rig is progressively "depowered" to reduce heeling 
moment (at the expense of driving force) to keep the boat under control. Thus the 
trim condition that would be ideal for one wind speed would not be ideal for another 
speed. Finding this ideal trim is generally not possible without loading the results 
of the wind tunnel investigation into the VPP program described earlier. Only then 
can the critical relationship between rig forces and hull stability and hydrodynamic 
forces be established and studied. The result of this is that the wind tunnel data set 
will ideally consider both a range of heel angles for the model and a range of tuning 
objectives in the test program. 


646 
MARINE VEHICLES 
These data are best generated by performing several tunings at each heel angle 
and hull centerline angle of incidence to the free stream. The first tuning will attempt 
to maximize driving force without regard to driving force. The procedure for this 
should be as described above. An approximate eyeball tuning should be done with 
final tuning by remote control and then yaw the model over some small range to 
establish how "good" the tririik The second and following trims should repeat this 
procedure with a decreasing upper limit on the heel moment. This will allow the 
VPP to select the optimally depowered rig for the conditions being examined. 
The tuning process for upwind sails can include mast bend, forestay tension, jib 
sheet lead position, mainsheet tension, and boom vang tension. This process should 
not overlook the critical influence of mast bend and forestay sag on the set shape 
of the sail. Also pay close attention to mounting arrangements that influence the 
size of the gap between the foot of the main and jib and the deck. The size of this 
gap influences the strength of the vortex developed at the foot of the sail. If this 
gap is completely eliminated, 
the foot vortex system will disappear and the efficiency 
of the rig will increase. 
The model should be heeled for most upwind sail tests. If only one heel is to be 
explored, it should be in the 20"-30" range. The only exception to this would be 
the case where the rig is intended for a vessel capable of creating an unusual righting 
moment to counteract the heeling moment. Examples of vessels of this type include 
catamarans or other multihull vessels or a dinghy where crew weight can be used to 
augment stability. A photograph of a typical upwind sail test is shown in Figure 15.24. 
If the details of the sail shape are a part of the investigation, the shape of sails 
should be recorded as the test matrix proceeds. This is best accomplished by fitting 
the sails with "draft stripes" and the photographing the sail from a position as 
directly in line with the mast as practical. These photographic images can then be 
digitized and compared with other trim conditions or even used as a geometry 
baseline for correlation studies with numerical predictions of sail performance. An 
example of such a photograph is shown in Figure 15.25. 
Upwind sails are not usually as sensitive to Reynolds number effects since the 
flow is not dominated by separation phenomena to the extent that offwind sails are. 
A rough measure of the influence of separation on the flow can be determined by 
a method suggested in a recent report by the United States Sailing Ass~ciation.~' 
Recall that Prandlt's classical lifting Line theory predicts that the induced drag of a 
three-dimensional airfoil can be calculated as 
where e is the span efficiency factor and AR is the aspect ratio of the foil. All the 
terms in the denominator are a constant for a particular airfoil, so the result is that 
the induced drag coefficient is proportional to the square of the lift coeficient. 
Since this technique uses inviscid flow assumptions, the validity of the ideal flow 
assumptions can be tested by plotting Ci 
for the different trim conditions at a given 
angle of attack as a function of CD. 
If the plot is linear, then the drag is primarily 


FIGURE 15.24 
Typical upwind sail test. 
induced. To isolate the aerodynamic drag contributions of the sails, the tare drag 
of the rig without the sails should be subtracted from the data generated with the 
sails set before making these calculations. 
Downwind Sails Downwind sail experiments are similar to upwind sail experi- 
ments in most respects, 
but there are significant differences. Most of these differences 
can be traced to the fact that upwind sails are primarily lifting surfaces with mostly 
attached flow. The experiments are, therefore, similar to those carried out for evaluat- 
ing wings and appendages. Downwind sails, on the other hand, have large regions 
of separation, which is characteristic of bluff bodies, but in some configurations 
retain substantial characteristics of lifting systems. A useful comparison is to stalled 
wings. The forces on objects in such flows are known to be much stronger functions 
of Reynolds number than the forces in flows that are almost completely attached. 
Since most experiments on downwind sails are necessarily performed at Reynolds 
numbers significantly below full scale, care should be exercised in interpreting 
the results. 
The need to have the Reynolds number as large as practical for downwind sail 
experiments leads to relatively large models and corresponding requirement for 
significant blockage corrections. Methods for blockage corrections are given in 


. 
 
-. 
 
648 
MARWE VEHICLES 
- 
FIGURE 15.25 
Recording upwind sail shape with draft stripes. 


REFERENCES AND NOTES 
649 
FIGURE 15.26 
Wind tunnel offwind sail test rig. (Photograph courtesy of the Glenn L. 
Martin Wind Tunnel.) 
Chapters 9, 10, and 11. Maim and Ranzenbach,3" as mentioned earlier, present a 
detailed review of blockage correction schemes appropriate for downwind sail tests. 
Figure 15.26 shows a downwind sail test being performed in the Glenn L. Martin 
Wind Tunnel at the University of Maryland. 
REFERENCES AND 
NOTES 
1. Lewis, E. V., Ed., Principles o
f
 Naval 
Architecture, Society of Naval Architects and 
Marine Engineers, Jersey City, NJ, 1988. 
2. McTaggart, K., and Savage, M., 'Wind Heeling Loads on a Naval Frigate," paper 
presented at the International Conference on Stability of Ships and Ocean Vehicles, 
Melbourne, FL, Nov. 1994. 
3. SNAME, "Guidelines for Wind Tunnel Testing of Mobile Offshore Structures," 
SNAME 
T&R Bulletin 5-4, Society of Naval Architects and Marine Engineers, 1988. 
4. Deakin, B., "Model Test Techniques Developed to Investigate the Wind Heeling Charac- 
teristics of Sailing Vessels and Their Response to Gusts," paper presented at the tenth 
Chesapeake 
Sailing Yacht Symposium, 
Society of Naval Architects and Marine 
Engineers, 
Annapolis, MD, 1991. 
5. Long, M. E., "Wind-Tunnel Tests on Multiple Ship Moorings, Part 3. Determination of 
Air Loads on Multiple Ship Moorings for Destroyers, Submarines, Liberty Ships, and 
Escort Carriers," David Taylor Model Basin Report 830, Bethesda, MD, July 1952. 


650 
MARINE VEHICLES 
6. Marquand, C. J., "Aerodynamic Model Study of Marine Gas Turbine Exhaust Cooling," 
J. Ship Res., 22, 123-129, June 1978. 
7. Shultz, M., "Air Wake Survey of Full-scale CVA(N)-65," David W. Taylor Model Basin 
Aerodynamic Laboratory, Bethesda, MD, January 1963; Cantone. A., "Smoke Tunnel 
Studies on Wind Velocities over the Deck of an Aircraft Carrier," Naval Air Engineering 
Laboratory Report NAEL-EM-7140, Lakehurst, NJ, March 1964. 
8. Cook, M. L., "A Wind Tunnel Air Wake Survey of an 11144 Scale Model Aircraft 
Canier with Deck and Island Modifications," 
David W. Taylor Model Basin Aerodynamic 
Laboratory Report 1805, Bethesda, MD, 1968; Also see Naval Postgraduate School 
Masters Theses: Cahill, T. A., "Visualization of the Flow Field Around an Oscillating 
Model of the USS Enterprise (CVN-65) in a Simulated Atmospheric Boundary Layer," 
Monterey, CA, 1988; Biskaduros, J. L., "Flow Visualization of the Airwake of an Oscillat- 
ing Generic Ship Model," Monterey, CA, 1987; Bolinger, W. K., "Visualization of the 
Flow Field Around a Generic Destroyer Model in a Simulated Turbulent Atmospheric 
Boundary Layer," Monterey, CA, 1987; and Anderson, G. A., "Mapping the Airwake 
of a Model DO-943 Along Specific Helicopter Flight Paths," Monterey, CA, 1989. 
9. Newman, J., Marine Hydrodynamics, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1977. 
10. Joubert, P. N., and Matheson, N., "Wind Tunnel Tests of Two Lucy Ashton Reflex 
Geosims," J. Ship Res., 14, 241-276, Dec. 1970; Draijer, W. and Menkveld, H. J., 
"Measurement of the Resistance of a Yacht Model in a Whd Tunnel for High Reynolds 
Number," paper presented at Symposium Yachtarchitecture, Schiphol-Oust, Holland, 
Nov. 1975. 
11. Hurwitz, R. B., and Jenkins, D. S., "Analysis of Wake Survey and Boundary Layer 
Measurements for the RV ATHENA Represented by Model 5366 in the Anechoic Wind 
Tunnel," David Taylor Naval Ship Research and Development CenterlShip Performance 
Department, DTNSRDUSPD Report 0833-02, July 1980. 
12. Wan, G. D., Nguyen, V. O., Cooper, K. R., and Tanguay, B., "Wind Tunnel Investigations 
of Submarine Hydrodynamics," 
Can. Aeronaut. Space J., 39, 119-126, Sept. 1993. 
13. Molland, A. F., and Turnock, S. R., "Wind Tunnel Test Results of a Model Ship Propeller 
Based on a Modified Wageningen B4.40," University of Southampton, Department of 
Ship Science Report No. 43, Highfield, Southampton, U.K., Dec. 1990. 
14. Leggat, L. J., Mackay, M., Cooper, K. R., Williams, C. D., and Johnston, G. W., 
"Canadian 
Wlnd Tunnel Research for Naval Hydrodynamics," in Advanced Hydrodynamic Testing 
Facilities, Proceedings of the Twenty-Second Defence Research Group Seminar on 
Advanced Hydrodynamic Testing Facilities, NATO, The Hague, The Netherlands, 1982. 
15. Young, A. D., Boundary Layers, AIAA, Washington, DC, 1989. 
16. Fidler, J. E., and Smith, C. A., "Methods for Predicting Submersible Hydrodynamic 
Characteristics," 
Naval Coastal System Laboratory Report NCSC TM-238-78, Panama 
city, n, 
J U ~ Y  
1978. 
17. Goodman, A., "Experimental and Theoretical Investigation of Factors Affecting Fin- 
Body Interference," Hydronautics, Iuc. Report TR-7927-1, Silver Springs, MD, 1980. 
18. Barlow, J. B., Harris, D., and Ranzenbach, R., "Time Domain Simulation of Underwater 
Vehicles," paper presented at MAN '98, International Symposium and Workshop on 
Force Acting on a Manoeuvring Vessel, Dijon, France, Sept. 1988. 
19. Wetzel, T. G., and Simpson, 
R. L., "Unsteady Flow Over a 6: 1 
Prolate Spheroid," Virginia 
Polytechnic Institute and State University Report VPI-AOE-232, Blacksburg, VA, 1993. 


REFERENCES AND NOTES 
651 
20. Ohman, L. H., and Nguyen, V
.
 D., "Applications of the Five-Hole Probe Technique for 
Flow Field Surveys at the Institute for Aerospace Research," 
Institute for Aerospace 
Research, Ottawa, Ontario, 1994. 
21. Fry, D. J., "HulVAppendagePropeller Interaction Experiment," 
David Taylor Research 
CenterJShip Hydrodynamics Department, Report DTRCISHD-1288-01, Bethesda, MD, 
1966. 
22. Larsson, L., and Eliasson, K., Principle of Yacht Design, International Marine Publishers, 
Camden, ME, 1994. 
23. Sclavonnos, P
.
,
 
and Huang, Y., "Rudder Winglets on Sailing Yachts," 
Marine Technology, 
SNAME, July 1997. 
24. Flay, R. G. J., and McMillan, D. C., "A Wind Tunnel Investigation of Yacht Hydrodynamic 
Side Force and Drag," J. Ship Res., 00, 000400, Dec. 1993. 
25. Marchaj, C. A,, Aero-Hydrodynamics of Sailing, Dodd, Mead & Company, New York, 
1979. Also see the related material in Sail Performance (McGraw-Hill, 1990) by the 
same author. 
26. Whidden, T., and Levitt, M., The An and Science of Sails, St. Martin's Press, New 
York, 1990. 
27. Flay, R. G., and Vuletich, I. J., "Development of a Wind Tunnel Test Facility for Yacht 
Aerodynamic Studies," 3. Wind Eng. Ind. Aerodyn., 58, 231-258, Dec. 1995. 
28. Flay, R. G., Locke, N. J., and Mallinson, G. D., "Model Tests of fiisted Flow Wind 
Tunnel Designs for Testing Yacht Sails," J. Wind Eng. 2nd. Aerodyn., 
63, 155-170, 1996. 
29. Flay, R. G., "A Tkisted Flow Wind Tunnel for Testing Yacht Sails," J. Wind Eng. 2nd. 
Aerodyn., 63, 171-184, 1996. 
30. Mairs, C. M., and Ranzenbach, R. C., "Experimental Determination of Sail Performance 
and Blockage Corrections," 
paper presented at the Thirteenth Chesapeake Sailing Yacht 
Symposium, Soc. of Naval Architects and Marine Engineers, Annapolis, MD, 1997. 
31. United States Sailing Association, 'Wind Tunnel Tests of Sailing Yacht Rig Aerodynam- 
ics," U.S. Sailing Report No. 1234, July 1995. 


16 Wind Engineering 
Wind tunnel evaluations of components, individual structures, and groups of struc- 
tures all are routinely used to obtain data to support design decisions that often are 
intended to ensure structural integrity but also may be aimed at issues of utility in 
addition to safety. Pedestrian-level wind conditions are 
often a substantial concern. 
Patterns of deposit for drifting snow or debris are frequent subjects of investigations. 
Local concentrations and dispersion patterns of pollutants are also topics of wind 
tunnel simulations. 
A number of applications that come from the field of wind engineering are 
discussed in Chapter 2. See Section 2.10 for discussions complementary to the 
material in this chapter. 
Extreme cases that call for special attention are perhaps the easiest to identify. 
Very tall structures that are relatively elastic clearly may experience sufficient wind- 
induced response so that the wind effects will impose significant requirements on 
the structural specifications. Buildings whose profiles are extraordinary are clear 
candidates for analysis and possible wind tunnel simulation to determine if some 
building surface loads may exceed typical local code expectations. Special attention 
is warranted if a structure has the potential for significant dynamic motions. Tall, 
slender buildings, long-span bridges, marine platforms, extensive cable-suspended 
flexible roofs, and transmission line cables with their towers are typical examples. 
The most widely publicized wind-induced structural failure is almost surely the 
Tacoma Narrows Bridge, which under the influence of a moderate and steady wind 
developed a largeamplitude oscillation leading to total separation of the bridge 
decking from the suspension system. A substantial part of the failure process was 
captured on motion picture film. The film provides 
dramatic evidence of the potential 
power of the interaction of a relatively moderate wind that excites dynamic modes 
of a susceptible structure. 
Problems often arise in situations that appear rather common so a review of 
potential for wind-related design issues is strongly recommended for all structures. 
For some areas that have relatively frequent tropical storms, this is now arequirement 
of local regulations. 
Compared to vehicle aerodynamics, 
wind engineering 
is a relatively young techni- 
cal field that has seen strong activity for the last 30 years or so. Two sources of 
information on the field and its ongoing development are the Journal of Wind 
Engineering and Industrial Aerodynamics published by Elsevier Scientific Publish- 
ing Co. and the proceedings of a remarkable series of international conferences on 
wind engineering that have been held at four-year intervals at sites around the world 
since the inaugural at the National Physical Laboratory, Teddington, England, in 


16.1 MODELING THE ATMOSPHERIC SURFACE WLND 
653 
1963. The tenth in the series is planned to be held at the Danish Maritime Institute, 
Copenhagen, Denmark, in June 1999.' A reference of particular value to our imrnedi- 
ate interests is the proceedings of a conference specifically focused on wind tun- 
nel m~deling.~ 
Wind tunnel simulations are intended to give information on wind effects on 
structures under particular wind conditions, that is, particular wind speed and wind 
direction relative 
to the structure and its surroundings. In the case 
of wind engineering 
studies, there are implied features of the incoming stream that are typically 
character- 
ized for general topographic features but may be dependent on direction even for 
a particular geographic site. This would be true, for example, for a structure located 
on a shore where significant features of the incoming wind may differ when coming 
from the water side as compared to coming from the land side. The data from the 
wind tunnel for specific speeds and directions are used with historic data on local 
wind conditions to make predictions for the effects on the actual full-scale 
structures. 
The most conservative approach to choosing design requirements is to take the 
worst-case 
climatic wind speed to be expected based on the historic record combined 
with the worst-case loading indicated from the wind tunnel simulations without 
regard to wind direction in either the historic record or the wind tunnel simulation. 
As experience has accumulated over the last three decades, it has become more 
acceptable to consider 
in a more realistic 
fashion the details of both directional 
effects 
from the wind tunnel results and the 
local climate 
in determining 
design requirements. 
The climatic wind conditions at a particular site are obviously critical, but also 
obviously predictable only in a statistical way and with considerable uncertainty 
for any given period of time. The most extreme events are of greatest significance 
in the design requirements and at the same time are the most uncertain. Choices 
are necessary in relating the wind tunnel simulation to reported climatic wind speeds, 
even though much of the historic data may be from less than ideal (incompletely 
defined) instrument locations. Typical choices for reference wind speed and direction 
are the conditions above the model boundary layer in the wind tunnel, which are 
considered to be comparable to the hourly mean wind speed at gradient height. In 
some situations, a profile in the wind tunnel may extend over such a large fraction 
of the tunnel height that there may not be a reasonable approximation to a "free 
stream." In such cases the wind speed at the top of the structure may be used as 
the reference to be considered as similar to the hourly mean at the height of the 
actual structure at its intended location. 
16.1 MODELING THE ATMOSPHERIC SURFACE WIND 
High wind speeds correspond to atmospheric boundary layers with neutral thermal 
stratification. These are the conditions of greatest interest with regard to structural 
wind loading. This is not the case of severest conditions for dispersion of pollutants 
that may occur for relatively low wind speeds and thermal inversion conditions. 
It is necessary to create flows representative of the atmospheric boundary layer 
over a number of different types of terrain. The properties of the flow are typically 


654 
WIND ENGINEERING 
described by the vertical 
distribution 
of the mean speed, 
tS(h), 
the values of turbulence 
intensity for the three flow components, and the integral scales for each component. 
It is generally considered most important to reproduce the vertical distribution of 
mean speed plus the intensity and scale of the longitudinal component of turbulence. 
Some cases in which the object under study is long and slender may require that 
the component of turbulence~normal 
to the mean wind and the long axis of the 
object be modeled with reasonable fidelity. 
It happens that the time variation of the atmospheric wind as represented by the 
power spectral density has a low region in the range from a few minutes to a few 
hours. Figure 
16.1, based on Lumley; shows this characteristic. 
This feature separates 
what can be considered as "turbulence" to the right of the low region and variations 
of mean wind speed to the left of the low region. Changes in the simulated mean 
wind speed are obtained by varying the wind tunnel flow rate. Changes in the 
turbulence and profile properties are obtained by changes in roughness elements 
upstream of the test object. Changes in simulated wind direction are obtained by 
rotating the test object in the wind tunnel. 
If the actual boundary layer is known at the location of a proposed site, the same 
boundary layer should be simulated. If not, the maximum speed at 30 ft altitude 
may be measured or estimated and the boundary layer is structured according to 
where u is the mean velocity at height z and u , ~  
the mean velocity at reference height. 
The boundary layer shape exponent u varies according to the terrain. Wind speed 
increases with height, while turbulence is greatest near the ground. Several boundary 
layer profiles are shown in Figure 16.2. 
cycles/ 1 
0-* 
I 6' 
10 
1 
0
'
 
1 
o
2
 Frequency 
Hours 
100 
10 
1 
0.1 
0.01 
Period 
FIGURE 16.1 Approximate spectrum of wind speed near 
the ground. 


~ 
16.1 MODELING THE 
ATMOSPHERIC SURFACE WIND 
655 
FIGURE 16.2 Boundary layer shapes and exponents. 
The dynamic pressure used for ~ducing 
the forces and moments to coefficient 
form may be taken as an average value over the model, the value noted at the 
middle of the model, or free stream q. It must, in any case, be clearly and unequivo- 
cally defined or the data are useless. Figure 16.3 shows a set of strakes and floor 
roughness needed to produce atmosphericlike boundary layers. 
FIGURE 16.3 Closeup of high-drag strakes needed to produce atmosphericlike boundary 
layer flows. (Courtesy of Institute for Aerospace Research, NRC) 


656 
WIND ENGINEERING 
Figure 16.4 and 16.5 show a plan view and a photograph of wind tunnels used 
in wind engineering studies. These tunnels have the characteristically long test 
sections that allow easier manipulation of the properties of the incoming profiles 
and turbulence features. 
Geometric Scale 
Geometric scale is influenced by the wind modeling as well as the overall size of 
the wind tunnel. It is desirable to obtain equality of the ratios of building size to 
roughness length of terrain, boundary layer thickness, and integral scale of the 
longitudinal component of turbulence. The integral scale of turbulence is the most 
difficult to manipulate. 
Blockage of the tunnel cross section is generally held below 10% and is preferably 
held to about 5%. Qpical scales used are in the range of 1 : 
300 to 1 
: 
600 for large 
buildings and down to 1 : 
100 or less for smaller structures for which surface layer 
simulation only is required. An example installation is shown in Figure 16.6. 
Speed Scale and Reynolds Number 
The wind tunnel simulation is almost always at very much smaller than full-scale 
Reynolds number. The simulations are useful representations 
of the full-scale flows 
for two reasons. First, the influence of high turbulence intensity is to reduce the 
Reynolds number dependence. Second, the typical shapes of buildings, bridges, and 
the like yield flows that are less dependent on Reynolds number than typical vehicle 
shapes. Reynolds number effects are strongest when the locations of transition and 
separation vary with Reynolds number. If there is no laminar flow due to high free- 
stream turbulence and the shapes are so sharp that all separation locations are 
geometrically determined, then there will be little dependence on Reynolds number. 
If rounded shapes are part of a structure, then some schemes such as roughening 
of the surface are sometimes used. 
Given that Reynolds number is not a factor in choosing speed and that rigid 
models are in use, then speed can be chosen primarily for the best performance of 
floor 
turntable 
FIGURE 16.4 Layout of meteorological wind tunnel at the Wind Engineering Laboratory 
at Colorado State University. 


16.1 MODELING THE ATMOSPHERIC SURFACE WIND 
657 
FIGURE 16.5 
Atmospheric simulation tunnel at Verdian-Calspan Operations. 
FIGURE 16.6 
The strakes, floor roughness, and upstream buildings needed to simulate 
the proper conditions for studying the wind pressures and pedestrian-level velocities for the 
Equitable Center West, New York. Scale is 1 : 
400. (Courtesy Cermak, Peterka Petersen, Inc.) 


658 
WIND ENGINEERING 
the instrumentation that is used. If the model used is elastic, then dynamic parameters 
influence the choice of flow speed. This will be discussed later. 
Terrain Effects 
Information on flow charactefistics over a variety of terrain is available to use in 
setting up flows. However, particular local topography must always be considered 
to determine if it will produce effects that are unique and important. Topographic 
models in scales ranging from 1 
: 
1000 to 1 
: 
5000 can be used for evaluation of 
effects on the flow field. The information from such a simulation can then be used 
in setting up a flow model at a larger scale 
for building or 
other structure simulations. 
Figure 16.7 shows a tunnel crew preparing a terrain simulation. 
Effects of Nearby Buildings and Topography 
Significant neighboring buildings, structures, and topographic features should be 
modeled if only with block-type representation. This typically includes significant 
features out to 1000-2000 f
t
 from the main structure of interest. Figure 16.8 shows 
a building with adjacent buildings simulated by blocks. The flow is influenced in 
this case by having the stagnation point much higher than would be the case in a 
more open environment. 
FIGURE 1
6
.
7
 Laying in contoured terrain. (Courtesy Verdian-Calspan Operations.) 


- - 
- 
- 
-- - - 
- 
- - 
- 
- 
16.2 LOCAL PRESSURES AND PANEL LOADS 
659 
FIGURE 16.8 Smoke visualization showing the location of stagnation point in the presence 
of adjacent buildings. 
16.2 LOCAL PRESSURES AND PANEL LOADS 
Since the environment provided by the simulation of the turbulent atmospheric 
boundary layer is obviously unsteady, there is an immediate requirement to assess 
the degree to which unsteady treatment of fluid flow phenomena is required. Cases 
that involve the dynamics of larger sections of the structure, if it is elastic, may 
require unsteady treatment. For local pressures measured on a rigid model to predict 
local panel loads, a quasi-static treatment is valid. The structural responses of these 
small&bsystems &faster than the energy containing 
frequencies of the atmospheric 
fluctuations. Appropriate data can be obtained by simulations at one wind speed. 
The instmmentation, 
however, must have suficiently high bandwidth capability 
to accurately track the time-varying 
pressures resulting from the incoming turbulence 
structures. Significant tubing lengths are difficult to avoid, so care must be taken 
in assessing the effects on the measurements. 


660 
WIND ENGINEERING 
The purposes of local pressure measurements usually include the prediction of 
wind loads on windows, wall elements, and so on. It is necessary to carry out 
preliminary assessments to anticipate the regions most likely to encounter peak 
effects. Even with cogent preassessment it is typical to require 400-800 pressure 
taps on a substantial building. To keep overall time requirements in acceptable 
ranges, the usual azimuthal program will be to collect data at 10' increments. 
Additional azimuthal points are usually needed for directions near those that exhibit 
the most critical behavior. 
Panel wind loads are obtained by integration of the pressures over the areas of 
interest. Various means of implementing such integrations 
using pheumatic 
averaging 
have been applied. These have the advantage of requiring fewer transducer readings, 
but they must be carefully analyzed and validated for each implementation. Current 
instrumentation and computing equipment is quite capable of doing almost any 
required computation for these purposes in very little time. 
Internal Pressures 
The action of wind affects the internal pressures as well as the external pressure 
distribution of buildings and other partially sealed enclosures. The wind-induced 
load on any wall, window, or membrane subjected to the internal pressure on one 
side and the local external pressure on the other is of course the integral of the 
difference in these pressures. The external pressure distributions are obtained from 
the direct simulation and measurement as discussed above. The correct internal 
pressure depends on a number of parameters that describe the restrictions on flow 
between the exterior and interior of the structure and the flow within the structure. 
Internal pressure caused by action of the wind depends on the external pressure 
distribution along with the distribution of porosity of the envelope of the structure 
and on the characteristics of internal flow passages. In a few cases, the internal 
pressures may be influenced by dynamic properties of the envelope materials and 
the internal 
flow volumes. Two obvious limiting cases can be identified: the unlikely, 
but possible, event that the envelope is impermeable in the one case at the stagnation 
point, or point of highest external pressure, or in the second case at the point of 
minimum external pressure. These two conditions define the largest interior-to- 
exterior loads and exterior-to-interior loads, respectively, that could exist. Using 
these for design specifications is conservative, but considerable information on 
interior details and their effects on flow resistances is needed to develop detailed 
models that could be used for developing design specifications that are less conser- 
vative. 
16.3 LOADS ON COMPLETE STRUCTURES 
Loads on complete structures that are effectively rigid can in principle be obtained 
by integrating surface pressures. This is effective for obtaining upper and lower 
limits, but accurate time-varying total loads are a challenge to obtain by surface 


16.4 STRUCTURES EXHIBITING ELASTIC MOTION 
661 
pressure integrations. Unlike integrating over relatively small panels, integrating 
over an entire structure while maintaining reasonable time accuracy requires very 
extensive, effectively simultaneous sampling of pressures. It can be done in principle, 
but often it may be preferable to construct a rigid model mounted on a very stiff 
and sensitive balance. This can be done, of course, for either a complete structure 
or a part of the structure on which total, perhaps time-varying, loads are needed. 
A full-scale structure for which such a measurement will be of interest will 
have some potential resonant response. The model structure and wind speed in the 
simulation must be chosen to have a model-scale resonant frequency that is high 
enough so that the measured characteristics 
are not affected by any resonant behavior 
of the model. The model-scale frequency f,, which corresponds to the full-scale 
frequency f,, is given by 
Here &IL, is the full-to-model-size 
ratio, usually quite large, and VmIVf, 
is the ratio 
of wind speed set in the wind tunnel to the full-scale wind speed of interest. This 
ratio is typically of order 1. This indicates that the model resonant frequency must 
be quite high, which leads to a requirement for light, rigid models mounted on 
piezoelectric-type balance elements. 
Concepts from structural dynamics that provide definitions for structural modes 
and generalized forces are used with the techniques of measurement mentioned 
above to predict full-scale motions. 
16.4 STRUCTURES EXHIBITING ELASTIC MOTION 
Some structures undergo dynamic deformations of sufficient magnitude so that the 
motion itself modifies the aerodynamic 
forces. They tend to be slender and relatively 
flexible. The simulations for these types of structures are termed aeroelastic simula- 
tions. We have not treated such cases for vehicles but will do so in Chapter 18. 
Aeroelastic models are governed by a combination of the equations of motion 
for fluid dynamics and the equations of motion for elastic structures. A derivation 
similar to that in Chapter 1 wherein the Navier-Stokes 
equations were nondimension- 
alized can be carried out to obtain the dimensionless parameters 
that govern dynamic 
similarity. An excellent presentation is given by Bisplinghoff, Ashley, and Halfrna~~.~ 
We will give an outline for a structure that can be modeled as a slender beam. 
Figure 16.9 is a representation of a cantilever-beam-like structure subjected to a 
transverse load from a wind profile in one direction. The equation of motion for a 
slender beam is given by the equation 


662 
WIND ENGINEERING 
running mass = m
(
y
)
 
stiffness = E
(
y
)
l
(
y
)
 
FIGURE 16.9 Cantilever beam subjected to dynamic transverse load. 
To nondimensionalize this equation, the following relations are introduced: 
where L is the beam length, M is the total mass, and TI 
is an appropriate time scale. 
It may be the period of the first normal mode or it might be an aerodynamic time 
interval, LIE 
where EIo is the value at y = 0 and s
^
@
)
 
is the dimensionless function describing 
the stiffness: 
where V, is the reference speed, perhaps at y = L, co is a representative length 
dimension of the cross section at the base, and the functions give the shapes of the 
variations that must be consistent. 
This last relation implies an assumption of Reyn- 
olds number independence. The equation of motion now appears in the form of 
Equation (16.8): 


16.4 STRUCTURES EXHIBITING ELASTIC MOTION 
663 
Supposing that the dimensionless functions $(j), 
A
(
?
)
,
 a(?), and 0(9, 0 are 
known for the full-scale structure and are made the same for a model, then the 
two coefficients 
T
!
E
I
O
 
C, = - 
and C2 = T:pVfco 
M 
L3 
2M 
must be the same for the model as they are for the full-scale structure. It turns out 
that there may be several choices that will accomplish this result. 
The analysis required in some cases may be much more complex. Two directions 
of sway and torsional motion may be important, in which case the equations of 
motion are more complex than those for the unidirectional motion for a slender 
beam as given above. 
In some limited number of cases, a model that is geometrically scaled internally 
and externally can provide a dynamically similar representation of the full scale 
insofar as structural dynamics is concerned. The Reynolds number, however, will 
not be near the full-scale value, 
so appeal is necessary to the same range of arguments 
that have been made previously that indicate much smaller Reynolds numbers are 
satisfactory 
for a majority of cases. These models are referred to as "replica" 
models. 
Such models are possible 
for large-scale 
ratios only if the full-scale structure is shell- 
like, having its elastic stiffness obtained from mass concentrated near the surfaces. 
Most aeroelastic models are "equivalent" models that have appropriate distribu- 
tions of mass and stiffness to reproduce the structural modal properties of the full- 
scale structure but are very different in structural detail. A segment of a structure 
may be modeled in a two-dimensional fashion for some highly slender shapes such 
FIGURE 16.10 Wind tunnel model installation for studying buffeting. The model in the 
foreground is in the wake of the sectional model o
f
 a railway bridge upstream. (Courtesy 
National Physical Laboratory.) 


664 
WIND ENGINEERING 
FIGURE 16.11 A sectional model of a circular cylinder with so-called three start helical 
strakes. (Courtesy National Physical Laboratory.) 
as bridge decks or tall towers. The sections are then mounted elastically in the wind 
tunnel in a manner that represents the constraints of the adjacent structure. 
Some structures that often require aeroelastic modeling are long-span bridges, 
flexible-roof systems, taIl buildings, cooling towers, transmission towers and cables, 
masts, and chimneys. 
Figures 16.10 and 16.11 show example tunnel installations of sectional models. 
REFERENCES AND NOTES 
1. h
t
t
p
:
/
/
w
w
w
.
d
a
n
m
a
r
.
d
k
/
i
c
w
e
9
9
/
.
 
2. Wind Tunnel Modeling for Civil Engineering, Proceedings of the International Workshop 
on W
i
n
d
 Tunnel Modeling Criteria and Techniques in Civil Engineering Applications, 
Simio, E., Ed., National Institute for Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD, 1982. 
3. Lurnley, J. L., and Panofsky, H. A., The Stmcfure 
ofAhnospheric Turbulence, Interscience, 
New York, 1964. 
4. Bisplinghoff. R., Ashley, H., and Halfman, R., "Aeroelasticity," in Aeroehtic Model 
Theory, Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA, 1955, Chapter 11. 


17 Small Wind 'hnnels 
In order to avoid the impression that useful wind tunnels must have a large jet and 
a speed of 200 mph or more, it seems pertinent to discuss some uses of smaller 
tunnels. A 30-in. tunnel was used by Van Schliestettl in the study of boundary 
correction factors, and a still smaller tunnel was used by Spaulding and MemamZ 
in their outstanding calibrations of pitot-static tubes. Other examples could be given 
of successful programs carried out in small tunnels. 
The fundamental advantage of a small wind tunnel is the economics of operation. 
Small tunnels cost less to build and less to run. 
A further advantage of a small tunnel is that smaller models, down to a point, 
require less time to build, can be constructed in simpler shops, and are therefore 
less expensive. Small size may be a disadvantage, it is true, but those who have 
built models with overall length or width of 6 or more feet (2 m) are well aware 
of the time and cost of such models. 
The key to successful experiments made in a small tunnel is to have a clear 
understanding of the likely role of Reynolds number on the objects of the experi- 
ments. Although it has been said that there are cases in which Reynolds number 
has no effect, this is not exactly true. It is a matter of whether the relevant effect 
of Reynolds number is in fact obtainable in a small tunnel. 
Small wind tunnels are routinely used for instruction in methods of experimenta- 
tion. This is done very well even if the data from the experiments are not useful 
for prediction of behavior of similarly shaped devices at much larger Reynolds 
number, There are many objects that are sufficiently small so that the aerodynamic 
properties are directly measurable at the appropriate Reynolds numbers in small 
wind tunnels. Examples are various instrumentation devices, sports objects that are 
hand thrown, and small- to moderate-size model airplanes. 
We have given a discussion of scale effects in Chapter 8, which should be 
consulted in conjunction with the material here. 
17.1 TESTS LEAST AFFECTED BY REYNOLDS NUMBER 
A small tunnel can be very useful in the study of flow patterns and how those 
patterns are 
affected by parametric variations in some geometric parameters. These 
studies can be made with, for example, smoke, tufts or china clay, lamp black, and 
fluorescent oil, as discussed in Chapter 5, although great care should be taken with 
regard to the possibility that any attachment to the surfaces may create a significant 
perturbation to the flow. Care must be exercised in recording the details of the 


666 
SMALL WIND TUNNELS 
resulting patterns whether it be done by artistic sketching, by photographic, or by 
cinematographic means. Studies of this type can give insight into separation on 
wings, fuselages, near intersections, sails, or other shapes such as automobiles. 
Pressure 
distribution measurements on airfoils 
can be instructive 
even at relatively 
low Reynolds numbers. For a given airfoil shape the distribution does not change 
drastically with Reynolds number so long as the angle of attack is well below stall. 
The induced drag increment due to planform selection is well represented at low 
Reynolds numbers. In this case the drag due to lift must be separated from the 
parasite drag. 
The aforementioned pitot-static 
calibration 
is an example 
of an instrument 
calibra- 
tion that is a perfect candidate for a small tunnel. 
Many experiments concerning wind tunnel wall corrections are suitable for the 
small tunnel. These tend to be little affected by Reynolds number. 
The progress or sequence of the stall over a wing may be unchanged by Reynolds 
number, although the entire stall is unusually delayed by higher Reynolds numbers. 
Key indicators of Reynolds number effects are the locations of transition of the 
boundary layers from laminar to turbulent and the behavior of lines of separation 
as model attitude is changed. If both of these are fixed by a natural aspect of the 
shape or by specific manipulation, then the flow is unlikely to change significantly 
with Reynolds number. 
So-called qualitative tests are candidates for small wind tunnels. Qualitative 
tests are expected to lead either to an indication of feasibility or an indication of 
nonfeasibility, which in turn will imply either more testing or abandonment of 
the project. 
17.2 THE SMALL WIND 
TUNNEL FOR INSTRUCTION 
A small tunnel is invaluable for instructional purposes. Almost no type of experiment 
is performed in a large tunnel that cannot be duplicated in a small tunnel, the possible 
exception being on models with turbine thrust simulators. For instructional purposes 
plastic model kits can often be reinforced and used as a low-cost way of obtaining 
the rather complex geometry of a complete vehicle. 
Many schools have a small wind tunnel, along the lines of that shown in Figure 
17.1. The jet size is from 12 to 30 in. square and the dimension are such that a 
space 14 X 30 ft is sufficient for the tunnel and motor. Ten to 25 hp will provide 
100-150 mph in the test section. 
Walls for the test section may be made so that they may be wholly or partially 
removed, thus making it possible to perform tests with an open or closed jet and 
to study asymmetrical boundaries. Open test sections cannot be used for nonretum 
tunnels without a plenum around the test section. 
Many of these smaller tunnels are three-component balances rather than a six- 
component balances. This allows the measurement of the longitudinal components 
without the complexity associated with full six-component measurements. The neces- 


17.2 THE SMALL WLND TUNNEL FOR INSTRUCTION 
667 
FIGURE 17.1 The late Professor Wiley Shewood and an instructional wind tunnel of his 
design. (More than 450 wind tunnels were constructed under his direction.) (Photograph 
Courtesy of Aerolab, Inc., Laurel, MD.) 
sity for completing an experiment in the typical laboratory period of 3 4  
h
r
 precludes 
as complete a test as might be desired. 
A significant number of high schools have developed special science programs 
that include some introduction to aerodynamics. In a small number of cases a small 
wind tunnel has been acquired. 
We have provided synopses of a selection of experiments suitable for instructional 
purposes. Some of these, as indicated, provide an opportunity to introduce the 
student to some of the more sophisticated instrumentation that is frequently used. 
Most of these can be completed in about 3 hr provided the participants have prepared 
themselves by studying appropriate material prior to arriving at the laboratory. 
The following descriptions assume that a closed test section will be used. Some 
modifications will be required if a blower tunnel or an open jet is used. 
Experiment 1: 'hnnel Calibration and Flow Quality 
Objectives 
a. Calibrate the test section speed against the nozzle pressure drop. 
b. 'Evaluate the uniformity of the time mean flow in the test section. 
c. Determine the turbulence factor in the center of the test section. 


668 
SMALL WIND TUNNELS 
Tunnel Condition 
Empty test section. 
Apparatus 
.
- 
Pitot-static tube, yawhead, turbulence sphere, two micromanometers, meter 
stick, and traverse device to position flow probes throughout test section. 
(We give the simplest types of apparatus. Electronic systems can always be 
substituted for the more basic devices.) 
Measurements 
a. Place pitot-static tube at the center of the test section. Attach one microma- 
nometer for measuring nozzle pressure drop, Ah, and the other to measure 
the total minus static from the pitot-static tube, q. Vary the tunnel speed 
control and record the pressures. Plot q versus Ah and determine the slope 
of the best straight-line fit. This is the tunnel calibration constant. 
bl. Measure the dynamic pressure at 11 equally spaced points across the jet at 
the mid height. Repeat this at 11 equally spaced heights if time permits. Plot 
variation from the centerline value in percent. Prepare a contour plot if area 
data are obtained. 
b2. Repeat bl with the q measurement replaced by the flow angle measurement. 
c. Put the turbulence sphere at the test section center. Determine the turbulence 
factor by the method described in Chapter 6. 
Experiment 2: Balance Alignment and Aspect Ratio 
Objectives 
a. Obtain lift, drag, and pitch moment measurements for wings at two aspect 
ratios. 
b. Find alignment correction. 
c. Apply boundary corrections and obtain corrected lift, drag, and pitch mo- 
ment coefficients. 
Tunnel Condition 
Balance in. 
Apparatus 
l k o  
wings with the same airfoil section profiles and chord but different aspect 
ratios: 4 and 6 are good choices. 


17.2 THE SMALL WIND TUNNEL FOR INSTRUCTION 
669 
Measurements 
a. Install wing of AR = 6. Read L, D, 
and Mat 2
'
 increments from below zero 
lift to past the stall. Angles should be set by a method that provides setting 
with precision of at least O.lO. 
b. Invert model and repeat. 
c. Repeat both steps above for wing of AR = 4. 
d. Plot all data uncorrected. Make alignment and boundary corrections and plot 
corrected results. (Final data here include tare and interference effects, but 
with models of about 3-in. chord the evaluation of these effects is extremely 
difficult.) Note on plots azL, 
dCLlda 
CLm, 
CW,rmnr 
Cmo. 
and ac. 
Experiment 3: Tailsetting and Downwash 
Objectives 
a. Find downwash at tail as a function of angle of attack. 
b. Find lift, drag, and pitch moment as functions of angle of attack and tail in- 
cidence. 
c. Find tail incidence for pitch trim at CL 
= 0.2 and the corresponding downwash 
and angle of attack at the tail. 
Tunnel Condition 
Balance in. 
Apparatus 
Airplane model with horizontal tail having variable incidence. 
Measurements 
a. Measure lift, drag, and pitch moment for angles of attack from zero lift to 
beyond stall with tail off. 
b. Repeat with tail on and elevator at zero setting for at least three tail incidences 
between ?go. 
c. Plot angle of attack versus moment coefficient and downwash at the tail versus 
angle of attack. Determine tail incidence to provide zero pitch moment when 
lift coefficient is 0.2. Determine 
the angle of attack of the tail in this condition. 
Note that a moment reference corresponding to a representative center-of- 
mass location must be chosen. This is not generally the same as the resolving 
center of the balance, so the necessary moment transfers must be compared. 


670 
SMALL WIND TUNNELS 
Experiment 4: Static Stability and Control 
Objectives 
a. Determine the allowable center-of-mass range that corresponds to positive 
static stability and possible trim with given elevators. 
'lbnnel Condition 
- Balance in. 
Apparatus 
- Model with removable tail and movable elevators. 
Measurements 
a. Measure lift, drag, and pitch moment for angles of attack from zero lift to 
beyond stall with the tail off. 
h. Repeat with the tail on for elevator settings of at least 0, -5, - 
10 and - 
15". 
c. Plot C
,
 against CL 
for each elevator setting and C. against 6,. Find dC,,,/dCL. 
Also plot CL 
against a. 
If a sting-type balance is available, this is a good experiment for which to use it. 
A separate experiment would be the calibration of the sting-type balance. 
Experiment 5: Profile Drag by Momentum Theory 
Objectives 
a. Obtain airfoil drag by measuring wake momentum deficit. 
'lbnnel Condition 
- Constant chord wing installed that extends the width of the tunnel. 
Apparatus 
'hvelve-inch 
chord airfoil, wake survey rake and multiple tube manometer, or 
pitot or pitot plus static that can traverse wake, scanivalve,-or 
pressure trans- 
ducer plus associated electronics can be used in place of the manometer. 
Back-lighted manometers can be photographed and have the advantage of 
showing students the shape of the wake plus ensure that the entire wake 
is obtained. 


17.2 THE 
SMALL WIND TUNNEL FOR INSTRUCTION 
6
7
1
 
Measurements 
a. Set tunnel speed in the range of 8&100% of maximum. Obtain total pressure 
from rake or traverse 0.7~ 
behind airfoil trailing edge for angles of attack 
from -3" to 6'. Integrate the momentum deficit for each condition to obtain 
c,,. Plot cd0 
against a. 
b. Set angle 
of attack at zero. Measure wake pressures 
for a range of tunnel speed, 
taking at least three speeds from the maximum down to a value determined by 
the capability of the measuring devices to resolve the pressure differences. 
Plot cd0 
against Reynolds number. 
Experiment 6: Pressure Distribution 
Objectives 
a. Obtain pressure 
distributions 
on a typical airfoil over a range of angles of attack. 
b. Integrate pressure distributions to obtain lift and drag contributions from 
pressure. 
Tunnel Condition 
Closed jet, balance out. 
Apparatus 
Pressure tapped wing. It would be very good if it is the same wing as used 
for experiment 5. Multiple-tube manometer or scanivalve-type pressure trans- 
ducer and associated electronics. 
Measurements 
a. With tunnel set at desired dynamic pressure obtain pressures for several angles 
of attack from zero lift through ,and beyond stall. Plot c,, c,, and c,, 
versus 
a. 
If run in conjunction with experiment 5, plot c, versus cd. 
Experiment 7: Dynamic Stability 
Objectives 
a. Obtain short-period made characteristics for a particular configuration. 
Tunnel Condition 
Model on hinge or pivot allowing free oscillation. No balance required. 


672 
SMALL WIND 
TUNNELS 
Apparatus 
A model that can be a wing or a missile body with fins or a complete configura- 
tion. The mounting must allow for free rotation about an axis that corresponds 
to a typical center-of-mass location. A method of recording the time history 
of the model pitch is required. It is good if the actual mass distribution of 
the model can be varied. An optical method of timing the oscillations is a 
good option. 
Measurements 
a. Measure the moment of inertia of the model about the axis of oscillation. 
b. Set the axis location. At a series of speeds, say 40, 60, and 80 mph, disturb 
model and record the time history of the pitch. Extract the frequency of the 
oscillations and the damping of the motion treated as a second-order system. 
Plot period against velocity. Compute the stability derivatives C,, and C, + 
C,, from the time histories and the moment of inertia. 
c. Set the axis at a new location and repeat. 
Experiment 8: The Boundary Layer 
Objectives 
a. To directly measure boundary layer at various stations on an airfoil and deduce 
the location of transition. 
Tunnel Condition 
Constant chord extending the width of the tunnel. No balance required. 
Apparatus 
Twelve- to 15-in. chord NACA 0012 wing (used because of large amount of 
data on this airfoil), boundary layer mouse plus manometer or scanivalve 
and associated elecaonics, or traversible hot-wire or thin-film gage or very 
small pitot. 
Measurements 
a. Place mouse and pitot at 5, 10, 15, 20, 25, 30, and 35% chord and record 
dynamic pressures at 0.03, 0.06, 0.09, 0.12 in. from surface. 
b. Determine transition region by plotting velocity profiles and velocity at con- 
stant height. If time permits, it is good to repeat for a range of speeds, that 
is, Reynolds numbers. Flow visualization can be used to check transition point. 


17.3 LOW-REYNOLDS-NUMBER 
TESTING 
673 
17.3 LOW-REYNOLDS-NUMBER TESTING 
Small tunnels provide conditions corresponding to relatively low Reynolds numbers, 
and it is fitting to have a good understanding of flow at these values in order to 
avoid the pitfalls into which many engineers have fallen. Indeed, a remarkable 
correlation exists at any time between the current capabilities of wind tunnels and 
the type of airfoils designers select. At Reynolds numbers of about 50,000 a thin 
wing with 4 6 %  camber appears best and was used in early aircraft such as the 
Brequet and many World War I fighters. At Reynolds numbers around 1.5 X lo6 
the Clark Y performs quite well, as do other sections with perhaps 4% camber and 
12% thickness. They in turn were used on the Spirit o
f
 St. Lauis and many other 
airplanes of the period 1925-1935. At 4 X 106-
8 X 106 the symmetrical sections 
of slightly higher thickness show up well, and we find those on many aircraft of 
1935-1940. Later, of course, the tunnels with lower turbulence became available, 
and they in turn greatly influenced design from 1940 to 1950 until high subsonic 
effects began to crowd out other problems. 
The point is to draw attention to the fact that most "modem" airfoils will yield 
embarrassingly poor results at low Reynolds numbers, and teachers, students, or 
others trying either NACA 0015 or 65 series wings at IW = 150,000 will find 
themselves with extremely wiggly lift curves and drag curves for symmetrical 
wings showing less drag at 5
O
 angle of attack than at z e r e a n  unexpected, if not 
"impossible," state of affairs. 
Hysteresislike Effects 
Mueller and co-workers" 
give results of extensive studies of flow over two-dimen- 
sional airfoils at Reynolds numbers as low as 40,000 based on chord. We show data 
for Reynolds numbers of 130,000 and 400,000 in Figures 17.2 and 17.3. At RN 
= 
40,000 the lift curve for a NACA 663-018 
from negative to positive stall is in three 
distinct pieces. W o  
parts are near the stall, and at a = &8O, there is a linear region 
with very low slope. Mueller and Batill3 show smoke photographs taken at a = 0° 
that indicate laminar separations on both the top and bottom of the airfoil at 65% 
chord with periodic vortex shedding. As shown in Figure 17.4, at a = +
6
O
 the 
flow attached to the lower surface but separates at 10-
15% chord on the upper 
surface. At u 
= 8" there is a laminar separation bubble on the upper surface that 
acts similarly to a trip strip inducing transition with turbulent reattachment and a 
large increase in lift. The lift increase is limited, however, by a trailing-edge separa- 
tion. This trailing-edge separation moves forward with a, 
causing the typical c,,,, 
shape of the lift curve. At RN = 40,000 drag was not measured due to the 
small forces. 
At RN 
= 130,000 the airfoil shows a complete reversal of the lift curve slope 
at a = 0°, and the drag is lower at 6' than at OD. The addition of a trip strip near 
the leading edge gave more normal curves for lift and drag. At a Reynolds number 
of 400,000 the lift curve and drag curve were typical of low-Reynolds-number 
performance. Lift and drag data for the same NACA 66,-108 airfoil are given by 
Mueller and BatilP for additional Reynolds numbers. Smoke-wire 
flow visualization 


674 
SMALL WIND TUNNELS 
1
.
0
 
FIGURE 
17.2 Lift CUNes for a smooth NACA 663-018 airfoil at three low Reynolds 
numbers. (Adapted from Mueller et al.' Copyright 8 
1982 AIAA. Reprinted with permission.) 
1 
I 
I 
I 
-
10 
0 
1
0
 
20 
0 Ideqml 
FIGURE 17.3 
Drag curves for a smooth NACA 66-018 airfoil at two low Reynolds 
numbers. (Adapted 
from Mueller 
et al? Copyright 8 
1982 AIAA. 
Reprinted with permission.) 


1
7
.
3
 LOW-REYNOLDS-NUMBER TESTING 
675 
FIGURE 17.4 
Smoke-wire flow visualization for a smooth NACA 66,-018 airfoil at 6" 
angle of attack, RN = 40,000. (Adapted from Mueller et al.' Copyright O 1982 AIAA. 
Reprinted with permission.) 
at RN = 55,000 for the NACA 66,-018 airfoil shown by Batill and Mueller' gives 
an insight into the surface flow at low Reynolds numbers. This work provides an 
indication that it is wise to be cautious about assumptions regarding low-Reynolds- 
number flows. 
Spanwise variation of profile drag is considered by Mueller and Jansen? They 
suggest that the three-dimensional flow in the boundary layer at F
W
 = 55,000 as 
shown by Batill and MuellerS may cause an error in either pitot or hot-wire measure- 
ments and that this accounts for the spanwise variation in profile drag. The momen- 
tum is based on the change is velocity parallel to the tunnel centerline, and the shed 
vortices and periodic variation in the wake could cause the error, It has been 
long 
considered that the momentum method is questionable for airfoils where separations 
are present. 
At the present time there is a growing interest in acquiring data at low Reynolds 
numbers. For use on high-performance, high-aspect-ratio sailplanes, Althaus and 
Wortmann6 
have published data on many airfoils at Reynolds numbers from 1 X 
lo6 
to 3 X lo6 
with some data at 0.28 X lo6 
and 0.50 X lo6. Other uses of low- 
Reynolds-number airfoil data would possibly be general-aviation, remotely piloted 
vehicles, fan blades, wind turbines, and model airplanes. The data discussed above 
have been taken in Eiffel-type tunnels with very large contractions with many 
screens, prior to the contraction, which leads to very low values of turbulence. The 
tunnel has 12 antiturbulence screens followed by a 24 : 
1 contraction. The turbulent 


676 
SMALL WIND TUNNELS 
intensity is less than 0.1%. Research of this nature is a case where the power 
consumed by screens is acceptable as they provide the needed laminar flow. 
Uncertainties in Measurements 
Batill and MuellelJ use the meGod of Kline and McClintock7 to determine the 
uncertainties 
in the data. This method uses a careful specification of the uncertainties 
associated with primary experimental measurements such as pressure, temperature, 
and so on, and the accuracy of the instruments used. 
The uncertainty of c, 
is W, 
and is a 
function of the uncertainty of the measurements. 
For a force coefficient measured by a balance, 
Force = F = BE 
= cf 
(iprnv;)~ 
(17.1) 
where BE is the output voltage E times a calibration constant to put it into engineering 
units. The cf 
is any aerodynamic coefficient, such as c,, cd, 
and so on, 
and the force uncertainty is 
This may be simplified by dividing cf: 
Now assuming that the tunnel test section is vented to the atmosphere, the 
equation of state yields 
Thus 


17.3 LOW-REYNOLDS-NUMBER TESTING 
677 
1 
Since q, = ?p,V; 
and 
Patm 
As a good example consider the determination of the lift coefficient by integration 
of pressures along the chord: 
In this case the uncertainties are the result of the length along the chord increment 
and the pressures. As WAp 
= Wq 
is some value in percent, 
where 
The average uncertainty of the pressure coefficient is used to determine the uncer- 
tainty of the lift coefficient: 
This is a straightforward method applicable to cases where single samples of the 
measurement are taken, as is often the case in wind tunnel tests. 
The above analysis for lift coefficient by the integration of pressures requires 
that P, - 
P, for the Cp 
and the tunnel q, be measured simultaneously. The same is 
true for data with the force balance. The simultaneous measurement of tunnel q is 


678 
SMALL WIND TUNNELS 
required to avoid the problem of time-dependent fluctuations in tunnel speed, which 
are very difficult to control at the low speeds required for very low Reynolds 
numbers. Almost all wind tunnels give difficulty in holding air speed precisely when 
run at low speeds owing to the inertia of both the drive system and the air. 
To summarize the problems with acquiring accurate data at very low Reynolds 
numbers below 100,000-150,066: First, the tunnel must have very low turbulence 
to promote laminar boundary layers on the model. This is necessary since the data 
are 
dependent on the behavior of the laminar boundary. The low turbulence requires 
large contraction ratios and damping screens before the contraction. 
Second, since the test speeds are low, there is almost always present time- 
dependent excursions in tunnel velocity about the average, which requires the data 
and tunnel q to be taken simultaneously. This generally requires a computer- 
controlled electronic data system. 
Third is the problem of balance zero shifts or drift. 
The use of electronic data systems usually requires amplification with response 
down to DC. The low-signal level due to small forces and pressures requires high 
gains. Thus the amplification must be of high quality (cost). The drift with time 
must be closely monitored. The signal conditioners or power supplies must be of 
the low noise type. And finally, owing to low transducer output voltages, care must 
be taken with shielding to avoid deficient signal-to-noise ratio. One-millivolt noise 
on a 1000-mV signal is quite different than a 1-mV noise on a 3-mV signal. 
When balances are used, they will have a relatively low spring rate or stiffness 
to generate an adequate signal from the low applied loads. To measure lift and drag, 
Mueller and Bati113 used a strain gage balance with two flexures: one for small 
loads and a second, stiffer, flexure that was engaged for larger loads. As the material 
frequency is proportional to the square root of the spring stiffness over mass, the 
natural frequency of the balance plus model will be very low. This may require the 
judicious use of electronic filtering of the balance output signal or a low-frequency 
cutoff. There also is the possibility of the model-balance having a large enough 
amplitude vibration that can lead to either a broken flexure in the balance or an 
inability to prevent the balance-model fouling with adjacent parts that have very 
small clearances. 
For other exploratory tests of aircraft models at low Reynolds numbers (below 
150,000 based on chord), it may be possible to apply a grit strip or other type of 
trip strip to fix transition as on large models and avoid the laminar bubble at the 
leading edge of the lifting surface that was encountered by Mueller and Jansen4 
The model may have a slightly higher drag and lower minimum lift. However, these 
results should be acceptable when used for trends and increments. Similar acceptable 
results~should 
be obtained on automobiles and trucks as long as the desired results 
are not sensitive to the Reynolds number. 
Also, small tunnels can, of course, be used for any test of exploratory nature 
when the model is not sensitive to laminar and turbulent boundary layers and the 
transition. It may well be that in many cases the problem of building the model, 


REFERENCES AND NOTES 
679 
especially in the case of structures such as transmission towers, cranes, and so on, 
will be the limiting factor. 
REFERENCES AND NOTES 
1. Van Schliestett, B., "Experimental Verification of Theordorsen's Theoretical Jet Boundary 
Correction Factors," NACA TN 506, 1934. 
2. Spaulding, E. R., and Merriam, K. G., "Comparative Tests of Pitot-Static Tubes," NACA 
TN 
546, 1935. 
3. Mueller, T. J., and Batill, S. M., "Experimental Studies of Separation on a Two Dimensional 
Airfoil at Low Reynolds Numbers," 
AIAA J., 20, 457-463, 1982. 
4. Mueller, T. J., and Jansen, B. J., Jr., "Aerodynamic Measurements at Low Reynolds 
Numbers," Paper 82-0598, presented at the 'hvelfth AIAA Aerodynamic Testing Confer- 
ence, Williamsburg, VA, 1982. 
5. Batill, S. M., and Mueller, T. J., "Visualization of Transition in the Flow over an Airfoil 
Using the Smoke-Wire Technique," AIAA J., 19, 346345, 1981. 
6. Althaus, D., and Wortmann, E 
X., Stuttgarter 
Pmfilkatalog I, F. Vieweg &Soh, 
Braunsch- 
weig, West Germany, 1981. 
7. Kline, S. J., and McClintock, F
.
 A., "Describing Uncertainties in Single-Sample Experi- 
ments," Mech. Eng., 3-8, 1953. 


18 Dynamic Tests 
18.1 SPIN CHARACTERISTICS AND SPIN RECOVERY 
The study of spin and spin recovery is covered in three broad areas: (1) entry into 
stall and loss of control, (2) poststall entry into a spin, and (3) spin and recovery. 
A complete spin program will require models and tests in each of these areas. 
However, in many cases it may only be necessary to demonstrate that it is possible 
to consistently recover from a spin. Thus spin and recovery tests are often made 
first in a spin tunnel. 
Chambers' gives an outline of a design procedure for predicting spins. This 
procedure requires several types of wind tunnel tests in addition to spin tunnel tests. 
These include static six-component full model tests at CLm and beyond at various 
side-slip angles accounting for Reynolds number effects at stall and poststall 
regions. 
There are two types of dynamic tests made using balances. The first is a forced 
oscillation test with the model using an internal balance mounted on an oscillating 
sting, as described by Orlik-Ruckemann? The results from this test yield combined 
derivatives that are used to analyze the airplane's motion in stall departure. The 
second dynamic test uses a rotary balance. The Langley Research Center spin 
tunnel's rotary balance allows the model to be tested through a ? 
15" side slip and 
8
"
-
9
0
"
 angle-of-attack range. Usually the balance moment center and the desired 
aircraft center of gravity coincide. The balance moment center is either on the spin 
axis or at a desired offset from the same axis. The model can be rotated either right 
or left up to 90 rpm. By use of the tunnel air speed and rotational speed steady 
spins can be simulated. Figure 18.1 shows a model installed in the Langley spin 
tunnel. Tares in the form of inertial forces and moments over the range of attitudes 
and rotational speeds at zero tunnel speed are taken and subtracted from the wind- 
on test data. Tares are taken by surrounding the model with a covered bird cage 
i 
structure that encloses the model but does not touch it. This allows the air immedi- 
ately surrounding the model to rotate with the model. The result of the rotary 
balance tests are used in inertidaerodynamic computer programs like those re- 
, 
.. 
ported by Barlow and TischkP or Bihrle and Barnhad to predict possible spin 
modes. Component buildup testing can be performed on the rotary balance to 
show the influence of the various components on spin characteristics as described 
by Bihrle and Bowmam6 It also should be noted that the rotary balance when 
not rotating can be used for measurement of static data at high angles of attack. 
Some horizontal tunnels as well as vertical spin tunnels are equipped with rotary 
balances. 
680 


18.1 SPIN CHARACTERISTICS AND SPIN RECOVERY 
FIGURE 18.1 
Beech Model 76 on rotary balance in NASA Langley 20-ft vertical spin 
tunnel. Model is 0.18 
: 
1 scale. (Photograph courtesy of Raytheon.) 
The Langley 30 X 60 tunnel has been used with free-flight models for studies 
through stall and loss of control. This facility uses a computer to implement flight 
control laws and provide control inputs along with those of the human pilot. Due 
to model support cables, departure from stall into a full spin cannot be simulated 
in this facility. 
NASA also uses free-flight models dropped from a helicopter to study spin 
entry characteristics. The results from these experiments help predict the airplane's 
susceptibility to spin entry and the dominant spin modes. Radio-controlled model 
airplanes are also used to investigate spin behavior as reported by Holcomb? 
In addition to rotary balance measurements, spin and recovery characteristics 
are investigated in the spin tunnel using free-flying models. The dynamically 
scaled model is hand launched into the tunnel at various pitch attitudes with prerota- 
tion. The tunnel air speed is adjusted to balance the model's sink rate, thus hold- 
ing the model level at the viewing window. The spin and recovery are recorded 
with a movie camera or video tape recorder. The angle of attack, bank angle, spin 
rate, and turns for recovery following a remotely initiated control input are extracted 
from the images. The tunnel speed yields the rate of descent. The recovery from 
the spin is initiated by remote control to set the model's aerodynamic controls 
to a predetermined position. The models are often built out of balsa wood or 


682 
DYNAMIC TESTS 
thin fiberglass, because both weight and moments of inertia must be properly 
scaled. 
Required scaling laws are discussed by Wolowicz, Bowman, and Gilbert.8 
The 
scale factors between the model and full scale, where M is the model, A is the full- 
scale aircraft, and N is the model scale (e.g., 
scale), are 
- 
Length LM 
= 
LAN 
(18.1) 
- 
Area SM 
= SAN2 
(18.2) 
Weight WM 
= WAN' - 
t
'
)
 
Moment of inertia I .  
= 
IA '(5) 
Velocity VM 
= V
~
<
N
 
(I 8.5) 
Q4 
Spin rate 
= - 
fl 
Figure 18.2 shows a model being hand launched into the Langley spin tunnel. 
FlGURE 18.2 Beech Model 76 being launched in NASA Langley 2
0
-
f
t
 
vertical spin tunnel. 
Model scale is 0.07 : 
1. (Photograph courtesy of Raytheon.) 


18.2 DYNAMIC AEROELASTIC EXPERIMENTS 
683 
Free-flying experiments in the spin tunnel can determine (1) spin modes and 
recovery characteristics, (2) effects of mass distribution and center of gravity, (3) 
the effect of extemal stores, (4) the type and size of required spin recovery chute 
to be installed on flight test airplanes, and (5) exit trajectory of air crew if ejection 
is necessary. It is necessary to determine both the spin and spin recovery in both 
right and left spins for all combinations of rudder, elevator, and ailerons. This 
requires a large matrix of experimental 
runs as indicated by Tumlinson, Holcomb, and 
Gregg,9 
who report approximately 500 spin simulations made in one aircraft study. 
The data are in the form of film and observation notes. The film have historically 
been analyzed in a cross-hair-equipped film viewing machine using a protractor to 
yield both fuselage and spin axis angles to a precision of 21" or better. Image 
processing software with the increased power of computer equipment is a more 
effective method. 
The angle conventions may be of interest. The fuselage angle (8) is measured 
from the horizontal and is negative nose down. The spin axis angle (8) is measured 
from the horizontal and is positive left wing up. The angle of attack is 
The number of turns for recovery from the images can be determined to one-quarter 
turn using typical frame rates. The spin rate (0) 
can be determined to f 
2%. 
The free-flight method in the spin tunnel only simulates developed spins and 
recovery; it yields no information on the spin susceptibility of the aircraft. This is 
obtained from the other methods discussed above. If the model experiments reveal 
two or more spin modes, it is almost impossible to predict which mode, if any, will 
be predominant or most likely to occur in actual flight. 
18.2 DYNAMIC AEROELASTIC EXPERIMENTS 
The constant search by designers for ways to achieve thinner wings that can support 
extemal stores,engine pods, and the like always keeps airplane designs near the edge 
of acceptability in terms of structural deformation and possible dynamic instabilities. 
Since the deflections of the aircraft structure will influence the dynamic behavior 
and flutter characteristics, 
experimental 
evaluation of flexible models in wind tunnels 
is necessary to determine these "elastic" effects. 
Essentially, tdo basic types of aeroelastic models have evolved, the dynamic 
stability model, b d  
the flutter model. As pointed out by Bisplinghoff, Ashley, and 
Halfmanlo 
in theit classic treatment of this subject, dynamic stability experiments 
are focused primarily on dynamic behavior dominated by rigid-body modes of 
motion. On the other hand, flutter experiments are focused on the elastic modes. 
Elastic models may be used in steady-state testing to determine the effect of 
deflection on static stability by mounting the model on the balance support system. 
It is important, however, to duplicate to scale the deformations of the full-scale 
vehicle and to be sure that the support system allows the model to deform elastically. 


684 
DYNAMIC TESTS 
Figure 18.3 illustrates the effect of deflection on the static stability curve; the dashed 
curve is the effective stability curve, since the aircraft does not fly at constant q 
over the CL 
range. 
Most model suspension rigs allow freedom in pitch, vertical translation, and yaw 
with limited roll and fore and aft freedom. Such a system will not allow a determina- 
tion of the long-period, or phug6Td, motion because the tunnel operates at constant 
speed whereas wide changes in velocity occur during the phugoid on the full- 
scale vehicle. 
The model may be "kicked" into a displaced attitude and released; the ensuing 
motion defines the short-period oscillation that occurs at constant speed. Camera 
and video studies, along with direct displacement transducers or similar instrumenta- 
tion, may be used to record the motion. Frequency and damping characteristic values 
can be obtained. 
Flutter experiments are designed to find a number of parameters, typically in- 
cluding 
1. critical flutter speed, 
2. flutter frequency(s), 
3. flutter mode@) 
symmetrical or antisymmetrical), 
4. fuselage coupling, and 
5. wing-empennage interaction. 
In most cases where complete models are used in the experiments, it is common 
practice to use a vertical rod mount. This system, an example of which is shown 
in Figure 18.4, provides relatively free motion in pitch, roll, yaw, and vertical 
translation. Fore and aft as well as spanwise motions are considerably restrained. 
A second method is to constrain the model by a cable bridle that holds the model 
centered in the tunnel, as illustrated in Figure 18.5. 
Experiments using components such as wing panels to investigate aileron flutter 
and empennage models to investigate stabilizer, elevator, or mdder flutter are fre- 
FIGURE 18.3 Effect of a swept-wing aircraft elastic deformation on longitudinal static sta- 
bility. 


18.2 DYNAMIC AEROELASTIC EXPERIMENTS 
685 
FIGURE 18.4 Boeing 747lSpace Shuttle flutter model on vertical rod mount. (Photograph 
courtesy of Boeing Aerodynamic Laboratories.) 
quently undertaken to obtain individual component flutter characteristics. Figure 
18.6 shows a large-scale empennage flutter model mounted in the tunnel. 
It is interesting to note that high-speed motion cameras and video recorders are 
among the most useful devices in flutter experiments because the mode shape is 
readily seen in the image sequences. Accelerometers, strain gages, and so on. 
FIGURE 18.5 Rockwell B-1 flutter model on cable mount. (Photograph courtesy of the 
Boeing Co.) 


686 
DYNAMIC TESTS 
FIGURE 18.6 DC-10 tail flutter model with double-hinged rudder. (Photograph courtesy 
of NASA Langley and McDonnell-Douglas Corporation.) 
mounted on the wing spars or other parts of the main structure provide data from 
which flutter frequency is readily deduced. 
The experimental procedure is to approach the expected critical flutter speed 
slowly. At each new speed setting, the model can be excited by means of a "jerk 
wire" or some other impulsive disturbance. Tracings of instrumentation output must 
be monitored. As critical speed is approached, the time to damp increases and can 
easily be detected if strip-chart-like 
displays are used. Finally, when the strip display 
indicates divergence, the cameras are turned on if movie cameras are in use and 
the run is terminated by cutting the tunnel. Some tunnels have a device called a "q 
stopper" 
that drops speed rapidly and thus reduces probability of model destruction. 
This consists of two splitter plates on the ceiling and floor. The splitter plates are 
equipped with spring-loaded flaps with snubbers at the end of their travel. When rapid 
speed reduction is needed, such as during model flutter, the flaps are automatically 
deployed toward the tunnel centerline. 
This reduces 
the speed quickly by dramatically 
increasing the drag in the test section near the model and forces some of the high- 
energy air to pass between the splitter plates and the ceiling and floor. 
There is always a risk during a flutter event of getting such a severe model flutter 
that the model is either partially or totally destroyed. The loss of a model or parts 
can also damage the wind tunnel propellers if adequate safety catch screens are not 
in place. The true air speed is of direct interest in flutter experiments, rather than 


18.2 
DYNAMIC AEROELASTIC EXPERIMENTS 
687 
dynamic pressure. The stream temperature is therefore a more important parameter 
than is the case for many force and pressure experiments. 
The primary purpose of a flutter experiment is to ensure that the airplane will 
not encounter flutter within its flight envelope at any one of its possible loadings. 
The loading requirement means that the distribution of fuel must be considered in 
cases of aircraft with wet wings. On some military aircraft with soft wings, external 
stores must also be considered. 
Principal results from flutter experiments are the true air speed for flutter as a 
function of altitude. Obviously a design should have flutter speeds that are higher 
than design speed at any given altitude. 
Flutter Model Scaling and Design 
Flutter models must be dynamically scaled as well as having the proper external 
geometric shape. The geometric scale ratio is usually fixed by consideration of wind 
tunnel size and other applicable limitations. The maximum model span that the 
tunnel can accommodate should not exceed 0.8 of the tunnel width, as discussed 
in Chapter 10. This sets the model to full-scale span ratio bdbA. 
The subscripts 
refer to model- and full-scale 
airplane. The quantity b could be any linear dimension, 
although wing span appears most convenient. The model mass distribution and both 
bending and torsional stiffnesses must be made to follow the scaling laws. The 
requirement on mass is indicated by the requirement that 
where m is the mass per foot, pM the tunnel operating airstream density, and p
,
 the 
atmospheric density for full-scale aircraft. The total mass or weight ratio then 
becomes 
The frequency ratio that should be preserved is 


688 
DYNAMIC TESTS 
or 
Other relations important for flatter models are as follows: 
1. the velocity ratio: 
2. the "static" moment scale ratio: 
3. the mass moment of inertia ratio: 
4. the stiffness ratio: 
Model stiffness 
Airplane stiffness 
The foregoing ratios are used to guide model design. Then the completed model is 
given vibration tests to determine the true frequency. 
Actual scale reproduction of the airplane structure is not practical. The model de- 
signer 
seeks 
a 
simplified 
structure that 
will give 
the 
right 
bending 
and torsional 
stiffness 
while allowing aprovision of proper mass distribution. For low-speedmodels, a single 
spar as shown in Figure 18.7 can frequently be used to obtain the moments of inertia 
for both vertical and fore and aft bending. It is customary to have all the stiffness in 
the spar with the covering providing only the aerodynamic 
shape. To accomplish this, 
the wing, fuselage, or tail external shape is made in sections. The gaps between the 
: sections can be covered with thin rubber dental dam, or better, filled with a thin soft 
. 
. 
foam rubber. The filler should not increase the stiffness of the structure especially for 
aerodynamic surfaces such as the wing and tail. 
After the spar is fabricated, the stiffness can be checked by static deflection tests. 
For these tests, the spar can be mounted as a cantilever beam. An accelerometer 
that can measure angles can be attached to the spar, the spar can be loaded, and 
the slope of the elastic curve determined by the accelerometer output. 


18.2 DYNAMIC AEROELASTIC EXPERIMENTS 
689 
FIGURE 18.7 Typical spar cross section for low-speed flutter model. Dimensions a and 
b determined by I,, and J required. Dimension c determined by I, required. Dimension d set 
at O.lb: I, and I
,
 are moments o
f
 inertia in vertical and fore and aft bending. 
From beam deflection analysis the relationship between deflection and stiffness 
properties is known to be 
With dyldx = O, we obtain 
and since the spar stations are finite distances apart, the equation 
applies. Therefore to obtain the average value of MIEI between stations, it is only 
necessary to subtract successive values of the measured deflections to get 
Since A@ is equal to the area of the ME1 curve between stations, the average value 
of ME1 is obtained by dividing AO by the distance between stations. Finally, 1/EI 
is obtained by dividing out the known applied bending moment. The values for 
bending stiffness in the other plane and for the torsional stiffness can be found by 
a similar procedure. All quantities must be compared to the airplane design data to 
check the fidelity of the model spar design and fabrication. 


690 
DYNAMIC TESTS 
TABLE 18.1. Typical Flutter Model Scale Ratios for a Four-Engine lbrbofan 
Cargo Plane 
- 
Ratio 
Symbol 
Numerical Value 
Geometry 
Density 
Velocity 
Frequency 
Deflection 
s,/s, 
2.34 
~ A I ~ M  
Weight 
W@A 
119,600 
Static moment 
S ~ S A  
1/230,000 
Weight moment of inertia 
I
~
A
 
115,529,600 
Stiffness 
EI&IA or GJdGJA 
1/12,960,000 
"Dictated by size of tunnel to be used. 
*Dictated by tunnel and flight conditions. 
The low-speed flutter model usually does not have either the right scaled weight 
(gravitational force) or the right deflection ratio. The ratio of gravitational force to 
aerodynamic force is 
The ratio gl(V2Ib) is seldom scaled properly, so that some additional vertical force 
must be applied if the model is to fly at the proper lift coefficient. The ratio of the 
deflection (due to a scaled load) of an aeroelastic model to that of the full-scale 
airplane should be consistent with 
This unit value is seldom achieved, but fortunately the product in Equation (18.21) 
may go as high as 3.0 without introducing appreciable error. Some typical values 
of the various ratios introduced in this section are listed in Table 18.1. A partially 
completed flutter model is shown in Figure 18.8. 
. . 
-1
8
.
3
 STORE RELEASE OR JETTISON EXPERIMENTS 
It is often necessary to determine the release characteristics of tip tanks, underwing 
stores, bombs, or other devices. Although it is simple and direct to state that we 
will design the model and experiment process to duplicate the ratio of inertia forces 


18.3 STORE 
RELEASE OR JElTSON EXPERIMENTS 
691 
FIGURE 18.8 A nearly completed flutter model. The dark lines are joints rather than glue 
locations. (Courtesy of the Boeing Co.) 
to gravity forces (i.e., we will duplicate the Froude number), it is probably more 
instructive to go through the mental gymnastics of a hypothetical case. 
Assume a store 16 ft long and a $-scale model 1.6 ft long. Further assume that 
whenever the full-scale store falls a length, it is pulled back half a length by 
aerodynamic drag and pitches 10". The linear acceleration is hence 16 ft/sec2, and 
the rotational acceleration 20 deg/sec2. 
Obviously we would like the model to pitch 
10" while it is pulled back half a length also, so that the trajectory is similar to the 
full-scale condition. 
The first thing we note is that while the full-scale stores takes 1 sec to fall a 
length and pitch 10". 
the model must do the same in 0.316 sec. Since half the model 
length is 0.8 ft, the linear acceleration needed for the model is again 16 ft/sec2. But 
the angular acceleration turns out to be 200 deg/sec2, or, in other words, the angular 
acceleration is increased by the scale factor A (which is equal to lEsll,; 
see below). 
The aerodynamic force that produces the linear displacement is proportional to 
the body area and hence decreases as A', and if we follow the dimensionally sound 
procedure of reducing the model weight by A3, the linear acceleration will be 
increased by A. We get around this by reducing the test air speed by fl. 
The torque is largely due to the force on the fin area (down by A2), the dynamic 
pressure (down by A
)
,
 and the length of the lever arm 
(down by A). In order to get 
A times the full-scale pitch acceleration, we must reduce the model moment of 


692 
DYNAMIC TESTS 
inertia by XS. Note that we more or less arbitrarily reduced the full-scale weight by 
X3. This is the relation that will exist if the model has the same average density as 
the full-scale article. This is not necessary. If we had used XZ and let BM 
= V,,, the 
moment of inertia would have come down by A4. 
This type of "heavy scaling" is 
useful at high Mach number and is discussed by Reed and Curry." 
Hence we have (using W for Weight, I 
for moment of inertia, 1 for typical length, 
and subscripts M and FS for model and full scale) 
FIGURE 18.9 Multiple-flash pictures of the releme and separation of a bomb shape. In 
multiple-flash pictures the static items (the airplanes fuselage and the catch-net in the above 
photograph) will always appear brighterthan the moving model, since their image is reinforced 
by each flash. (Courtesy Sandia National Laboratories.) 


18.3 STORE RELEASE OR JElTISON EXPERIMENTS 
693 
Poor releases (wild pitching or hitting the airplane with the store) are almost 
invariably cured by jettison guns and may be cured by store tilt, flaps on the airplane 
fuselage near the store fins, flaps on the store-mounting pylon, or toed-in stores. 
Stores have sometimes remained "with the airplane" after being mechanically re- 
leased. There have been a few reports of a belly carried bomb crawling up the side 
of the fuselage so the pilot was looking out the side of the cockpit at his "dropped" 
and presumably fused bomb. Drop data may be obtained in the form of high-speed 
video, movies, or multiple-flash stills. An example of multiple-flash stop motion 
recording is shown in Figure 18.9. Motion sequences may be analyzed and the 
results given in conventional plots, as shown in Figure 18.10. When cameras or 
Time, sec 
FIGURE 18.10 Presentation of store drop data (CG = center of gravity). Other configura- 
tions may typically be plotted on the same sheet to aid in selecting the best configuration. 


694 
DYNAMIC TESTS 
high-speed video is used, both side and top cameras are. 
needed. Extra windows in 
the tunnel may often be needed. 
A more elaborate approach to the separation problem that avoids the difficulty 
of matching model- and full-scale moments of inertia is briefly as follows: The 
store model is mounted on an internal balance on a sting. The balance output in 
terms of angles, forces, and momeGs is fed into a six-degree-of-freedom simulation 
program. The motion consistent with the measured forces and inertial properties is 
determined and the sting is directed to move accordingly. This process is repeated 
in short steps and yields the path of the store as it leaves the aircraft. This method 
does not require the safety net with its large drag penalty, nor does it run the risk 
of the breakup of the model and possible damage to the tunnel's propellers. It is, 
however, quite expensive to develop and validate. 
18.4 
PARABRAKE EVALUATIONS 
The use of drag chutes to provide "air braking" is quite common and the wind 
tunnel may be used to determine the drag characteristics of such devices. The chute 
may be packed in the model tail section and opened remotely during the test. Figure 
18.11 shows a drag chute deployed during a tunnel test of a turboprop cargo-troop 
transport plane. Troublesome oscillations of the chute occurred during this test 
program, probably as a result of too short a bridle and too short suspension lines 
on the chute. Wake from the airplane also likely contributed. 
18.5 CAVITY RESONANCE 
One of the newer problems that besets modern high-speed aircraft 
is cavity resonance, 
a high-intensity vibration of wheel wells, bomb bays, or cockpits that arises when 
their covers are removed and the high-speed airstream moves by (and into) the 
opening. 
This phenomenon has been localized by means of tunnel experiments and over- 
come in some cases by means of Helmholtz resonators, that is, tuned chambers that 
a
r
e
.
 
opened into the offending cavity. The procedure for a tunnel experiment is to 
open the various cavities one at a time and to pick up their natural frequencies with 
a pressure pickup fed intm a frequency analyzer possibly in parallel with a scope 
and a real-time recorder. Resonance, if any, will occur close to the same speed at 
which it will occur on the airplane but at a frequency increased by the scale factor. 
If space is available for Helmholtz resonators, they may be tried; if not, scoops or 
lips may be added to the cavities intuitively until the intensity is down. This is an 
area of continuing research effort and is being attacked by computational methods 
of computational aeroacoustics. It is far from being mastered in a general context. 
A second approach, if the natural frequency has already been determined by 
flight test, is to mount the model or some subpart on strain gages selected so that 
their spring constant and the mass of the model or subsystem provides the natural 


REFERENCES 
AND NOTES 
695 
FIGURE 1
8
.
1
1
 Model parabrake deployed behind a cargo transport model. The nailing 
loop from the windshield contains wires to the solenoid-operated chute compartment doors. 
(Courtesy Lockheed Georgia Co.) 
frequency value already known. Baseline data will provide signal levels that can 
be used to judge the effectiveness of proposed changes. 
REFERENCES AND NOTES 
-1. Chambers, J. R., "Overview of StalVSpin Technology," 
Paper 80-1580, presented at the 
A M  
Atmospheric Flight Mechanics Conference, Danvers, MA, 1980. 
2. Orlik-Ruckermann, K. I., "Techniques for Dynamic Stability Testing in W~nd 
Tunnels, 
in Dynamic Stability Parameters," AGARD CR-235, May 1978. 
3. Barlow, J. B., and Tischler, M. B., "Dynamic Analysis of the Flat Spin Mode of a General 
Aviation Aircraft," AIAA J. Aircraft, 19(13), 198-210, 1982. 
4. Barlow, J. B., and Tischler, M. B., "Determination of the Spin and Recovery Characteris- 
tics of a General Aviation Design," AIAA J. Aircrafi, 18(4), 238-244, 1981. 
5. Bihrle, W., and Barnhart, B., "Spin Prediction Techniques," AIAA J. Aircraft, 20, 97- 
101, 1983. 
6. Bihrle, W., and Bowman, J. S., "Influence of Wing, Fuselage, and Tail Design on Rota- 
tional Flow Aerodynamics Beyond Maximum Lift," AIAA J, Aircraft, 18, 920-925, 
1981. 


696 
DYNAMIC TESTS 
7. Holcomb, M. L., "The Beech Model 77 'Skipper' Spin Program," Paper 79-1835, pre- 
sented at the AIAA Aircraft Systems and Technology Meeting, New York, NY, 
1979. 
8. Wolowicz, C. H., Bowman, J. S., and Gilbert, W. P., "Similitude Requirements and 
Scaling Relationships as Applied to Model Testing," NASA Technical Paper 1435, 
Aug. 1979. 
9. Turnlinson, R. R., Holcomb, M. Lyand Gregg, V. D., "Spin Research on a 'bin Engine 
Aircraft," Paper 81-1667, presented at the AIAA Aircraft Systems and Technology 
Conference, Dayton, OH, 1981. 
10. Bidplinghoff, R. L., Ashley, H., and Halfman, R. L., Aemelasticity, Addison-Wesley, 
Reading, MA, 1957. 
11. R
e
e
d
,
 
J. E, 
and Curry, W. H., "A Wind Tunnel Investigation 
of the Supersonic Characteris- 
tics of Three Low Fineness Ratio Stores Internally Carried in a Simulated F-105 Bomb 
Bay," Sandia Corporation SCTM 30-56-51, 1956. 


APPENDIX 1 
Subsonic Aerodynamic 
Testing Association (S 
ATA) 
The Subsonic Aerodynamic Testing Association was formed to provide a world- 
wide organization for operators of subsonic aerodynamic facilities. The first meeting 
was convened at the University of Maryland in March, 1965. The objectives of the 
SATA are to provide a means of interchange of ideas, techniques, and solutions of 
problems associated with subsonic aerodynamic experimental facilities and experi- 
ments. General areas of interest include: 
Physical measurement, instrumentation, handling and reduction of data. 
Design, performance, and economics of test facilities. 
Facility operation and maintenance 
Current members of SATA are listed below. Descriptions of the facilities of the 
members and contact information can be found through the world wide web site, 
http://www.niar.twsu.edu/sata/sata.htm. 
Members of SATA (1998) 
Joined 
- - - 
- 
Agency for the Assessment and Application of Technology (Indonesia) 
Agusta Helicopters 
Bihrle Applied Research 
Boeing Philadelphia 
Boeing Seattle 
Boeing St. Louis 
British Aerospace Airbus 
Calspan Buffalo 
Centro Tecnico AerospaciallIAEIASA-L Brazil 
Chrysler Corp. 
Cox and Company 
CSIR-Aerotek (South Africa) 
Dairnler-Benz Aerospace Airbus 
Daimler-Benz AG 
Danish Maritime Institute 
Darmstadt University of Technology 


698 
SUBSONIC AERODYNAMIC TESTING ASSOCIATION (SATA) 
DERA Bedford 
DERA Farnborough 
Dresden University of Technology 
DNW (The Netherlands) 
FFA Sweden 
Ford Motor Company-Design c&ter 
Ford Motor Company-Product Development 
Georgia Institute of Technology 
General Motors Design 
General Motors Research 
Industrie Pininfarina SPA (Italy) 
Israel Aircraft Industries 
KAWADA Industries (Japan) 
Korea Aerospace Research Institute 
Lockheed Martin Aeronautical Systems Co (Georgia) 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
Micro Craft San Diego 
NASA Ames 
NASA Langley 
NASA Lewis 
National Research Council of Canada 
Naval Surface Warfare Center (Bethesda) 
Nihon University (Japan) 
Nissan Motor Company 
Northrop Advanced Systems 
Northrop Grumman 
Ohio State University 
Old Dominion University 
ONERA France 
Pennsylvania State University 
Porsche AG 
Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology (Australia) 
Sandia National Laboratories 
Sverdrup Technology-AEDC Group 
Swift Aero 
Swiss Aircraft and Systems Company 
Technion-Israel Institute of Technology 
Texas A & M University 
United Technologies Research Center 
University of Kansas 
University of Maryland 
University of Notre Dame 
University of Washington 
US Air Force Academy 
US Air Force Wright Laboratories 


SUBSONIC AERODYNAMIC TESTING ASSOCIATION (SATA) 
699 
US Naval Academy 
Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University 
Volkwagenwerks AG 
Volve Car Corporation 
Wichita State University 
Windkanal Dresden-Klotzsche 




APPENDIX 2 
Numerical Constants and 
Units Conversions 
USEFUL NUMERICAL CONSTANTS 
Gas constant for air = 287 J/(kg°K) = 1716 ft-lb/(slugoR) 
Acceleration of gravity = 32.174 ft/sec2 = 9.8066 mlsZ 
Standard Sea Level Conditions 
Pressure = 14.7 1b/in.2 
= 29.92 in. Hg = 2116.2 lb/ft2 = 101,325 N/m2 
Density = 0.002378 slug/ft3 = 1.225 kg/m3 
Temperature = 518.69% = 288.16"K = 59°F = 15°C 
Viscosity = 3.7373 X lo-' lb-slft2 = 1.7894 X 
N-dm2 
Speed of sound = 1116 ftk = 340.2 mls 
UNIT 
CONVERSIONS 
Length 
Speed 
1 inch = 2.54 centimeters 
, 1 Wsec = 0.6818 mph = 0.5921 knots 
1 mile = 5280 feet = 1609.3 meters 
1 knot = 1.152 mph = 1.8536 kmlhr 
1 foot = 0.3048 meter 
1 mls = 3.281 ft/s 
1 nautical mile = 6080 feet 
1 mph = 1.6093 kmlhr 
Volume 
1,ft3 
= 7.48 gallons = 28.326 liters 
1 imperial gallon = 1.201 gallon 
Force 
Work or Enerm 
Power 
1 hp = 550 ft-lbls = 0.7457 kw 
Pressure 
1 lb/ft2 = 47.880 N/m2 
1 1bli11.~ 
= 6894.8 N/m2 
1 in. H,O = 5.204 lb/ft2 
= 0.07355 in. Hg 
1 ft-lb = 1.3558 joules 
1 BTU = 1055.1 joules 




INDEX 
Accuracy, 475 
Adam, 139 
Aeolian vibrations, 52 
Aeroacoustics 15 
Aerodynamic center, 484 
Aerodynamics 
equations, principal, 3 
experiments 
antennas 
radar, 44 
television, 44 
birds and insects, 42 
boats, speed, 46 
bridges, 46 
buildings, 50 
elastic models, 5 
1 
people, 41 
pollution dispersion, 55 
sails, 45 
smoke, 50 
snow drifting, 53 
soil erosion, 53 
solar collectors, 44 
transmission lines, 52 
windmills, 42 
wire galloping, 52 
Aeroelasticity, experiments, 683 
Aerohydrodynamics of sailing, 
63 
1 
AGARDograph #336, 346 
Aileron, 474, 492 
hinge moment, 500 
Air 
, 
clean, 56 
high pressure, 546, 564 
properties of, 7 
Aircraft, 63 
Allen, 350 
Amplifiers, 232 
Anderson, 2 
Anechoic Flow Facility, 38 
Ashill, 342 
Automobiles, racing, 63 
Axis systems, 417 
transfer equations, 418 
B 
Baker, 2 
Balances, 239 
alignment, 265 
deflections, 253, 260 
drag, accuracy, 245 
external, 242, 244, 248 
alignment, 261 
automatic beam, 256 
calibration, 258 
electrical output devices, 257 
flexure, 255 
hydraulic capsules, 257 
linkages, 254 
loading tee, 259 
output transducers, 256 
pivots, 254 
platform, 251 
pyramid, 252 
wire, 248 
yoke, 25 
1 
flexures, 254, 292 
high sensitivity, 678 
hinge moment, 292 
interactions, 246, 293, 299 
interference, see Balances, tare and 
interference. 
internal, 244, 288 
basic designs, 289 
calibration, 296 
mathematical problem, 298 
temperature sensitivity, 299 
jumping air across, 546 
linkages, 254 


704 
INDEX 
Balances (continued) 
material, 291 
measuring units, 256 
beams, 256 
natural frequency, 262 
permissible errors, 261 
permissible uncertainty, 248 
pivots, 254 
platform, 251 
repeatability, 261 
required range, 246 
requirements, 244 
sensitivity of, 261 
six component, 239 
small loads, 261 
specifications, 244 
sting, 285 
tare and interference, 271 
from calibration models, 274 
combined determination, 273 
comparisons for various mounting, 
275 
independent determination, 27 
1 
no image system, 274 
wire, 248 
zero shift, 274, 678 
Batchelor, 92 
Benedict, 137 
Benne, 145 
Bernoulli's equation, 4, 14 
applied to a duct, 73 
unsteady, 14 
Bicknell, 325 
Blade element, 109 
Body axes, 418, 529 
Borger, 97 
Boundary corrections, 328 
cylinder, circular, 332 
downwash, 
angle of attack correction, 416 
asymmetric distortion, 330 
behind the wing. 399 
circular arc jet, 387 
circular jets, 384 
drag coefficient, 416 
elliptic jets, 391 
general corrections, 377 
nonrectangular tunnels, 404 
octagonal jets, 398 
pitching moment coefficient, 399, 
417 
rectangular jets, 384 
spanwise distortion, 329 
hinge moments, 43 
1 
horizontal buoyancy, 328, 350 
three dimensions, 367 
lift distribution, 382 
elliptic jets, 383 
round jets. 382 
mathematical models, 335 
methods 
approximations, 374 
Herriot's, 368 
Heyson's method-V/STOL 
aircraft, 405 
images, 338,350 
Joppa's vortex-lattice method, 410 
Maskell's 2-D, 357 
Maskell's, 
three dimensions, 370 
measured variable, 342 
pressure signature or "Hackett- 
Wilsden" Method, 342 
three dimensions, 375 
two variable or "Ashill-Keating" 
Method, 345 
panel methods, 341 
Thorn's, 370,357 
propellers, 330, 433 
reflection plane models, 
large, 430 
small 
symmetrical, 428 
vertical tail, 429 
slotted walls, 348 
solid blockage, 329, 353 
three dimensions, 368 
streamline curvature, 329, 358 
three dimensions, 376 
swept wings. 430 
V/STOL models, 435 
flow breakdown, 435 
summary, 
open jet, 425 
three-dimensions, closed, 412 
two-dimensions, 360 
tail downwash, 330 
verification, 2-D, 362 


wake blockage, 329, 356 
separated flows, 370 
three dimensions, 370 
Boundary layer, 204 
atmospheric, 653 
profiles, 654 
laminar, 303 
rake, 228 
separation, 304 
stimulation, 306 
survey, mechanism, 229 
thickness, 303 
transition, 171, 304, 309 
detection 
by infrared themography, 204 
by oil flow, 204 
by sublimation, 204 
trip strip, 306 
turbulent, 303 
wind tunnel, 227 
Bradshaw, 64, 68 
Braslow, 326 
Breathing, 52 
Brombacher, 139 
Brooks, 93 
Brune, 186 
Bruun, 186 
Buoyancy, 221 
C 
Calibration 
curve, 242 
linear fit 242 
longitudinal pressure gradient, 221 
pressure sensitive paint, 148 
second order fit, 242 
- 
speed, 218 
test section, 218 
~borundum, 
306 
Center of pressure, 488 
Chmielewski, 97 
Coggotti, 163 
Collar, 133 
Configurations 
complete, 513 
aileron power, 523 
asymmetric power condition, 525 
average downwash, 530 
drag, 521 
INDEX 
705 
elevator power, 523 
flaps down, 518 
lateral stability, 526 
lift, 518 
pitching moment, 521 
rudder power, 525 
tail setting, 530 
components, 477 
aileron panels, 474 
doors, 512 
elevators, 505 
engines, 5 
11 
landing gear, 512 
nacelles, 508 
propellers, 509 
rudders, 502 
stores, 5 
11 
wings 
low aspect ratio, 490 
three-dimensional, 478 
two-dimensional, 489 
Confidence factor, 452 
Confidence interval, 452 
Confidence limits, 451 
Confidence probability, 452 
Continuity equation, 4 
Contraction, 68 
Comers, 83 
first, 68 
second, 68 
third, 68 
vanes, 83 
Correlation, 302 
wind tunnel to flight, 324, 325 
Cost, of operation, 62 
Crites, 145 
Cryogenic, 30 
Dalgliesch, 51 
Danius, 101 
Data 
systems, 230 
for pressure sensitive paint, 149 
uncertainty, 676 
David, 2 
Diffuser 
first, 68 
second, 68 


706 
INDEX 
Diffuser (continued) 
wide angle, 68 
Dihedral, 527 
Dimensional analysis, 2 
Dipole, 17 
Directional stability, 525 
DNS, 23 
Dodge, 2 
Doering, 24 
Downwash, 384 
powered models, 433 
Drag 
boundary layer, 303 
circular cylinder, 264 
coefficient, 12 
from pressure distribution, 180 
minimum H u e ,  482 
momentum method, 168 
polar, 324 
profile, 176 
skin friction, 303 
sphere, 264 
use of wind tunnel data, 325 
wake integration, 176 
Dryden, 226 
Dynamic experiments 
cavity resonance, 694 
elastic models, 683 
forced oscillation method, 680 
free flight models, 681 
parabrake evaluations, 694 
rotary balance method, 680 
spin characteristics and spin recovery, 
680 
store release or jettison models, 690 
E 
Elastic force, 21 
Electronic scanners, 143 
Energy equation, 6 
Equation of state, 6, 29 
Euler angles, 236 
Ewald, 69, 346 
Experiments, see also Aerodynamics, ex- 
periments; Dynamic experiments; 
Instructional experiments. 
data flow, 458 
design, 444,458 
blocking, 459 
principles, 459 
randomization, 459 
replication, 459 
dynamic stability, 683 
guidelines, 460 
planning diagram, 462 
planning, 469 
Reynolds number, with small effect 
of, 665 
Extrapolating, 301 
drag coefficient, 313 
F 
Facility arrangements, 470 
Fan blade sections, 112 
Fan efficiency, 111 
Ffowcs-Williams, 16 
Flaps, 474, 477, 533 
Flexures, 254, 292 
Flow 
angle, 475 
variation across jet, 222, ,265,266 
breakdown, V/STOL models, 435 
inviscid, 14 
irrotational, 14 
transducer 
ideal, 215 
real, 216 
upflow, 265 
visualization, 188 
field, 229 
data driven methods, 212 
helium bubbles, 207 
shadowgraph, 21 
1 
smoke, 208 
tuft grid, 207 
tuft wands, 207 
laser, 168, 216 
methods of recording, 192 
propellers, 560 
rotors, 558, 560 
sublimation, 204 
surface, 192 
china clay, 197 
effects on flow, 198 
mini-tufts, 194 
oil, 196 
tufts, 193, 202 


INDEX 
707 
ultraviolet fluorescence photogra- 
phy, 205 
Flutter model, 683 
design, 687 
scaling, 687 
Forces, 234 
standards, 241 
Fraser, 133 
Freon, use of, 29 
Friction factor, 75 
Froude number, 10, 20 
Gallington, 163 
Galloping structures, 52 
Gemer, 163 
Gibbon, 24 
Glauert, 367, 433 
Gravity 
force, 20 
standard acceleration, 138 
variation of acceleration, 241 
Grit, 306 
carborundum, 306 
micro balls, 306 
Ground 
boundary layer, 432 
effects, 43 
1 
simulation, 38 
Ground vehicles 
aeroacoustics, 591 
computational methods, 603 
experimental methods, 599 
frequencies, 596 
sources, 596 
velocity scaling, 594 
- 
aerodynamic forces and moments, 563 
convertibles, 571 
cooling flows, 564 
flow features. 580 
ground simulation, 582 
combinations, 586 
fixed floor, 582 
ground plane, 583 
moving ground, 585 
raised floor with suction at leading 
edge, 584 
suction through perforated 
floor, 584 
symmetry, 583 
tangential blowing, 585 
heating, ventilation, and air 
conditioning, 564 
motorcycles, 575, 578 
production cars 
design, 566 
racing cars 
design, 571 
ground effects, 590 
wind tunnel methods, 573 
road tests vs wind tunnel tests, 589 
scale models, 567 
choice of scale, 588 
trains, 575, 577 
trucks, 575 
tuning, 569 
wheel rotation, 586 
wind noise, 565 
wind tunnel systems, 579 
wipers, washers, and related surface 
flows, 565 
Hackett, 342 
Hamrnond, 23 
Hanis, 326 
Hawkings, 16 
Heat exchanger, 68 
Hemot, 368 
Heyson, 405 
Hicks, 326 
Hills, 322 
Hockman, 325 
Holography, 216 
Honeycomb, 90 
Horizontal buoyancy, 78,328 
Humidity, 8 
Hysteresis, 200, 673 
Idel'chik, 86 
Inertia force, 20 
Instructional experiments 
balance alignment, and aspect ratio 
effects, 668 
boundary layer characteristics, 672 
dynamic stability, 671 


708 
INDEX 
Instructional experiments (continued) 
profile drag by momentum method, 
670 
pressure distribution, 671 
static stability and control, 670 
tail setting and downwash, 669 
-- 
tunnel calibration and flow quality, 
667 
Instrumentation 
airfoils, 164 
boundary layer mouse, 170 
claw, 162 
cone probes, 163 
hot wires and hot films, 164 
Kiel tube, 154 
laser welocimeter, 166 
mouse, boundary layer, 170 
particle image velocimeter, 169 
pitot tube, 154 
pitot-static tube, 155 
Prandtl design, 157 
standard design, 155 
Preston tube, 173 
probes 
cone, 163 
reverse flow, 163 
split hot f
i
l
m
,
 
165 
total head rake, 169 
vanes, 164 
yawheads, 159 
Interferometry, 2 
1 
6 
Johansson, 85 
Jones, 7, 325 
Kabayashi, 53 
Karamcheti, 2 
Katz, 334 
Keating, 342 
Kellogg, 336 
Kiel tube, 195 . 
Kind, 53 
Klebanoff, 92 
Krause, 170 
Krober, 133 
Kutta-Joukowski theorem, 184 
L 
Lamb, 336 
Landahl, 15 
Laplace's equation, 14 
Laser velocimetry, 21 
6 
back scatter, 167 
forward scatter, 167 
Laws, 93 
LES, 23 
Lift 
coefficient, 12 
maximum values, 48 
1 
curve, 48 
1,490 
from pressure distribution, 180 
slope of curve, 481 
zero angle, 482 
Lighthill's equation, I5 
Linden, 325 
Lindgren, 85 
Liquid crystals, 175 
Livesey, 93 
Loads, 234 
Log, 476 
Loitsyanskii, 5 
Long static tube, 221 
Longitudinal pressure gradient, 49 
Losses in tunnel, 168 
Ludwig, 55 
Lumiphor, 146 
Mach number 11, 20, 21, 22, 63 
MacWilkinson, 325 
Manometer, 137 
fluid for, 140 
micromanometer, 142 
multitube, 140 
utube, 138 
Marine vehicles 
acoustic sources, 625 
control surfaces, 623 
flow field effects on aircraft, 614 
freeboard, 61 
1 
Froude's hypothesis, 616 
model self propulsion test, 620 
powering requirements', 617 
recreational yachts, 614 
stack gas dispersion, 612 


INDEX 
709 
plume buoyancy, 613 
plume momentum, 613 
underwater, 627 
propulsion and power, 629 
stability and control, 627 
viscous hull resistance, 616 
wind loads, 610 
Maskell, 342 
McKinney, 325 
McPhail, 133 
Mean 
confidence limits, 451 
confidence probability, 451 
estimation from measurements, 451 
of a random variable, 561 
Mehta, 70 
Mercker, 358 
Micro beads, 306 
Microphones, 145 
Mikhail, 97 
Millikan, 325 
Milne-Thomson, 336 
Models 
airplanes, 65 
attitude, 236 
breakdown, 473 
construction, 461 
design, 461 
dimensional tolerances, 466 
finishes, 466 
flutter models, 687 
fuselage, 464 
handling, 468 
hinged surfaces, 465 
materials, 463 
mounting, 264, 462 
as wing with endplate, 288 
from roof, 283 
half models, 287 
on a turntable, 287 
reflection plane, 285 
short strut, 288 
single-strut with fork, 281 
single-strut, 280 
StNtS, 
seals, 264, 278 
single, 280 
with fork, 281 
tail sting, 285 
three-point, 283 
two-strut, 281 
wingtip, 283 
V/STOL, 65 
propellers, 433 
pressure orifices, 467 
pressure, 467 
rotor, 559 
spin, 473 
split, 287 
wings and tails, 464 
Mollo-Christensen, 15 
Moment coefficient 
pitching, 13 
rolling, 13 
yawing, 13 
Moment transfer, 238 
Moments, 234 
Monopole, 16 
Morel, 96 
Moul, 325 
Moving belts, 432 
Murphy, 141 
Nagib, 93 
Navier-Stokes equations, 5 
Neal, 325 
Nitrogen, 30 
Nolle, 2 
Nozzle, 68, 95 
design, 97 
Ockendon, 23 
Oscillations, 5 
1 
Osterlund, 85 
Oswald's efficiency factor, 482 
Pankhurst, 64, 68 
Particle image velocimetry (PIV), 216 
Paterson, 325 
Pathline, 189 
Patterson, 133 
Photography 
filters, 206 
flash lamps, 205 


710 
INDEX 
Pitot-static tube, 220 
PN, 216 
Planetary boundary layer, 610 
Plotkin, 334 
Positioning systems, 184 
Power effects 
.- 
blowing nacelle, 544 
experimental methods, 539 
flow-through nacelles, 544 
jet aircraft, 544 
propellers, 532 
single engine tractor, 533 
turbine-powered simulator, 545 
Prandtl Number, 11 
Randtl universal law of friction, 75 
handtl, 90 
Preliminary shapes, 567 
Pressure, 137, 218 
coefficient, 10 
dynamic, 10,218 
average, 475 
variation across jet, 222 
distribution, 220 
airfoil, 181 
lift, I80 
pitching moment, 184 
evolution of measurement, 151 
longitudinal gradient, 221 
transducers, 141 
absolute, 143 
differential, 143 
piezoelectric, 144 
units of measurement, 139 
Pressure sensitive paint, 145 
Preston tube, 173 
Preston, 64 
Profile drag, 176 
Propellers, 509 
characteristics, 534 
model calibration, 537 
motors, 536 
thrust coefficients, 535 
toque coefficients, 535 
Q 
Quadropole, 17 
R 
Rainbird, 97 
Randers-Pehrson, 186 
RANS, 24 
Reda, 175 
Reentry landers, 560 
Reference frames, 234 
body axes, 235 
converting force components, 237 
converting moment components, 238 
origins, 235 
wind axes, 235 
Restitution, coefficient of, 54 
Reynolds number, 11, 20, 22, 29, 665 
critical, 225 
critical (sphere), 94 
effect of low values, 673 
effect of temperature, 122 
effect on maximum lift, 63 
effective, 226 
minimum, 64 
unit, 62 
wire, 86 
Robertson, 133 
Rooney, 325 
Rossby number, 49 
S 
Sahlin, 85 
Sailboats, 631 
atmospheric boundary layer, 641 
keels and rudders, 65, 635 
floor mountings, 638 
reflection plane models, 637 
wind tunnel tests, 636 
sails, 65, 638 
downwind, 647 
sail shape, 643 
upwind, 645 
wind tunnel tests, 642 
spinnakers, 66 
Salter, 85 
SATA, 19 
Savonius windmill, 43 
Scale effect, 301 
directional stability and control, 333 
drag, 313 
flaps, 320 
lateral stability and control, 323 
lift curve, 3 
17 
forward thickness airfoils, 3 
17 


INDEX 
711 
low-drag airfoils, 320 
hgitudinal stability and control, 322 
maximum lift coefficient, 317 
pitching moment, 322 
Scale models, 19 
Scanivalves, 177 
Scheiman, 93 
Schlichting, 5, 303 
Schubauer, 92 
Screens 
effect of dirt on, 269 
safety, 68 
Sedov, 2 
Separation, locating points, 228 
Settling area, 68 
Shames, 2, 4, 75 
Shape optimization, 567 
Shear stress, 204 
Shemood, Wiley, 667 
Side force coeficient, 12 
Signal conditioner, 230 
Similarity, 9 
important parameters, 19 
Skin friction coefficient, 75 
Skinner, 55 
Slipstream, 433, 533 
Smith, 141 
Solid blockage, 329 
Soloukhin, 139 
Sound, speed of, 21 
Span load, 492 
Spangenberg, 92 
Speziale, 23 
Stability axes, 418, 529 
Stalford, 325 
Stall, type, 317 
Standard deviation 
from sample, 452 
of a random variable, 449 
Steinle, 122 
Stengel, 325 
Straighteners, fan, 102, 115 
Stratford, 97 
Streakline, 190 
Streamline curvature, 329 
Streamline, 190 
Strom, 53 
Struts, dummy, 269 
Submarines, 65 
Subsonic Aerodynamic Testing Associa- 
tion, 19 
Sutherland's law, 7 
Symmetry, 200 
T 
Takagi, 186 
Temperature, 153, 218 
Test procedure, 473 
Test section, 68 
closed, 28, 68 
lighting, 79 
open, 28, 67 
size, 28,61 
slotted, 348 
windows, 79 
Theme development, 567 
Timeline, 19 
1 
Topology, of flows, 202 
Transducer, 
terminology, 242 
Trip strip, 306 
drag correction for, 3 10 
epoxy dots, 308 
grit, 306 
height, 309 
location, 309 
fuselage and nacelles, 309 
lifting surfaces, 309 
three dimensional pinked tape, 307 
two-dimensional tape, 307 
wire, thread, string, 307 
Turbulence, 15, 218 
factor, 226 
measurement in test section, 224 
multiple, 93 
screens, 91 
sphere, 94, 224 
drag, 226 
Turntable, 49 
Uncertainty, 445 
bias components, 454 
combined, 456 
measurements, 676 
precision component, 447 
probability distribution, 448 


Uncertainty (continued) 
chi-square, 449 
Gaussian, 449 
student t, 450 
uniform, 449 
random component, 447 
systematic components, 454 
total, 456 
types of, 445 
bias, 447 
random, 445 
systematic, 446 
Upflow, 265 
V/STOL vehicles, 550 
autogyros, 554 
compressed air, 557 
deflected slipstream. 552 
design of rotor model, 559 
experimental issues, 556 
fan in wing, 554 
helicopters, 550 
hinged rotor operation, 559 
instrumentation, 557 
jet flaps, 554 
measuring rpm, 557 
model sizing, 559 
rotors, 558 
tare and interference, 558 
tilt rotor, 551 
tilt wing, 552 
vectored thrust, 551, 558 
Vanes, 164 
Variance, 
of a random variable, 448 
Velocity prediction program (VPP), 63 
1 
Vincenti, 350 
Viscosity, 8, 9
,
 
20 
Viscous force, 20 
Vortex generators, 1
0
4
 
Vortex span, 38 1 
VPt: 631 ' 
Wake blockage, 329 
Wardlaw, 48 
Water, properties of, 8 
Water tunnels, 40 
Wax, formula, 469 
Westhe,:! 
Wide angle diffusers, 88 
Wiedermann, 358 
Wilsden, 342 
Wind axes, 417, 529 
Wind engineering 
conferences, 652 
dynamic deformations, 661 
geometric scale, 656 
internal building pressures, 660 
loads on complete structures, 660 
nearby buildings and topography, 
658 
Reynolds number, 656 
scale speed, 656 
terrain effects, 658 
Wind forces, 49 
Wind spectrum, 654 
Wind tunnels 
aeroacoustic, 38 
aeronautical, 29 
automobile, 35, 65 
breather vibrations, 123 
climatic, 37 
cooling, 121 
configurations 
annular return, 25 
blower tunnels, 69 
closed circuit, 25, 66 
closed return, 27, 66 
general layout, 67 
double return, 25 
Eiffel. 25 
general layout, 116 
open circuit, 25, 32, 34, 69 
open return, 27, 66 
single return, 25 
tandem test section, 30 
two dimensional, 34 
corner vanes, 83 
design procedure, 11 
7 
doors and windows, 81 
energy ratlo 
effect of contraction ratio, 100 
effect of diffuser angle, 100 
examples, 99 
environmental, 37 


INDEX 
713 
European Transonic Facility, 30 
fan-straightener section, 102 
flow, 330 
free flight, 32 
general purpose, 41 
Glenn L. Martin, 36, 41 
Gottingen, 25 
high Reynolds number, 29 
cryogenic, 30 
effect of Freon, 29 
icing, 34 
instructional, 66 
Lockheed Martin Low Speed, 30, 35 
loss coefficient, 73 
losses in constant area section, 74 
low turbulence, 34 
Nissan full scale, 36 
NPL, 25 
NTF, 30 
power input section, 87 
Prandtl, 25 
pressurized, 29 
propeller, 33 
propulsion, 34 
safety, 131 
second diffuser, 120 
section losses, 77 
comers, 83, 85 
diffuser, 80 
honeycombs, 90 
nozzle, 98 
open jets, 80 
screens, 86 
solid wall jets, 79 
test section, 78 
small, 665 
smoke, 35 
specifications, 62 
spin, 32 
stability, 33 
straightener vanes, 115 
test section flow quality, 123 
test section inserts, 130 
types of, 25 
V/STOL, 30 
variable density, 29 
Wind turbines, 
emergency power, 509 
windmills, 42 
Windbreaks, 53 
Windows, 79 
Winters, 85 
Wolf, 346 
World Wide Web, 25 
Young, 303