WT/DS413/R 
Page 28 
 
 
 
in several countries.  One of the examples put forward by China to support this assertion is France, 
where, according to China, the authorization process for payment card transactions is carried out by 
the network of "Groupement des Cartes Bancaires" (or CB), while the clearing and settlement of 
transactions is handled by "CompensationREtail" (or CORE).104  The United States argues that the 
fact that two separate entities may provide different elements of "electronic payment services" is not 
inconsistent with the fact that each of the elements is integrated and necessary to facilitate payment 
card transactions, and as such constitutes a single service.  In the United States' view, "electronic 
payment services" could not be effectuated through the provision of the service provided by STET 
only, or the service provided by CB only.  It is, in the United States' view, the combination that 
enables the payment card transaction to occur.   
7.61 
We agree with the United States' view on this matter.  How the supply of "electronic payment 
services" is organized depends on different parameters (e.g. the business models adopted by the 
entities participating in the payment card transaction).  On the one hand, global electronic payment 
services suppliers provide all the components of the "system" identified by the United States, thus 
supplying a final product that looks like a "single" service for the direct user (the issuing and 
acquiring institutions) and for the ultimate beneficiaries of these services (the card holder and the 
merchant), and that in many countries that is the case.  On the other hand, there are jurisdictions 
where the different components of the "system" are supplied by different service suppliers.  Further, 
as we saw previously, third-party processors may also intervene in the processing of payment card 
transactions.  In the Panel's view, therefore, the services at issue may as a factual matter be supplied 
by a single service supplier or by more than one service supplier acting in concert. 
7.62 
We conclude therefore that the services at issue include both the instances in which these 
services are supplied as a single service by a single service supplier, and those instances in which 
different elements of the "system" described by the United States are supplied by different service 
suppliers. 
D. 
CHINA'S SPECIFIC COMMITMENTS CONCERNING THE SERVICES AT ISSUE 
7.63 
The United States claims that, in sector 7.B, under the heading "Banking and Other Financial 
Services" of its GATS Schedule, China undertook market access and national treatment commitments 
with respect to subsector (d), which reads "[a]ll payment and money transmission services, including 
credit, charge and debit cards, travellers cheques and bankers draft (including import and export 
settlement)" (subsector (d)).  According to the United States, subsector (d) includes the electronic 
payment services supplied in connection with "credit, charge and debit cards", and other payment card 
transactions.105 
7.64 
China argues that the United States has failed to prove that any of the services at issue, much 
less all of them, fall within subsector (d) of its Schedule. In China's view, the clearing and settlement 
services at issue fall under paragraph 5(a), subsector (xiv), of the GATS Annex on Financial Services 
(subsector (xiv)), which covers "[s]ettlement and clearing services for financial assets, including 
securities, derivative products, and other negotiable instruments", a subsector for which no 
commitments have been made in China's Schedule. China maintains that the fact that those clearing 
and settlement services do not fall within the scope of subsector (d) defeats the United States' 
assertion that all of the services at issue fall within subsector (d).  According to China, the "payment 
services" referred to in subsector (d) encompass the issuance and acceptance by banks and other types 
                                                   
104 CORE is a payment processing network developed and operated by the STET company (Systèmes 
Technologiques d’Echange et de Traitement).  Examples of European countries in which the national 
authorization network is independent of the clearing and settlement mechanism for payment card transactions, 
Exhibit CHN-103, pp. 2 and 5. 
105 United States' first written submission, para. 13. 


 
WT/DS413/R 
 
Page 29 
 
 
 
of financial institutions of payment instruments other than cash.  However, issuing and acquiring 
services are not part of this dispute.106 
7.65 
Australia, the European Union and Korea submit that the services at issue fall under 
subsector (d) of China's Schedule.107  According to Ecuador, an excessively broad interpretation of 
specific commitments in GATS schedules would constitute an unacceptable impairment of WTO 
Members' rights to define the scope and content of such commitments.108 
7.66 
The Panel must determine whether, as claimed by the United States, China has undertaken 
specific commitments on the services at issue under subsector (d) of its Schedule of Specific 
Commitments (China's Schedule).109 To do so, it will need to interpret China's Schedule as well as 
relevant provisions of the GATS. 
7.67 
Article XX:1 of the GATS provides that each Member "shall set out in a schedule the specific 
commitments it undertakes", notably on market access and national treatment.  This schedule, 
according to Article XX:3, "shall form an integral part" of the GATS110, and is thus legally part of the 
WTO Agreement. 111  For that reason, GATS schedules must be interpreted according to the 
"customary rules of interpretation of public international law", as codified in Articles 31 and 32 of the 
Vienna Convention.112 
7.68 
As a result, we will interpret China's Schedule and other relevant treaty text in accordance 
with the ordinary meaning to be given to the terms of the Schedule in their context, and in the light of 
the object and purpose of the GATS and the WTO Agreement.  The Panel will turn to supplementary 
means of interpretation pursuant to Article 32 of the Vienna Convention as appropriate. 
1. 
Order of analysis of the subsectors identified by the parties 
7.69 
As a preliminary matter, the Panel must decide whether to start its interpretative analysis with 
subsector (d) of China's Schedule, or with subsector (xiv) of the GATS Annex on Financial Services 
(Annex).   
7.70 
China submits that, because clearing and settlement services for payment card transactions are 
encompassed by subsector (xiv) of the Annex, it is unnecessary for the Panel to examine the United 
States' assertion that those services are encompassed by subsector (d). According to China, the Panel 
should begin with an analysis of subsector (xiv) of the Annex – a subsector not listed in China's 
Schedule – because this subsector offers the more specific description of the clearing and settlement 
services at issue.  Referring to the rules of interpretation contained in the United Nations' Provisional 
Central Product Classification113 (CPC), China claims that the category that provides the most specific 
                                                   
106 China's first written submission, paras. 78 and 96. 
107 Australia's third-party submission, para. 7; European Union's third-party submission, para. 23; and 
Korea's third-party submission, para. 11.  
108 Ecuador's third-party statement, para. 5. 
109 Schedule of Specific Commitments of the People's Republic of China, GATS/SC/135 (14 February 
2002).  The relevant part of China's Schedule is contained in Annex G to this Report. 
110 Article XX:3 of the GATS provides: "Schedules of specific commitments shall be annexed to this 
Agreement and shall form an integral part thereof." 
111 Pursuant to Article II:2 (Scope of the WTO) of the Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the World 
Trade Organization (WTO Agreement), the GATS, which is included in Annex 1B of the WTO Agreement, is 
an integral part of that Agreement. 
112 DSU Art. 3.2. See also Appellate Body Report, US – Gambling, para. 160.  For the text of Articles 
31 and 32 of the Vienna Convention, see above, para. 7.8. 
113Provisional Central Product Classification, Statistical Papers, Series M No.77, United Nations (1991). 


WT/DS413/R 
Page 30 
 
 
 
description is to be preferred to categories providing a more general description.114  The United States 
did not offer specific arguments on this issue. 
7.71 
The Panel notes, first, that this dispute concerns the scope of China's GATS commitments.  
The issue before us is whether the United States can properly base its claims in respect of the services 
at issue on China's commitments under subsector (d). For this reason, we believe that it would be 
incongruous for the Panel to begin its analysis by interpreting a subsector not relied on by the United 
States and not contained in China's Schedule.  Furthermore, under the approach proposed by China, 
the Panel would need to determine at the outset of its examination which of subsectors (d) and (xiv) is 
"more specific". In our view, the matter is not so obvious that we could confidently determine, 
without undertaking a detailed examination, that subsector (xiv) is "more specific" in relation to the 
services at issue.   
7.72 
For these reasons, we are not persuaded that we must, from the outset, follow the CPC rule of 
interpretation referred to by China and thus direct our initial analysis away from the provisions of 
China's Schedule, in particular subsector (d).  Naturally, this neither prevents nor dispenses us from 
subsequently examining subsector (xiv) of the Annex as relevant context for the interpretation of 
China's Schedule.  The Panel will thus start its analysis by examining subsector (d) of China's 
Schedule. 
2. 
Interpretation of subsector (d) in China's Schedule 
7.73 
The parties have different views on the scope of subsector (d).  The United States argues that 
subsector (d) encompasses the services at issue. China disagrees and submits that this 
subsector covers issuing and acquiring services, which are not among the services at issue.   
7.74 
As explained above, we will interpret subsector (d) as described in China's Schedule in 
accordance with customary rules of interpretation.  Therefore, we will first determine the ordinary 
meaning of relevant terms used to describe the services contained in subsector (d).  We shall then turn 
to the context, which includes, inter alia, other elements of China's Schedule, the GATS itself, the 
GATS Annex on Financial Services, and the schedules of other WTO Members.115  Finally, we shall 
consider the object and purpose of the GATS and the WTO Agreement.  As indicated above, we may 
turn to supplementary means of interpretation pursuant to Article 32 of the Vienna Convention as 
appropriate. 
(a) 
Ordinary meaning   
7.75 
The United States argues that the services at issue fall within the ordinary meaning of 
"payment and money transmission services" as one type of "all" such services within subsector (d) of 
China’s Schedule.  According to the United States, the ordinary meaning of "payment" and "money 
transmission", as reflected in definitions from the Shorter Oxford English Dictionary and specialized 
financial sources, demonstrates that subsector (d) covers the action of transferring money from one 
person to another.116   
7.76 
China argues that subsector (d) is listed in China's Schedule under the heading of "banking 
services".  Consistent with the ordinary meaning of "banking services", all of the services listed under 
                                                   
114 China's first written submission, para. 89. 
115 In US – Gambling, a dispute about commitments included in the GATS Schedule of the United 
States, the Appellate Body found that the context included:  (i) the remainder of the Member's Schedule; (ii) the 
substantive provisions of the GATS; (iii) the provisions of covered agreements other than the GATS; and (iv) 
the GATS Schedules of other Members.  See Appellate Body Report, US – Gambling, para. 178. 
116 United States' response to China's request for a preliminary ruling, paras. 150-155; first written 
submission, para. 26;  and second written submission, paras. 19-32. 


 
WT/DS413/R 
 
Page 31 
 
 
 
that heading are services that are typically provided by banks, finance companies, and other types of 
financial institutions.  The banks are making a "payment" within the ordinary meaning of that term, i.e. 
they are engaging in "[a]n act, or the action or process, of paying …".  Hence, according to China, the 
payment services referred to in subsector (d) encompass the issuance and acceptance by financial 
institutions of payment instruments other than cash, but do not cover the services at issue.117 
7.77 
Australia submits that the ordinary meaning of the terms "all payment and money 
transmission services" encompasses services which manage and facilitate the transfer of funds, 
whether for the purpose of payment for a good, service or debt, or for purposes unrelated to payment, 
from one person or place to another.118 
7.78 
The Panel recalls that subsector (d) in China's Schedule reads as follows: 
All payment and money transmission services, including credit, charge and debit 
cards, travellers cheques and bankers draft (including import and export settlement) 
7.79 
We begin our textual analysis of the phrase "all payment and money transmission services" by 
examining the terms "payment", "money" and "transmission".  We shall then turn to the terms "all" 
and "services". 
(i) 
Ordinary meaning of "payment", "money" and "transmission" 
Dictionaries and glossaries  
7.80 
The Panel observes at the outset that, for the purpose of determining the ordinary meaning of 
the terms of subsector (d), dictionary definitions of those terms are a useful starting point.  However, 
such definitions are not always sufficient.  As the Appellate Body has explained:  
[I]n order to identify the ordinary meaning, a Panel may start with the dictionary 
definitions of the terms to be interpreted.  But dictionaries alone are not necessarily 
capable of resolving complex questions of interpretation, as they typically aim to 
catalogue all meanings of words – be those meanings common or rare, universal or 
specialized.119 
7.81 
We first consider the term "payment" in subsector (d).  The Shorter Oxford English 
Dictionary defines "payment" as "an act, or the action or process, of paying".120  In turn, the verb 
"pay" is defined as "give (a person) money etc. that is due for goods received, a service done, or a 
debt incurred; remunerate.  Also, hand over or transfer (money etc.) in return for something."121  This 
general definition of "payment" is consistent with definitions in certain glossaries and specialized 
dictionaries submitted by the United States: (i) a "transfer of funds in any form between two 
parties";122 or (ii) the "transfer of money from one party to another with the assent of both parties".123  
We glean from these definitions that the three main elements in a payment are (i) there is a transfer, (ii) 
what is transferred is money, and (iii) the transferred money is due for goods, services or a debt 
incurred.  The Panel next considers the term "money". The Shorter Oxford English Dictionary 
provides the following general definition:  
                                                   
117 China's first submission, paras. 95-97. 
118 Australia's third-party submission, para. 10. 
119Appellate Body Report, US – Gambling, para. 164 (footnotes omitted, emphasis original). 
120 Shorter Oxford English Dictionary, Vol. 2, p. 2130. 
121 Ibid., p. 2129. 
122 Banking Terminology, 3rd ed., (American Bankers Association, 1989) (Banking Terminology), 
Exhibit US-59, p. 262. 
123 John V. Terry, Dictionary for Business & Finance, 1990, Exhibit US-60, p. 240. 


WT/DS413/R 
Page 32 
 
 
 
… A current medium of exchange in the form of coins and (in mod. use) banknotes; 
coins and banknotes collectively. … Any object or material serving the same 
purposes as coins. … Property, wealth, possessions, resources, etc., viewed as 
convertible into coin or banknotes or having value expressible in terms of these.124   
7.82 
In glossaries and specialized dictionaries, the term "money" is defined as the following: (i) 
"[a]nything which is immediately and generally acceptable for the discharge of a debt or in exchange 
for a good or service"125;  (ii) "the means of facilitating the exchange of goods and services and the 
accumulation of financial wealth, commonly recognizable as banknotes, coins and bank deposits"126;  
(iii) "[a]nything that is generally acceptable as a means of settling debt. Money is said to have three 
main functions, being: a store of value; a means of exchange; and a means of debt settlement (cf. fiat 
money)".127 
7.83 
As one might expect, the definitions found in specialized dictionaries and glossaries are more 
technical than the general definition found in the Shorter Oxford English Dictionary; however, they 
are consistent with this definition.  The definitions suggest that "money" can be characterized  as (i) a 
generally acceptable means of exchange, (ii) that represents wealth, and (iii) is generally acceptable as 
payment. 
7.84 
Finally, the Panel considers the term "transmission".  The Shorter Oxford English Dictionary 
defines this term as "[c]onveyance or transfer from one person or place to another; the action or 
process of passing from one person, organism, generation, etc., to another, as by personal contact, 
stored information, genetic inheritance, etc."128  This definition suggests that the two main elements 
characterizing "transmission" are (i) a transfer, (ii) from one person or place to another.   
7.85 
In sum, our analysis of definitions contained in dictionaries and glossaries suggests that the 
terms "payment", "money" and "transmission", when used in combination, refer to the transfer of a 
generally acceptable means of exchange from one person or place to another.  The money transferred 
may be due for goods or services received, or for settling a debt.  We continue our consideration of 
the ordinary meaning of the terms used in subsector (d) with an examination of industry sources. 
Industry sources 
7.86 
The United States argues that the description of the sector at issue drawn from industry 
sources is relevant to determining the ordinary meaning under Article 31 of the Vienna Convention.  
According to the United States, industry sources confirm the ordinary meaning of the service and 
demonstrate that EPS is a payment service that is one type of "all" "payment and money transmission 
service" falling within subsector (d).  The United States contends that, in many instances, the common 
meaning of a term corresponds to its usage within a particular industry or sector and provides the 
basis for dictionary definitions.  Consequently, the United States suggests, it is appropriate and may 
be helpful to look at how those involved in the service at issue understand the terms found in a GATS 
schedule.  The United States further submits that sector sources describe the suppliers of the services 
at issue in this dispute as supplying "electronic payment services" for "payment card" transactions and 
                                                   
124 Shorter Oxford English Dictionary, Vol. 1, p. 1821. 
125 D. Rutherford, Dictionary of Economics, Routledge, 1992, p. 305. 
126 G. Bannock & W. Manser, The Penguin International Dictionary of Finance, Penguin Books, 
3rd ed., 1999, p. 181. 
127 Peter Moles & Nicholas Terry, The Handbook of International Financial Terms, Oxford University 
Press, 1997. 
128 Shorter Oxford English Dictionary, Vol. 2, p. 3325. 


 
WT/DS413/R 
 
Page 33 
 
 
 
as operating within the "global payments industry."  This confirms, according to the United States, 
that the services at issue are payment services falling under subsector (d) of China's Schedule.129 
7.87 
China argues that the United States provides no support for the proposition that the manner in 
which certain service suppliers characterize their services is relevant, as a matter of treaty 
interpretation, to how those services should be classified in relation to a Member's schedule.  Thus, 
industry sources like company brochures, annual reports, or company websites are not relevant for the 
purpose of establishing the ordinary meaning of the terms at issue in this dispute, one reason being 
that they might be biased and self-serving.  Moreover, China observes that the United States has not 
pointed to a single panel or Appellate Body report that uses industry sources as a means of treaty 
interpretation.  China further argues that, even if the industry sources cited by the United were legally 
relevant to the classification of the services at issue, they would support China's position that these 
services include clearing and settlement, among other possible services.  There are only a handful of 
references in these sources to the "payment industry" or "payment systems", compared to far more 
numerous references to the telecommunications, data processing, and clearing and settlement services 
that these companies describe themselves as providing.130 
7.88 
Ecuador submits that the industry's characterization of a service does not determine the nature 
of that service and the fact that one or several suppliers describe the services they supply as "payment 
services" does not necessarily confer that character upon them.  The legal value of industry sources is 
therefore questionable.131 
7.89 
The Panel begins by assessing whether it is appropriate to examine industry sources in 
addition to dictionaries for the purpose of determining the ordinary meaning of a term appearing in a 
GATS schedule.132  We acknowledge that, sometimes, industry sources may define a term in a way 
that might reflect self-interest and, thus, might be "biased and self-serving", as argued by China.  To 
that extent, we see some merit in China’s concerns about relying on such sources, without more.  
Nevertheless, we see no basis to completely disregard industry sources as potential relevant evidence 
of an ordinary meaning of a specific term in a particular industry.  Indeed, we see no reason why a 
panel's search for the ordinary meaning of any term should always be confined to regular dictionaries.  
A panel's initial task in interpreting treaty provisions is to determine the ordinary meaning of the 
words used.  If industry sources can be shown to assist with this task in a particular dispute, we see no 
reason why a panel should not refer to them.  As with a panel's consideration of dictionary definitions, 
however, panels must be mindful of the limitations, such as self-interest, that industry sources may 
present and should govern their interpretive task accordingly.  
7.90 
With these preliminary observations in mind, we now examine the relevance of the terms that 
appear in the industry sources referred to by the parties for purposes of the interpretation of the terms 
used in subsector (d).  We note that both parties refer to industry sources – sometimes the very same 
ones133 – but draw different conclusions from them. 134  The United States argues that the way industry 
                                                   
129 United States' first written submission, para. 26; and response to Panel question No. 82, para. 52. 
130 China's first written submission, paras. 117 and 118; and response to Panel question No. 82, paras. 1 
and 2. 
131 Ecuador's third-party statement, paras. 12, 13 and 15. 
132 We observe that, pursuant to Article 31(4) of the Vienna Convention, "[a] special meaning shall be 
given to a term if it is established that the parties so intended".  In the present dispute, no party is relying on this 
provision.  Hence, we shall not consider it. 
133 China submits in this regard that "[i]ronically, many of the materials that the United States 
references and includes as exhibits are materials that China was already planning to cite – and, in fact, has cited 
above – for the proposition that the services at issue in this dispute include clearing and settlement services."  
China's first written submission, fn. 69. 
134 For example, both parties refer to MasterCard's 2010 annual report.  Our examination of this report 
indicates that, as argued by the United States, it describes the company as providing "a global payment network" 


WT/DS413/R 
Page 34 
 
 
 
sources describe their own services confirms that EPS is a payment service that is one type of "all" 
"payment and money transmission service" falling within subsector (d).  China has not relied on 
industry sources to shed light on the meaning of "all payment …".  In China's view, "[r]eading 
through the various corporate materials and other 'industry sources' that the United States cites as 
evidence, one is struck not by the handful of references to the 'payment industry' or 'payment systems', 
but rather by the far more numerous references to the telecommunications, data processing, and 
clearing and settlement services that these companies describe themselves as providing".135   
7.91 
The Panel notes that industry sources cited in this dispute refer to payment transactions, 
electronic payments and the various types of cards specifically identified in subsector (d) of China's 
Schedule.136  We also note that the usage of these terms in industry sources is consistent with the 
definitions found in general dictionaries and more specialized glossaries that we examined in the 
preceding section.  We find, however, that industry sources do little to shed further light on the scope 
of subsector (d).  
The expression "payment and money transmission services" 
7.92 
Having considered the ordinary meaning of "payment", "money" and "transmission", the 
Panel notes that these three elements must be examined in conjunction with the term "services", 
which they qualify.  Our understanding is that the phrase "payment and money transmission services" 
refers to, respectively, "payment services" and "money transmission services".  The parties and third 
parties in this dispute have the same reading.  What is thus at stake in this dispute is the scope of the 
expressions "payment services" and "money transmission services".   
7.93 
The United States argues that EPS is the service through which transactions involving 
payment cards are processed and through which transfers of funds between institutions participating 
in the transactions are managed and facilitated.  It considers that EPS clearly fall within the ordinary 
meaning of "payment and money transmission services" as one type of "all" such services.137 
7.94 
China submits that a service supplier that is merely "managing" or "facilitating" the supply of 
this type of payment service, or "processing" payment transactions, is not itself a party to the payment 
transaction.  In China's view, the supplier is neither issuing nor accepting the payment instrument and 
is never in possession of the funds to be paid.  It is not "paying" anyone, and is not providing a 
"payment service" within the ordinary meaning of that term.  China also submits that the United 
                                                                                                                                                              
and operating in the "global payment industry".  The report also refers to various means of payment, including 
"credit cards, charge cards, debit cards (including … [ATM] cards), prepaid cards, …" and indicates that the 
company provides "payment services and solutions".  We observe however that, as submitted by China, the 
same report also refers to MasterCard as providing "transaction switching", which includes "authorization, 
clearing and settlement".  MasterCard 2010 Annual Report, Exhibits US-6, pp. 4-10. 
135 China's first written submission, para. 118. 
136 Visa IPO Prospectus, Exhibit US-3, p. 128;  MasterCard 2009 Annual Report, Exhibit US-5;  
MasterCard 2010 Annual Report, Exhibit US-6, p. 6;  American Express 2010 Annual Report, Exhibit US-7, 
pp. 4-11;  Discover 2010 Annual Report, Exhibit US-8, pp. 1-4;  First Data Corp 10-K Annual Report (March 
10, 2011), Exhibit US-9;  UBS Investment Research, "Visa 201: No Better Way to 'Play the Swipe', June 25, 
2008, Exhibit US-10, pp. 28-30;  JCB Corporate Overview: JCB – A Leader in the Payments Industry (as of 
July 2011), Exhibit US-16;  JCB Smart Card Press Release:  JCB International and Vital Processing Services 
Team Up to Introduce JCB Smart Card Capability in the United States (November 2002), Exhibit US-17;  JCB 
History (2001-2009, JCB International Co., LTD), Exhibit US-18;  JCB System network:  Most Advanced 
Payment System Network, Exhibit US-19;  and CUP's Articles of Association, Articles 11-12, Exhibit US-20.  
See United States' response to China's request for a preliminary ruling, paras. 55-61 and 164-178;  and first 
written submission, para. 27. 
137 United States' response to China's request for a preliminary ruling, para. 147-155;  first written 
submission, paras. 25-26;  and second written submission, paras. 19-32. 


 
WT/DS413/R 
 
Page 35 
 
 
 
States has not given a proper interpretation to subsector (d) because the United States has failed to 
acknowledge that network operators are not "paying" or "transmitting money" to anyone.138 
7.95 
The Panel observes that the GATS provides no definition of the word "service", although it 
defines related concepts, such as the supply of a service and a service supplier. 139  Paragraph 5(a) of 
the GATS Annex on Financial Services defines a "financial service" as "any service of a financial 
nature offered by a financial service supplier of a Member", and contains a list of financial services 
that comprises "all payment and money transmission services, including …" under subsector (viii).  
7.96 
It is clear to the Panel that the supply of a "payment service" is not the same thing as the act of 
paying for goods or services.  Purchasers who, on their own account, pay merchants for goods or 
services received are not thereby providing a "payment service" to these merchants.  The payment in 
such case is what a purchaser gives in return for the good or service received, and not a separate 
service received by the merchant. Thus, "payment services" in our view are supplied, if at all, by a 
person or entity other than the payer or payee. Typically, when payment instruments other than cash 
are used, a third party intervenes between the payer and the payee, in order to facilitate or make 
possible the "act of paying". The same can be said about "money transmission services", since 
transmitting money normally involves the participation of an intermediary to ensure that the money is 
transferred from one party to another.  
7.97 
We consider, therefore, that whoever supplies a "payment service" does not "pay", but makes 
the payment between payer and payee, for example by processing payment transactions involving the 
use of credit cards, debit cards, or other such instruments.  Similarly, when it comes to "money 
transmission services", the supplier of the service intervenes between the sender and the recipient 
(payer and payee) to ensure that the money is transmitted.  In our view, a "money transmission 
service" encompasses, among other situations, those where the supplier either transmits the funds 
from the payer's account to the payee's account (as in the three-party model) or connects the parties 
involved in a payment transaction, and ensures that payment instructions are executed and funds are 
transferred pursuant to the transaction (as in a four-party model). Hence, suppliers of "payment and 
money transmission services" are providing a "service" that facilitates and enables payments and 
money transmissions.  For that reason, we agree with the United States that "payment and money 
transmission services" include those services that "manage", "facilitate" or "enable" the act, of paying, 
or transmitting money. 
Ordinary meaning of "all" 
7.98 
As noted, subsector (d) begins with the word "all".  It is the only subsector in the financial 
services section of China's Schedule that does so.  Subsector (viii) of the GATS Annex on Financial 
Services, on which, according to China, subsector (d) of China's Schedule is based,140 also starts with 
the word "all".141 
7.99 
Consistent with the principle of effective treaty interpretation, we consider that the word "all" 
before "payment and money transmission services" must be given meaning and effect.  In our view, 
the use of the term "all" manifests an intention to cover comprehensively the entire spectrum of 
"payment and money transmission services".  More particularly, this term indicates to us an intention 
                                                   
138 China's second written submission, para. 40. 
139 Article XXVIII(b) of the GATS defines the "supply of a service" as including "the production, 
distribution, marketing, sale and delivery of a service" and, pursuant to Article XXVIII(g) of the GATS, a 
service supplier means "any person that supplies a service".   
140 China's first written submission, para. 80. 
141 The Shorter Oxford English Dictionary, Vol. 1, p. 55 defines "all" as "the entire number of; the 
individual constituents of, without exception". 


WT/DS413/R 
Page 36 
 
 
 
to include all services essential to payment and money transmission, all means of payment and money 
transmission (i.e. paper-based, card-based and others), and all associated business models (e.g. four-
party model, three-party model and any variations thereof).142 
Summary of findings on the ordinary meaning of "all payment and money transmission 
services" 
7.100 Our analysis of the ordinary meaning of the relevant text indicates that "payment and money 
transmission services" include those services that "manage", "facilitate" or "enable" the act of paying 
or transmitting money.  Finally, we concluded that the use of the term "all" manifests an intention to 
cover comprehensively the entire spectrum of payment and money transmission services. 
7.101 Having determined the ordinary meaning of these terms, we shall turn now to the contextual 
elements of the phrase "all payment and money transmission services". 
(b) 
Context 
7.102 Pursuant to the rule codified in Article 31(2) of the Vienna Convention, the "context" within 
which a treaty provision shall be interpreted notably comprises the text of the treaty, including its 
preamble and annexes.  For the purpose of interpreting a Member's GATS schedule, the Appellate 
Body found in US – Gambling that the context includes (i) the remainder of the Member's schedule; 
(ii) the substantive provisions of the GATS; (iii) the provisions of covered agreements other than the 
GATS; and (iv) the GATS schedules of other WTO Members.143 
7.103 When looking at the remainder of a Member's schedule as part of a contextual analysis, 
panels and the Appellate Body have considered several aspects.  For instance, in US – Gambling, the 
Appellate Body examined the structure of the schedule.144  In China – Publications and Audiovisual 
Products, the Appellate Body considered such aspects as the contextual relevance of the sectoral 
heading at stake; market access, national treatment and additional commitments under the subsector at 
stake; subsectors adjacent to the services at stake; and commitments scheduled under another related 
sector.145 
7.104 In the present dispute, we therefore consider that our examination of the context should, as 
also reflected in the parties' arguments, cover the following elements:  (i) the rest of subsector (d); (ii) 
the headings in the sector at stake; (iii) market access, national treatment and additional commitments 
in the sector at stake; (iv) the structure of the GATS; (v) the GATS Annex on Financial Services; and 
(vi) the schedules of other WTO Members.  We shall examine these different contextual elements in 
turn. 
(i) 
The rest of subsector (d)  
7.105 We recall that subsector (d) of China's Schedule reads as follows: 
[A]ll payment and money transmission services, including credit, charge and debit 
cards, travellers cheques and bankers drafts (including import and export settlement) 
7.106 The phrase "[A]ll payment and money transmission services" in subsector (d) of China's 
Schedule is immediately followed by the phrase:  "including credit, charge and debit cards, travellers 
                                                   
142 The Panel uses the term "essential" to refer to all component services which are needed to complete 
a payment transaction or money transmission. 
143 Appellate Body Report, US – Gambling, para. 178. 
144 Appellate Body Report, US – Gambling, para. 179. 
145 Appellate Body Report, China – Publications and Audiovisual Products, paras. 361-372. 


 
WT/DS413/R 
 
Page 37 
 
 
 
cheques and bankers drafts (including import and export settlement)".  We observe that this phrase is 
similar to that found in subsector (viii) of the Annex on Financial Services146, on which, according to 
China, subsector (d) is based.147  The only difference is the parenthetical addition "(including import 
and export settlement)" in subsector (d).  We shall examine first the phrase "including credit, charge 
and debit cards, travellers cheques and bankers drafts" and shall then turn to the parenthetical addition. 
The phrase "including credit, charge and debit cards, travellers cheques and bankers drafts" 
7.107 The United States argues that the explicit reference to credit, charge and debit cards accords 
with the recognition that EPS is integral to the processing of these types of cards and other payment 
card-based electronic payment transactions.  The United States observes that without EPS, payment 
card transactions could not occur.148 
7.108 China submits that, properly interpreted in its context, the "payment services" referred to in 
subsector (d) encompass the issuance and acceptance by financial institutions of payment instruments 
other than cash.  All of the specific types of payment instruments referenced in subsector (d) are 
methods of payment that allow the buyers and sellers of goods and services to complete transactions 
without a direct transfer of cash.149 
7.109 The Panel first observes that the phrase "including credit, charge and debit cards, travellers 
cheques and bankers drafts" refers to payment and money transmission instruments, not to services.  
In our view, this phrase sets out various types of instruments that require payment and money 
transmission services for them to work effectively.  We also note that the instruments listed are 
preceded by the word "including".  As explained by the panel in China – Publications and 
Audiovisual Products, "the word 'including' in ordinary usage indicates that what follows is not an 
exhaustive, but a partial, list of all covered items".150  In a similar vein, we consider that the phrase 
"including credit, charge and debit cards, travellers cheques and bankers drafts" in subsector (d) 
provides a non-exhaustive list of instruments used in connection with payment and money 
transmission services.151  In the Panel's view, the explicit reference to "credit, charge and debit cards" 
in subsector (d) of China's Schedule sheds light on the type of services covered by the phrase "all 
payment and money transmission services" as it appears in China's Schedule.  It notably suggests that 
the phrase covers payment and money transmission services that are essential for the use of the 
enumerated instruments. 
7.110 Turning to dictionary definitions, a "credit card" is "a card issued by a bank, business, etc., 
authorizing the acquisition of goods and services on credit".152  A "charge card" is "a credit card, esp. 
for use at a particular store or chain of stores or for an account which must be cleared in full on receipt 
of a statement".153  A "debit card" is defined as "giving the holder access (through a computer terminal) 
to an account in order to transfer funds to another's account when making a purchase, etc."154  These 
general definitions are confirmed by definitions found in more specialized glossaries, such as the BIS 
                                                   
146 In paragraph 5(a) of the Annex, subsector (viii) is defined as "[a]ll payment and money transmission 
services, including credit, charge and debit cards, travellers cheques and bankers drafts". 
147 China's first written submission, para. 80. 
148 The United States also argues that the ordinary meaning of the phrase "including credit, charge and 
debit cards" supports the position that EPS for payment card transactions fall within subsector (d) in China's 
Schedule.  United States' response to China's request for a preliminary ruling, para. 149 and 156-163; first 
written submission, paras. 25-26;  and second written submission, paras. 19-23 and 33-37. 
149 China's first written submission, para. 96. 
150 Panel Report, China – Publications and Audiovisual Products, para. 7.294. 
151 In our view, these instruments also include other types of cards, such as ATM cards.  
152 Shorter Oxford English Dictionary, Vol. 1, p. 555. 
153 Ibid. p. 385.  
154 Ibid. p. 615. 


WT/DS413/R 
Page 38 
 
 
 
Glossary of terms used in payment and settlement systems.155  Moreover, "credit, charge and debit 
cards" are commonly associated with EPS suppliers, which own and licence card brands.  Finally, we 
note that definitions of "travellers cheques" and "bankers drafts" also identify them as payment and 
money transmission instruments involving transmission of money.156 
7.111 Accordingly, we find that the phrase "including credit, charge and debit cards, travellers 
cheques and bankers drafts", which sheds light on the types of services covered by the phrase "all 
payment and money transmission services", refers to an illustrative list of payment and money 
transmission instruments.  Dictionary definitions identify these instruments as instruments enabling 
the holder to make payments without cash and to transfer money from one person or place to another.  
Consequently, the list confirms that "[a]ll payment and money transmission services" refers to those 
services that are essential to the processing and completion of transactions using payment cards.  The 
Panel considers that such transactions include not only those involving, for instance, the use of a 
credit card at a POS terminal for the purpose of a good or service, but also those involving the use of a 
credit, debit or ATM card for the purpose of withdrawing cash from an ATM.  In the Panel's view, the 
latter constitutes a form of money transmission service.157 
The reference to "(including import and export settlement)" 
7.112 The United States submits that the parenthetical phrase "(including import and export 
settlement)" does not appear in subsector (viii) of the GATS Annex on Financial Services, but was 
added by China to the description of the services covered by subsector (d).  According to the United 
States, the explicit use of "settlement" suggests that there is an element of settlement and clearing that 
occurs as part of the payment service.158 
7.113 China submits that the term "import and export settlement" refers to the services that banks 
provide as payment intermediaries for import and export transactions through letters of credit. Unlike 
                                                   
155 The BIS defines a "credit card" as "a card indicating that the holder has been granted a line of credit. 
It enables the holder to make purchases and/or withdraw cash up to a prearranged ceiling; the credit granted can 
be settled in full by the end of a specified period or can be settled in part, with the balance taken as extended 
credit. Interest is charged on the amount of any extended credit and the holder is sometimes charged an annual 
fee."  The same glossary defines a "debit card" as "card enabling the holder to have his purchases directly 
charged to funds on his account at a deposit-taking institution (may sometimes be combined with another 
function, e.g. that of a cash card or cheque guarantee card)."  Finally, the glossary defines a "travel and 
entertainment card" as "card issued by non-banks indicating that the holder has been granted a line of credit.  It 
enables him to make purchases but does not offer extended credit, the full amount of the debt incurred having to 
be settled at the end of a specified period.  The holder is usually charged an annual fee.  Also called charge 
card."   BIS Glossary, Exhibit US-68, pp. 16, 19 and 50. 
156 A travellers cheque is "a cheque for a fixed amount of money which may be cashed or used in 
payment abroad, on the holder's signature", Shorter Oxford English Dictionary, Vo. 2, p. 3331.  A "bank draft" 
is defined as (i) "a check that a bank draws on itself, used when the payee does not wish to accept the credit of 
the customer as drawer. The customer purchases the bank draft with good funds, which gives the payee 
confidence that the check will be honoured. Also known as banker's check." The Palgrave Macmillan 
Dictionary of Finance, Investment and Banking (Palgrave MacMillan, New York, 2010) (The Palgrave 
Macmillan Dictionary of Finance, Investment and Banking), p. 44; or as (ii) "a cheque drawn by a bank on itself 
or its agent.  A person who owes money to another buys the draft from a bank for cash and hands it to the 
creditor who need have no fear that it might be dishonoured.  A bank draft is used if the creditor is unwilling to 
accept an ordinary cheque."  A Dictionary of Finance and Banking, Oxford Paperback Reference, 
Exhibit CHN-80, p. 34. 
157 In our view, the use of a credit, debit or ATM card to withdraw cash from an ATM constitutes a 
form of money transmission service, insofar as, for example, the card issuing institution or card holder's bank 
authorizes the transmission of money from the card holder's bank account to the location of the ATM or, in the 
case of a credit card, a cash advance to the location of the ATM. 
158 United States' response to Panel question No. 83, paras. 54-58. 


 
WT/DS413/R 
 
Page 39 
 
 
 
the case of payment cards, there is no third party that provides clearing and settlement services to the 
financial institutions that are involved in an import/export transaction. The financial institutions deal 
with each other directly, and use the international inter-bank payment system to complete the 
necessary transfer of funds. According to China, the reference to "settlement" in subsector (d) in no 
way suggests that clearing and settlement services are within the scope of this subsector, as there are 
no clearing and settlement services involved in an import/export transaction.  China also submits that 
it is significant that subsector (d) does not use the word "clearing".159 
7.114 The Panel notes that, as pointed out above in paragraph 7.106, the words in parenthesis – 
"including import and export settlement" – do not appear in subsector (viii) of the Annex;   they were 
added by China to its Schedule.  Consistent with the principle of effective treaty interpretation, these 
words must be given meaning. 
7.115 In our view, the terms "import and export" suggest that the parenthetical phrase refers to 
payment services supplied in connection with international trade transactions.  China appears to hold a 
similar view as it considers that the phrase refers to the services that banks provide as payment 
intermediaries for import and export transactions.160  We observe that the parenthetical phrase 
qualifies inter alia the expression "bankers drafts", which generally refers to a draft drawn by a bank 
on itself.161  Bankers' drafts are payment instruments used in international trade transactions between 
importers and exporters.  Like other payment instruments listed in subsector (d), bankers' drafts must 
be settled in order to complete the transaction.162  In our view, the word "settlement" at the end of the 
phrase refers to the completed transaction.  Therefore, the parenthetical phrase serves to confirm that 
payment services for transactions between importers and exporters where payment occurs by means 
of bankers' drafts are covered by subsector (d) of China's Schedule.  
7.116 We note China's argument that the fact that subsector (d) does not use the word "clearing" 
should be given interpretative significance.163  In the Panel's view, the fact that the word "clearing" is 
not mentioned in the bracketed language does not mean that no clearing is involved in situations 
where bankers' drafts are used.  Bankers' drafts, like any other type of cheque, are normally cleared 
before they are settled.  We also note that various sources suggest that clearing is usually a prior step 
to settlement:  the term "clearing" is defined as "[t]he system of settling payments due from one bank 
to another"164 or "[t]he exchange of mutual claims by financial institutions with settlement of the net 
balance".165  Settlement marks the final stage in an import/export transaction completed through 
bankers' drafts.  Hence, in our view, "clearing" of a bankers' draft is implied in the parenthetical 
phrase.   
                                                   
159 China's response to Panel question No. 83, paras. 1-3; and comments on United States' response to 
Panel question No. 83, para. 53. 
160 In response to Panel question No. 83, China submits that "[t]he term 'import and export settlement' 
refers to the services that banks provide as payment intermediaries for import and export transactions.  … They 
involve banks acting as trusted payment intermediaries to allow the parties to an import/export transaction to 
avoid the use of cash."  China's response to Panel question No. 83, para. 1. 
161 See above fn. 156 for definitions of "bank draft". 
162 We note in this regard that the BIS definition cited above in fn. 156 likens bankers' drafts to cheques.   
163 China's comments on United States' response to Panel question No. 83, para. 53. 
164 Oxford Dictionary of Economics, 3rd ed., Oxford University Press, 2009, Exhibit CHN-4, p. 64. 
165 Banking Terminology, Exhibit CHN-3, p. 64-65, definition 2.  Another source defines "clearing" as 
"the process of transmitting, reconciling and, in some cases, confirming payment orders or security transfer 
instructions prior to settlement, possibly including the netting of instructions and the establishment of final 
positions for settlement."  BIS Glossary, Exhibits US-68; CHN-2, p. 13. 


WT/DS413/R 
Page 40 
 
 
 
7.117 We understand China's arguments to suggest that the language in parentheses applies 
primarily to letters of credit.166  We agree that letters of credit are payment instruments used in 
international trade transactions and that payment services to complete transactions through letters of 
credit arguably can fall under subsector (d).  Thus the words "including import and export settlement" 
might also relate to letters of credit.  We observe, however, that letters of credit are not mentioned in 
the illustrative list under subsector (d).  Moreover, a parenthetical phrase is a grammatical device 
often used to link the words in parenthesis to language that precedes them.167  Here, the parenthetical 
phrase follows a list of instruments that does not include letters of credit.  In our view, it is 
implausible that the parenthetical phrase relates primarily to letters of credit, i.e. a payment instrument 
that has not even been included in the list that precedes the parenthetical phrase.  
7.118 The Panel therefore concludes that the parenthetical addition "(including import and export 
settlement)" in China's Schedule confirms that subsector (d) includes settlement, and by implication 
clearing, e.g. when bankers' drafts are used as payment instruments for transactions between importers 
and exporters.  We perceive no sound basis for assuming that subsector (d) includes settlement, and 
where appropriate clearing, of transactions involving the use of bankers' drafts, but that it would 
exclude settlement and clearing of transactions involving the use of the other payment instruments 
listed in subsector (d).  In our view, the parenthetical phrase merely seeks to make explicit – in 
relation to one particular type of transaction – something that the broad phrase "[a]ll payment and 
money transmission services …" already contains implicitly.   
Summary of findings on the phrase "including credit, charge and debit cards, travellers 
cheques and bankers drafts (including import and export settlement)" 
7.119 Our examination of the phrase "including credit, charge and debit cards, travellers cheques 
and bankers drafts" in subsector (d) as immediate context for interpreting the preceding words "[a]ll 
payment and money transmission services", led us to conclude that this phrase is an illustrative list 
which provides confirmation that the phrase "[a]ll payment and money transmission services" 
includes those services that are essential to the processing and completion of transactions using 
payment cards.  Moreover, the parenthetical addition "(including import and export settlement)" 
confirms that subsector (d) includes settlement, and by implication clearing, when bankers' drafts are 
used as payment instruments for transactions between importers and exporters.  The parenthetical 
addition also suggests to us that settlement and clearing of transactions involving the use of other 
payment instruments listed in subsector (d) would likewise be classifiable under this subsector.   
7.120 We now proceed to examine whether other contextual elements confirm or undermine these 
conclusions. 
(ii) 
Other elements of China's Schedule 
The subheading "Banking services as listed below" in the sectoral column of China's 
Schedule 
7.121 China argues that subsector (d) is one of six subsectors listed in China's Schedule under the 
heading "Banking services …".  According to China, the ordinary meaning of "banking services" is 
services provided by banks.  Consistent with this ordinary meaning, all of the services listed under the 
heading of "Banking services …" are services that are typically provided by banks, finance companies, 
                                                   
166 China's response to Panel question No. 83, para. 2.  United States' rebuttal arguments regarding 
China's letter of credit arguments are set out in United States' response to Panel question No. 83, paras. 54-58. 
167 The Shorter Oxford English Dictionary, Vol. 2, p. 2102 defines "parenthesis" as "a word, clause, 
sentence, etc., inserted (as an explanation, qualification, aside, or afterthought) into a passage which is already 
grammatically complete, and usu. marked off by brackets, dashes, or commas." 


 
WT/DS413/R 
 
Page 41 
 
 
 
and other types of financial institutions.  China also submits that China's market access and national 
treatment inscriptions for mode 3 confirm that the services encompassed by subsectors (a) through (f) 
are services supplied by banks and other financial institutions, which confirms that subsector (d) does 
not encompass services that are supplied to banks by non-bank service suppliers.  According to China, 
when interpreted in this context, the "payment services" referred to in subsector (d) encompass the 
issuance and acceptance by financial institutions of payment instruments other than cash.  China also 
submits that there is no indication in any Member’s commitments for subsector (viii) of the 
Annex that these services are provided by suppliers other than banks or other financial institutions.168 
7.122 The United States submits that the heading "Banking services…" does not have the effect of 
limiting the scope of the commitments to "banks" and other "regulated financial institutions". 
According to the United States, the definition of "financial institution" offered by China is far too 
narrow.  The United States also observes that, in addition to the explicit reference to "non-bank 
financial institutions" in China’s Schedule, there are other references to "foreign finance companies" 
in the market access column and to "foreign financial leasing corporations" in the additional 
commitments column.  The United States further argues that, even if China's approach were correct, 
suppliers of payment card services would qualify because they were formerly operated as associations 
of banks and, according to the United States, the nature of the service that an entity supplies does not 
change merely because that entity assumes a new corporate form.  The United States also submits that 
the characteristics and nature of the service control the classification of that service, and where the 
identity of the supplier is relevant, the sectoral description must clearly indicate that to be the case.169 
7.123 Australia, the European Union, Guatemala and Korea are of the view that the subheading 
"Banking services …" does not affect the scope of China's commitments under subsector (d).170 
7.124 The Panel notes that the heading "B. Banking and Other Financial Services …" in China's 
Schedule encompasses four categories, namely "Banking services as listed below", "Motor vehicle 
financing by non-bank financial institutions", "Other financial services as listed below", and 
"Securities".171  Subsector (d) is listed under the subheading "Banking services as listed below". The 
four categories are specific to China's Schedule: they are not present in the GATS Annex on Financial 
Services and do not appear in other WTO Members' GATS schedules.   
7.125 Turning first to the ordinary meaning of "banking", this term is defined as (i) "the provision of 
payments facilities, credit, and capital to individuals, firms, and the government. …";172  (ii) "the 
business of banks";173  and (iii) "the area of finance related to taking of deposits, granting of loans, 
and provision of other financial services, which may include investment, trading, and advisory".174  
We observe that these definitions do not indicate that "banks" are necessarily the exclusive providers 
of "banking" services.  
                                                   
168 China's first written submission, paras. 95-98; and China's response to Panel question No. 60, 
paras. 108 and 109.  The Panel recalls that subsector (viii) of the Annex corresponds to subsector (d) of China's 
Schedule. 
169 United States' second written submission, paras. 118-124; and response to Panel questions No. 60, 
paras. 151-153 and No. 61, paras. 154 and 155. 
170 Australia's third-party response to Panel question No. 9 (no paragraph numbering provided);  
European Union's third-party response to Panel question No. 9, para. 29;  Guatemala's third-party's response to 
Panel question No. 9, para. 34; and Korea's third-party's response to Panel question No. 9 (no 
paragraph numbering provided). 
171 See excerpt of China's Schedule in Annex G to this Report.  We note that the last three subheadings 
are preceded by a hyphen.  We view the lack of a hyphen before "Banking services as listed below" as a 
typographical error.   
172 Oxford Dictionary of Economics, 3rd ed., Oxford University Press, 2009, Exhibit CHN-41, p. 26. 
173 Dictionary of Banking and Finance, 4th ed., A & C Black, 2010, Exhibit CHN-42, p. 30. 
174 The Palgrave Macmillan Dictionary of Finance, Investment and Banking, Exhibit CHN-47, p. 46. 


WT/DS413/R 
Page 42 
 
 
 
7.126 We also observe that all of the services listed in subsectors (a) to (f) under the subheading at 
issue are commonly supplied by banks, but non-bank financial services suppliers can also supply them.  
For example, deposits (subsector (a)) can be taken by post offices; loans (subsector (b)) can be 
granted by post offices and finance companies;  leasing services (subsector (c)) can be supplied by 
leasing companies;  money can be transferred (subsector (d)) by post offices or other specialized 
suppliers;  guarantees (subsector (e)) can be granted by finance companies;  and foreign exchange 
(subsector (f)) can be traded by specialised foreign exchange dealers and brokers.  Hence, in practice, 
different types of entities can supply the services listed in subsectors (a) to (f).  
7.127 Moreover, the commitments contained in the market access column, which are relevant 
context for interpreting the subheading at issue, make reference to "finance companies", which are 
non-bank entities.175  Finally, the additional commitments column under the subheading "Banking 
services …" contains a reference to "financial leasing corporations" which are also non-bank entities.  
With these considerations in mind, it is clear to us that "banking services" as that term appears under 
the subheading at issue includes services supplied by banks and non-banks. 
7.128 China argues that "[c]onsistent with this ordinary meaning [i.e. the ordinary meaning of 
banking services, which, according to China, refers to "services provided by banks"], all of the 
services listed under the heading of 'banking services' are services that are typically provided by banks, 
finance companies, and other types of financial institutions."176  In other words, China's argument 
amounts to saying that "services provided by banks" are "services provided by banks and non-banks".   
7.129 Moreover, as pointed out by the United States, when China wished to undertake a 
commitment with respect to a certain category of supplier only, it did so explicitly, such as in the 
subsector "[m]otor vehicle financing by non-bank financial institutions".177 
7.130 Furthermore, the Panel observes that, as evidenced by the arguments presented by both the 
United States and China, there is a close historical association between banks and EPS suppliers.  
Both parties have made reference to the fact that certain United States' EPS suppliers were operated as 
associations of banks until 2006, i.e. until well after China's accession to the WTO in 2001.178  If, as 
argued by China, the identity of the supplier is relevant for purposes of classifying services, then those 
EPS suppliers were arguably providing "banking services" as China defines that term (i.e. services 
supplied by banks) until they changed their corporate form in 2006.  The Panel has already indicated 
that it does not share China's narrow interpretation of the term "banking services".  Having said that, 
the Panel agrees with the United States that the classification of a service should not change solely 
because the suppliers of that service modify their ownership structure or legal form.  Such an 
interpretative approach to classification would undermine the predictability, security and clarity of 
GATS specific commitments.   
7.131 We also find relevant in this respect evidence submitted by China (to which we referred in 
connection with determining whether the services in question are supplied as integrated services)179 
demonstrating that, in France, for example, the authorization system for payment card transactions is 
operated by CB, an association of banks.  Moreover, clearing and settlement of retail payments 
transactions, including payment card transactions, is operated by STET Inter-bank Payment Services, 
                                                   
175 A "finance company" is defined as "a non-bank financial institution …" See The Palgrave 
Macmillan Dictionary of Finance, Investment and Banking, Exhibit CHN-88, p. 206.  
176 China's first written submission, para. 95 (emphasis added). 
177 United States' response to Panel question No. 60, para. 152. 
178 China's first written submission, para. 50 ("Prior to their initial public offerings in 2006, Visa and 
MasterCard were operated as associations of banks … that issued and acquired payment cards under a common 
brand."); and United States' response to Panel question No. 60, para. 152. 
179 See para. 7.60 above. 


 
WT/DS413/R 
 
Page 43 
 
 
 
an institution created and still owned by five banks in France.  In our view, this is further evidence of 
the continuing link between banks and EPS.180 
7.132 Finally, as noted above, the heading "B.  Banking and Other Financial Services …" 
encompasses four subheadings, namely, "Banking services as listed below", "Motor vehicle financing 
by non-bank financial institutions", "Other financial services as listed below", and "Securities".  The 
subheadings "Banking services as listed below" and "Other financial services as listed below" group 
together, respectively, six and two subsectors.  We note that the pattern of market access and national 
treatment commitments under each of these four subheadings is different.  Hence, in our view, the 
heading "Banking services as listed below" may also serve a practical purpose, which is to separate 
China's commitments that apply in the same way to subsectors (a) to (f) from its commitments that 
apply only to certain categories of services (motor vehicle financing by non-bank financial institutions) 
or to other services listed further down in China's Schedule (namely, other financial services … and 
securities).  As indicated, China has undertaken different market access and national treatment 
commitments under the four subheadings in question.  
7.133 In sum, our analysis of the subheading "Banking services as listed below" leads us to 
conclude that this subheading is not indicative of an intention to circumscribe the commitments under 
subsectors (a) to (f) to a certain category of services suppliers, namely banks.  Rather, this subheading 
indicates that the services concerned are typically supplied by banks, or were typically provided by 
banks in the past.  This does not detract from the fact, however, that some of these services can be, 
and are, also provided by other types of financial entities.  Additionally, and from a more practical 
point of view, this subheading may also serve to separate commitments undertaken in respect of 
subsectors (a) to (f) from different commitments undertaken in respect of other subsectors listed 
further down in China's Schedule. 
7.134 We conclude therefore that the placement of subsector (d) under the heading "Banking 
services as listed below" does not contradict our view explained above that subsector (d) encompasses 
services that are essential to the processing and completion of transactions using payment cards. 
The market access commitment under mode 1 
7.135 In its arguments concerning the scope of the market access commitment undertaken by China 
under mode 1181, the United States submits that the word "Unbound" in China's market access 
commitment under mode 1 is followed by the qualifying phrase "except for the following," which in 
turn is further elaborated by two sentences that describe elements of the services within subsector (d) 
for which China has undertaken mode 1 commitments, namely: 
- 
Provision and transfer of financial information, and financial data processing 
and related software by suppliers of other financial services; 
- 
Advisory, intermediation and other auxiliary financial services on all 
activities listed in subparagraphs (a) through (k), including credit reference and 
analysis, investment and portfolio research and advice, advice on acquisitions and on 
corporate restructuring and strategy. 
7.136 For the United States, China's mode 1 commitment must be understood as recognizing that 
elements of "payment and money transmission" services include "provision and transfer of financial 
                                                   
180 See China's response to Panel question No. 75, para. 2 and Cartes Bancaires 2010 Annual Report, 
Exhibit CHN-106, p. 13. 
181 The Panel will use the term "mode 1" to refer to the supply of a service that is "from the territory of 
one Member into the territory of any other Member", as provided for in Article I:2(a) of the GATS. 


WT/DS413/R 
Page 44 
 
 
 
information" and "advisory, intermediation and other auxiliary services", to the extent that such 
elements are integral to the core service, and that the service of which they form a part is properly 
classified within "payment and money transmission" services and not in subsector (k) or (l) of China's 
Schedule.182 
7.137 China replies that, in an effort to "jam" all of the services at issue into the exception to 
China’s unbound mode 1 inscription for subsector (d), the United States takes the position that all five 
of the "components" of the services at issue match the descriptions of subsectors (k) and (l). By doing 
so, the United States removes everything from the basket of subsector (d) and, as a result, has nothing 
left in this subsector.183 
7.138 The Panel is of the view that the market access entry under mode 1 constitutes relevant 
context for the purpose of interpreting the scope of subsector (d).  The Panel refers to its detailed 
discussion of China's market access commitment under mode 1 in Section VII.F.1(a) below.  There, 
the Panel finds that this entry is properly understood as referencing China's mode 1 market access 
commitment for subsectors (k) and (l).  Hence, the context provided by the market access entry under 
mode 1 does not suggest an interpretation that is different from that suggested by the other contextual 
elements examined so far.  In other words, the mode 1 market access commitment does not contradict 
our conclusion that subsector (d) encompasses services that are essential to the processing and 
completion of transactions using payment cards.  
(iii) 
The GATS Annex on Financial Services 
The scope of subsector (xiv) in the Annex 
7.139 Article XXIX of the GATS (Annexes) states that "[t]he Annexes to this Agreement are an 
integral part of this Agreement".  Pursuant to that provision, the GATS Annex on Financial Services 
is treaty text.  Moreover, it constitutes context for purposes of interpreting China's Schedule, which is 
itself an integral part of the GATS.  Paragraph 5 (Definitions) of the Annex contains several 
definitions and a classification of financial services that WTO Members may use – and many of them 
did use – when scheduling their commitments on financial services. We recall that China stated that it 
scheduled its financial services commitments by reference to the definition of financial services set 
forth in the Annex.184 We shall therefore turn to the Annex as relevant context for the interpretation of 
China's Schedule.  
7.140 Subsector (xiv) in paragraph 5(a) of the Annex, which falls under the heading "Banking and 
other financial services (excluding insurance)", states as follows: 
Settlement and clearing services for financial assets, including securities, derivative 
products, and other negotiable instruments185 
7.141 China argues that the clearing and settlement services at issue in this dispute are classifiable 
under subsector (xiv) of the Annex, a subsector for which China undertook no commitments.  China 
maintains that every definition of the term "financial assets" points to the conclusion that it refers to 
"money and claims", including cash and any right to receive cash.  Furthermore, the reference to 
                                                   
182 United States' response to Panel question No. 45, para. 118; and second written submission, 
paras. 103-108. 
183 China's second written submission, paras. 37 and 38. 
184 China's first written submission, para. 80. 
185 We note China's comment that "[b]ecause the process of 'clearing' comes before the process of 
'settlement', China will refer to 'clearing and settlement services' even though item (xiv) refers to these two 
processes in the opposite order" (China's first written submission, fn. 49).  Like China and for the same reason, 
we shall refer to "clearing and settlement services". 


 
WT/DS413/R 
 
Page 45 
 
 
 
"negotiable instruments" in subsector (xiv) unambiguously includes retail payment instruments, such 
as cheques and travellers' cheques.  It is China's view that, as context, the illustrative list of examples 
confirms that the drafters of subsector (xiv) intended to use the term "financial assets" according to its 
common and ordinary meaning.186 
7.142 The United States replies that China's position is inconsistent with the ordinary meaning of 
"settlement and clearing services for financial assets" and fails to recognize that subsector (xiv) 
constitutes a substantially different financial service than the services at issue.  It argues that China's 
position also fails to interpret the term "financial asset" within its immediate context, which is the full 
sentence in subsector (xiv).187 
7.143 Australia argues that subsector (xiv) covers settlement and clearing services for financial 
assets, other than card based transactions.  Settlement and clearing services for financial assets are 
clearly distinct from the settlement and clearing activity that is part of payment and money 
transmissions, such as credit card transactions.188  The European Union submits that the clearing and 
settlement services involved in the trading (buying and selling) of "securities, derivative products and 
other negotiable instruments" are separate and distinct from the "payment and money transmission 
services" which take place when there is a transfer of funds between different persons or entities, in 
order to settle "credit, charge or debit card" transactions".189  According to Korea, subsector (xiv) of 
the Annex addresses mainly paper-based financial asset transactions which, in and of themselves, 
represent or carry designated monetary value.  The term "financial assets" refers to an object or 
instrument that contains or represents some sort of monetary value to its owner, which can 
subsequently be sold or negotiated; this is not the case for credit card or credit card transactions.190 
7.144 The Panel observes that the parties do not dispute that payment card transactions must be 
cleared and settled.  They disagree, however, where the clearing and settlement of payment card 
transactions should be classified.  We recall that our interpretation of subsector (d) thus far has led us 
to the view that this subsector includes those services that are essential to the processing and 
completion of transactions using payment cards.  We also concluded, in paragraph 7.118 above, that 
the parenthetical addition "(including import and export settlement)" confirms that subsector (d) 
includes settlement, and by implication clearing.  Consistent with this view, clearing and settlement of 
payment card transactions should a priori be classified under subsector (d), because they are essential 
services to complete a payment card transaction.  We also recall that, although we decided to begin 
our analysis with subsector (d) of China's Schedule, we also said that we would turn to subsector (xiv) 
of the Annex before reaching a final conclusion on the scope of subsector (d).191 
7.145 Starting with an examination of the ordinary meaning of the terms "clearing", "settlement" 
and "financial assets", the Panel notes the following definitions: 
Clearing: "process of transmitting, reconciling and, in some cases, confirming 
payment orders or security transfer instructions prior to settlement, possibly including 
the netting of instructions and the establishment of final positions for settlement"192 or 
                                                   
186 China's first written submission, paras. 79-89; response to Panel question No. 39(a), para. 47;  and 
second written submission, paras. 2-33. 
187 United States' response to Panel question No. 24, paras. 68-80; and second written submission, 
paras. 42-74. 
188 Australia's third-party submission, para. 17; and third-party response to Panel question No. 1 (no 
paragraph numbering provided). 
189 European Union's third-party submission, para. 27. 
190 Korea's third-party submission, para. 1; and third-party response to Panel question No. 15(a) (no 
paragraph numbering provided). 
191 See para. 7.72 above. 
192 BIS Glossary, Exhibits US-68 and CHN-2, p. 13. 


WT/DS413/R 
Page 46 
 
 
 
"(a) the exchange of the payment instrument or of relevant payment information 
between the payer's and the payee's financial institutions, and (b) the calculation of 
claims for settlement".193 
Settlement: "an act that discharges obligations in respect of funds or securities 
transfers between two or more parties"194 or "a transfer of funds to complete one or 
more prior transactions that were made subject to final settlement. Settlement is the 
point at which underlying claims and obligations are satisfied".195 
Financial assets: "[m]oney and claims, as distinct from physical assets such as land, 
buildings, or equipment.  Financial assets include money, securities constituting a 
claim to receive money, such as bills or bonds, and shares giving indirect ownership 
of the physical assets of companies.  The claims held as financial assets include the 
obligations of individuals, companies, and governments, domestic and foreign.  
Financial assets include shares in financial institutions, and derivatives such as 
options."196  Other definitions describe a "financial asset" as "[a]n asset that is either 
cash, a contractual right to receive cash, or the right to exchange a financial 
instrument with another entity under potentially favourable terms or an equity 
instrument of another entity";197 or "assets in the form of stocks, bonds, rights, 
certificates, bank balances, etc., as distinguished from tangible, physical assets …".198  
Financial: "of or pertaining to revenue or money matters".199 
7.146 An examination of dictionary definitions and other specialized glossaries suggests that the 
ordinary meaning of the words "clearing" and "settlement" refers to activities that are relevant for 
both retail payment instruments and securities.  The ordinary meaning of the term "financial assets" 
encompasses virtually all financial instruments.  We also observe that definitions of the terms used in 
subsector (xiv) may overlap with definitions of terms in subsector (d) – for instance, "settlement" and 
"payment" are almost synonymous. 200  It is difficult, therefore, to ascertain the scope of subsector (d) 
of China's Schedule and that of subsector (xiv) of the Annex based solely on the ordinary meaning of 
the terms used in these sector descriptions.  We also recall that the Appellate Body has cautioned 
against using dictionary definitions in a mechanical manner.201 
7.147 Thus, while we agree with China that an interpretation of the term "financial assets" must 
begin with the ordinary meaning of the terms, our interpretation cannot end there.  We recall that, 
pursuant to Article 31(1) of the Vienna Convention, the ordinary meaning of "financial assets" must 
be interpreted "in good faith in accordance with the ordinary meaning to be given to the terms of the 
treaty in their context and in the light of its object and purpose" (emphasis added).  With this in mind, 
we now turn to the phrase "including securities, derivative products, and other negotiable instruments", 
                                                   
193 BIS (CPSS), Clearing and Settlement Arrangements for Retail Payments in Selected Countries, 
2000, Exhibit CHN-1, pp. 2-6. 
194BIS Glossary, Exhibits CHN-2 and US-68, p. 45. 
195 Banking Terminology, Exhibit CHN-5, p. 323, definition 3. 
196 A Dictionary of Economics, 3rd ed., Oxford University Press, 2009, Exhibit CHN-32, p. 167. 
197 A Dictionary of Accounting, Oxford University Press, 1999, Exhibit CHN-38, p. 161. 
198 Dictionary of Finance and Investment Terms, 8th ed., Barron's, New York, 2010, Exhibit CHN-34, 
p. 257. 
199Shorter Oxford English Dictionary, Vol. 1, p. 964. The Shorter Oxford English Dictionary does not 
contain a definition for financial asset or for clearing. 
200 See, above in section VII.D.2(a) our analysis of the ordinary meaning of the terms used in 
subsector (d) of China's Schedule. 
201 Appellate Body Report, US – Gambling, para. 164. 


 
WT/DS413/R 
 
Page 47 
 
 
 
which follows immediately after the words "settlement and clearing for financial assets" in 
subsector (xiv) and hence constitutes immediate context.   
7.148 The United States argues that illustrative lists may be more than merely non-exhaustive lists 
of examples.   They may also inform the overall scope of a provision and the meaning of a term that 
they illustrate.  An examination of each of the items in the illustrative list in subsector (xiv) 
demonstrates that retail receipts, such as a claim on a payment card, are not the same type of financial 
asset as the items included in the illustrative list ("securities", "derivative products" and "other 
negotiable instruments").  According to the United States, the illustrative list of financial assets in 
subsector (xiv) indicates that the scope of those assets is limited to tradable investment instruments, 
which supports the conclusion that the term "financial assets" as used in subsector (xiv) is intended to 
be limited to these types of instruments.202 
7.149 China submits that the three examples in the illustrative list do not constitute an exhaustive 
list of what constitutes a "financial asset" under subsector (xiv).  Moreover, according to China, the 
United States tries to work backwards from these examples to limit the ordinary meaning of the term 
"financial assets" to what it calls "tradeable financial instruments" or, alternatively, "tradeable 
investment instruments".  For China, the reference to "negotiable instruments" in subsector (xiv) 
unambiguously includes retail payment instruments such as cheques and traveller's cheques.  Like 
securities and derivatives, these are "financial assets" within the ordinary meaning of that term 
because they give rise to claims for payment.  Moreover, China contends that because subsector (viii) 
of the Annex provides examples of negotiable instruments as types of "payment services", the drafters 
understood that the clearing and settlement of these instruments under subsector (xiv) is distinct from 
the issuance and acceptance of these instruments under subsector (viii).203 
7.150 The Panel is of the view that the list contained in subsector (xiv) sheds light on the type of 
clearing and settlement services covered under that subsector.  In this respect, we recall the view of 
the panel in China – Publications and Audiovisual Products that "the word 'including' in ordinary 
usage indicates that what follows is not an exhaustive, but a partial, list of all covered items".204  We 
find this statement to be correct in the specific context of subsector (xiv), and so, like the parties, we 
regard the list as illustrative.  Accordingly, we conclude that this illustrative list is a non-exhaustive 
enumeration of the kinds of "financial assets", the clearing and settlement of which are classified 
under subsector (xiv).   
7.151 We observe that although the parties appear to concur that the illustrative list in item (xiv) 
informs the understanding of the term "financial assets", they reach different conclusions on the 
meaning and scope of that term.  For the United States, illustrative lists "may help to inform the 
overall scope of a provision and the meaning of a term that they illustrate".205  For China, the 
reference to "negotiable instruments" in the illustrative list of subsector (xiv) "necessarily informs the 
understanding of the term 'financial assets'".206  
7.152 We now turn to the specific financial instruments listed in the illustrative list of 
subsector (xiv),  i.e. securities, derivative products, and other negotiable instruments,  and start with 
an examination of their ordinary meaning:   
                                                   
202 United States' response to Panel question No. 42, para. 107; and second written submission, 
paras. 75-93. 
203 China's response to Panel question No. 39(c), paras. 54-62; and second written submission, 
paras. 15-26.  It will be recalled that subsector (viii) states as follows: "[a]ll payment and money transmission 
services, including credit, charge and debit cards, travellers cheques and bankers drafts" and that China states 
that subsector (d) was based on subsector (viii).  See,  para. 7.106 above. 
204 Panel Report, China – Publications and Audiovisual Products, para. 7.294.  
205 United States' second written submission, para. 75. 
206 China's response to Panel question No. 39(a), para. 49. 


WT/DS413/R 
Page 48 
 
 
 
Security:  "A document held by a credit as guarantee of his or her right to payment; a 
certificate attesting ownership of stock, shares, etc.; the financial asset represented by 
such a document.  Also (US), such a document issued to investors to finance a 
business venture";207 or "A pledge of financial or physical property to be surrendered 
in the event of failure to repay a loan.  Any medium of investment in the money 
market or capital market, e.g. a money-market instrument, a bond, a share.  A term 
used to refer only to bonds, and shares, as distinct from money-market assets."208 
Derivative product:  "An arrangement or instrument (such as a future, option, or 
warrant) whose value derives from and is dependent on the value of an underlying 
asset.";209  or "a financial contract the value of which depends on the value of one or 
more underlying reference assets, rates or indices. For analytical purposes, all 
derivatives contracts can be divided into basic building blocks of forward contracts, 
options or combinations thereof."210 
7.153 Definitions found in general and specialized dictionaries suggest that "securities" (i) are a 
medium of investment, (ii) attest ownership rights and (iii) grant financial returns.  Derivative 
products essentially share these same characteristics.   
7.154 We consider now the ordinary meaning of the term "negotiable instruments".  The word 
"negotiable" is defined as follows: "[o]f a bill, draft, cheques, etc.: transferable or assignable in the 
course of business from one person to another simply by delivery."211  A "negotiable instrument" is "a 
document of title that can be freely negotiated …"212 or "unconditional order or promise to pay an 
amount of money, easily transferable from one person to another".213  The characteristics of 
"negotiable instruments", as identified in specialized dictionaries, are that they (i) are easily 
transferable from one person to another, and (ii) can be freely negotiated.   
7.155 In our view, the reference to "securities, derivative products and other negotiable instruments" 
indicates that this subsector deals with financial assets which have in common the characteristic of 
being "negotiable".   Many types of financial instruments are negotiable and some retail payment 
instruments listed under subsector (d) of China's Schedule, such as traveller's cheques and banker's 
drafts, may be negotiable.  In contrast, we observe, and the parties seem to agree,214 that plastic 
payment cards and sales slips signed in connection with payment card transactions are not negotiable 
instruments because they are neither transferable nor can they be traded on a market.  Hence, on this 
                                                   
207 Shorter Oxford English Dictionary, Vol. 2, p. 2733. 
208 The Economist, Dictionary of Business, by Graham, Davis, Trott, Uncles, Bloomberg Press, 2003, 
Exhibit US-69, p. 334. 
209 Shorter Oxford English Dictionary, Vol. 1, p. 653. 
210BIS Glossary, Exhibit US-68, p. 20. 
211 Shorter Oxford English Dictionary, Vol. 2, p. 1905. 
212 A Dictionary of Finance and Banking, Oxford Paperback Reference, Oxford, 2008, Exhibit CHN-39, 
p. 303. 
213 Dictionary of Finance and Investment Terms, 8th ed., Barron's, New York, 2010, Exhibit CHN-40, 
p. 469. 
214 The United States submits that "[p]ayment cards and the sales slips generated from payment card 
transactions do not meet the internationally accepted criteria for a negotiable instrument." United States' second 
written submission, para. 81.  China states that "[c]redit, charge, and debit cards are more modern payment 
instruments, and their relationship to the concept of negotiability is more complicated.  It is clear that the cards 
themselves – the pieces of plastic – are not negotiable instruments.  … The slip is a promise to pay, but, in many 
cases, that promise will be subject to the terms and conditions of a contractual agreement (e.g. the cardholder 
agreement between the issuer and the cardholder).  In these circumstances, the promise to pay may not be 
"unconditional", which is usually a formal requirement of negotiability." China's response to Panel's question 
No. 39(a), para. 48. 


 
WT/DS413/R 
 
Page 49 
 
 
 
basis we consider that payment cards and sales slips do not fall within the category of "other 
negotiable instruments" referred to in the illustrative list of subsector (xiv). 
7.156 China argues, however, that payment cards have "common features" with bankers' drafts and 
traveller's cheques in the sense that each of these instruments gives rise to inter-bank claims for 
payment between acquiring banks and issuing banks, and that such claims need to be cleared and 
settled.  China concludes that, "since it is beyond any reasonable dispute that the clearing and 
settlement of negotiable instruments is encompassed by item (xiv), it would be arbitrary and illogical 
to conclude that clearing and settlement services for certain types of retail payment instruments are 
covered by item (xiv), while clearing and settlement services for other types of retail payment 
instruments are covered by item (viii) ".215 
7.157 The United States submits that there are many types of negotiable instruments and, while 
some are used for payments (for example, cheques), others are used as investment vehicles (for 
example, commercial paper).  The reference to "negotiable instruments" in subsector (xiv) does not 
include all such instruments.  In the United States' view, subsector (xiv) only indicates that there are 
negotiable instruments that settle and clear like securities and derivative products.  However, 
subsector (xiv) cannot be read properly to mean that all negotiable instruments are settled and cleared 
like securities and derivative products.  Thus, the United States considers that to the extent a 
negotiable instrument appears in subsector (viii), it is not a negotiable instrument referred to in 
subsector (xiv).216 
7.158 The Panel observes that, according to China, the clearing and settling of payment card 
transactions should be covered under subsector (xiv) because payment cards have "common features" 
with other payment instruments listed in subsector (d) (for example, bankers' drafts and travellers' 
cheques), these "common features" being, in China's view, that "(1) each is a type of payment 
instrument that is issued by banks; and (2) that each of these instruments gives rise to inter-bank 
claims for payment between acquiring banks and issuing banks, which such [sic] claims need to be 
cleared and settled."217  In other words, China's interpretation brings the clearing and settlement of 
non-negotiable payment instruments, such as payment cards, within the scope of subsector (xiv).  
What appears to matter most, in China's view, is that clearing and settlement services for all financial 
instruments, whether negotiable or not, be classified in the same subsector.   
7.159 It is not clear to us, however, how this interpretative approach can be reconciled with the 
terms used in subsector (xiv).  First, we note that subsector (xiv) does not refer to "all settlement and 
clearing services", in contrast to the "[a]ll payment and money transmission services" found in 
subsector (d).  Furthermore, we observe that the illustrative list includes two specific terms – 
"securities and derivative products" – and a broader, residual category – "other negotiable 
instruments".  The adjective "other" 218  ties "negotiable instruments" back to "securities" and 
"derivative products", thereby establishing a nexus between these three categories of instruments. 
Reading the term "other negotiable instruments" with reference to the terms "securities" and 
"derivative products" that precede it supports the conclusion that the term "negotiable instruments" 
does not include any and all instruments that are "negotiable".  We note in this respect that the 
illustrative list does not say "any other negotiable instruments" or "other negotiable instruments of any 
kind".  Thus, we consider that the term "other negotiable instruments", read in its context, covers only 
those instruments that share essentially the same characteristics as securities and derivative products.  
                                                   
215 China's response to Panel question No. 39(a), paras. 49 and 50. 
216 United States' response to Panel question No. 39(a), paras. 99-100. 
217 China's response to Panel question No. 39(a), para. 49. 
218 "Other" (adj.) is defined as "4 Existing besides or distinct from that or those already specified or 
implied; further, additional. …". Shorter Oxford English Dictionary, Vol. 2, p. 2035. 


WT/DS413/R 
Page 50 
 
 
 
7.160 Turning to the term "securities", we noted above that this term is defined as a means of 
investment attesting ownership rights and granting financial returns.  We also noted that derivative 
products essentially share these same characteristics.  In our view, payment cards and other payment 
instruments listed in subsector (d) do not share these characteristics.  In particular, payment 
instruments are not a means of investment, do not grant ownership rights and do not yield financial 
returns.  Hence, we agree with the United States that instruments listed in subsector (d), such as 
travellers' cheques, although potentially negotiable, are not among the negotiable instruments falling 
within subsector (xiv). 
7.161 Furthermore, we find convincing the arguments and factual evidence submitted by the United 
States that there are many practical differences between the systems used to clear and settle 
investment instruments of the kind referenced in subsector (xiv) and the systems used to clear and 
settle payment instruments, such as those mentioned in subsector (d). 219  These differences relate to 
the following: (i) the financial instruments involved and the value of typical transactions; (ii) the 
market participants involved in the transaction and related processing; (iii) the infrastructure needs for 
such processes to occur safely and efficiently; and (iv) regulatory oversight and systemic risk to the 
financial system. The distinction between payment systems and securities infrastructure as distinct 
components of the market infrastructure is common in many countries, including in China.220 
7.162 China does not contest the differences between clearing and settlement of payment 
instruments, on the one hand, and securities and derivatives, on the other hand.  China argues, 
however, that these differences are not relevant to the interpretation of the term "financial assets" and 
do not change the ordinary meaning of the term "negotiable instruments".  We disagree.  In our view, 
classification of services is not an abstract exercise;  due regard should be had to market and 
regulatory realities.  A classification approach reflecting, and in accord with, those realities 
contributes to the clarity and, therefore, security and predictability, of GATS specific commitments.  
Our reading of the scope of subsector (xiv) in the Annex and that of subsector (d) in China's Schedule 
is consistent with these considerations, because it takes due account of (i) the way payment systems 
are generally organized and regulated, as well as (ii) the essential differences between the settling and 
clearing of payment instruments and of securities and other negotiable instruments.   
7.163 In sum, we find that subsector (xiv) encompasses the clearing and settlement of financial 
instruments sharing essentially the same characteristics as securities, derivative products and other 
negotiable instruments.  More particularly, we consider that subsector (xiv) covers the clearing and 
settlement of financial instruments which have investment attributes, grant ownership rights and yield 
financial returns.  Our conclusion is also based on the important practical differences between, on the 
one hand, the clearing and settlement of financial assets like securities and, on the other hand, the 
clearing and settlement of payment transactions.  Hence, it is our view that retail payment instruments 
listed in subsector (d) of China's Schedule are not "financial assets" within the meaning that term has 
in subsector (xiv) of the Annex and, therefore, transactions based on the payment instruments listed in 
subsector (d), including payment cards, are not cleared and settled under subsector (xiv).   
Subsector (x) of the Annex 
7.164 Subsector (x) in paragraph 5(a) of the Annex on Financial Services reads as follows: 
(x) 
Trading for own account or for account of customers, 
whether on an exchange, in an over-the-counter market or 
otherwise, the following: 
                                                   
219 United States' second written submission, paras. 55 to 74 and Exhibits cited in those paragraphs. 
220 The Panel asked China whether China UnionPay was involved in any stage of the clearing and 
settlement of securities in China.  China replied "[n]o".  China's response to Panel question No. 34, para. 35. 


 
WT/DS413/R 
 
Page 51 
 
 
 
(A) 
money market instruments (including cheques, bills, 
certificates of deposits); 
(B) 
foreign exchange; 
(C) 
derivative products including, but not limited to, 
futures and options; 
(D) 
exchange rate and interest rate instruments, including 
products such as swaps, forward rate agreements; 
(E) 
transferable securities; 
(F) 
other negotiable instruments and financial assets, 
including bullion. 
7.165 The United States argues that China's interpretation of "financial asset" and "negotiable 
instruments" as they appear in subsector (xiv) does not accord with how these terms are used 
elsewhere in the Annex.  The United States notes that these terms also appear in paragraph 5(a), 
subsector (x) of the Annex.  The illustrative list of tradable assets under subsector (x) includes "other 
negotiable instruments and financial assets, including bullion".  Thus, according to the United States, 
"negotiable instruments" and "financial assets" as used in subsector (x) refer to tradable investment 
assets, rather than "[m]oney and claims."  This indicates that "negotiable instruments" and "financial 
assets" are not retail payment vehicles like credit and debit cards.221 
7.166 China submits that the United States overlooks the fact that subsector (x)(A) of the 
Annex explicitly refers to "cheques" as among the "negotiable instruments" and "financial assets"  
included within this category.  According to China, "this fatally undermines the United States' 
insistence that the drafters of the Annex meant to exclude cheques from the ordinary meaning of the 
terms 'financial assets' and 'negotiable instruments"'.222 
7.167 The Panel observes that subsector (x) of the Annex contains a list of instruments that can be 
"traded for own account or for account of customers, …".  The Panel has already observed that 
cheques are among those retail payment instruments that are potentially negotiable.  In our view, the 
list in subsector (x) confirms this point.  Yet we do not consider that the fact that "cheques" are listed 
in subsector (x) as tradable instruments would support the view that clearing and settlement of 
cheques and other payment instruments should fall under subsector (xiv) of the Annex.  It is only if 
one assumes that the clearing and settlement of potentially negotiable instruments of any kind falls 
under subsector (xiv) that this would be so, and we have already explained that we are unable to 
accept this assumption.  Finally, we note that subsector (x) does not refer to payment cards, which 
also supports our earlier conclusion that payment cards are not negotiable instruments.   
7.168 To conclude, we consider that the fact that subsector (x) in the Annex refers to cheques as a 
kind of tradable instrument does not invalidate our conclusion with respect to the scope of 
subsector (d) in China's Schedule. 
Summary of findings on the GATS Annex on Financial Services 
7.169 In our examination of subsector (xiv) of the Annex, we found that payment instruments listed 
in subsector (d) of China's Schedule, such as payment cards, are not "financial assets" within the 
meaning of that term as it is used in subsector (xiv) of the Annex.  Therefore, in our view, the clearing 
and settlement of transactions involving the use of the payment instruments listed in subsectors (d) of 
China's Schedule are not covered under subsector (xiv) of the Annex.  In our view, having regard to 
                                                   
221 United States' second written submission, paras. 94 and 95. 
222 China's opening statement at the second substantive meeting, para. 15. 


WT/DS413/R 
Page 52 
 
 
 
the broad phrase "[a]ll payment and money transmission services", clearing and settlement services 
concerning transactions using payment cards are properly classified under subsector (d).  As concerns 
subsector (x) in the Annex, we found that the fact that it refers to cheques as tradable instruments does 
not invalidate our conclusion with respect to the scope of subsector (d) in China's Schedule.   
7.170 Hence, our analysis of the context provided by the GATS Annex on Financial Services does 
not contradict our finding that subsector (d) of China's Schedule encompasses the services that are 
essential to the processing and completion of transactions using payment cards.   
(iv) 
The structure of the GATS 
7.171 We turn now to a consideration of the structure of the GATS.  The United States submits that 
EPS fall within the ordinary meaning of "payment and money transmission services" as one type of 
"all" such services.  EPS are at the centre of all payment card transactions and without these services 
the transactions could not occur.  According to the United States, EPS involve the services through 
which transactions involving payment cards are processed and through which transfers of funds 
between institutions participating in the transactions are managed and facilitated.  Moreover, EPS are 
integral to the processing of credit, charge, debit and other payment card-based electronic payment 
transactions, and without these services, payment card transactions could not occur.223 
7.172 China submits that the assertion by the United States that subsector (d) encompasses all of the 
services at issue is based on an interpretation of this subsector that is "vastly overbroad."  This 
interpretation would lead to the conclusion that this subsector encompasses not only services supplied 
by banks, but also services supplied to banks.  Moreover, in China's view, services that "manage" or 
"facilitate" the supply of a service, or that relate to the "processing" of another service transaction, are 
not necessarily classifiable as that other service, but must be classified separately to the extent that 
they are distinct and separately identifiable services.  China points out that, pursuant to the 2001 
Scheduling Guidelines, "input" services must be classified and evaluated as distinct services.  China 
further submits that a schedule of specific commitments is based on taxonomy of distinct and 
mutually exclusive services.  Many of those services could be said to "manage" or "facilitate" the 
provision of other services within the taxonomy, or relate to the "processing" of a distinct service 
transaction.  In China’s view, this system of classifying services would collapse if distinct and 
separately identifiable services could be classified under another sector or subsector merely because 
they "manage", "facilitate", or relate to the "processing" of that service.224 
7.173 The United States replies that it has described the entire package provided by an EPS supplier 
as "managing," "facilitating," or "enabling" the processing of payment card transactions in an effort to 
capture the "intrinsic linkage" between EPS and payment card transactions.  EPS do not "manage," 
"facilitate," or relate to the "processing" of a payment and money transmission service.  EPS are the 
service at issue.  EPS "manage," "facilitate," and relate to the "processing" of payment card 
transactions – which is one type of payment service falling within "all payment and money 
transmission services" in subsector (d).  According to the United States, EPS for payment card 
transactions constitute one integral, indivisible service.  They are sold in a bundle and the service is a 
coherent whole, and the service supplier and service consumer are the same for the various 
component services.  Without this integrated service, a payment card transaction could not happen.  
EPS for payment card transactions is a single service that is "intrinsically linked" to payment card 
transactions and that, for purposes of classification, should be analysed as a whole.  The United States 
also submits that, if China's position were accepted – that a service must first be disaggregated into 
                                                   
223 United States' response to China's request for a preliminary ruling, para. 149; first written 
submission, paras. 25-26;  response to Panel question No. 26, paras. 84-86;  and second written submission, 
paras. 13-18. 
224 China's first written submission, paras. 102-108. 


 
WT/DS413/R 
 
Page 53 
 
 
 
subcomponents and each subcomponent separately classified – it would render WTO Members' 
concessions meaningless for a wide range of services.225 
7.174 China further submits that network services are at most "inputs" to card issuance and 
acceptance services, and are better seen as altogether different services.  The services supplied by 
network operators relate to how financial institutions interact with each other, not to how card holders 
and merchants interact with each other.  For China, the United States is trying to imply in subsector (d) 
a right of market access for a different set of service suppliers who provide input services (at most) at 
an entirely different level of trade.  This is not only inconsistent with the principle of mutual 
exclusivity, but with WTO Members' express recognition that input services must be classified and 
evaluated as distinct services.  China also takes issue with the argument that EPS is "one integral, 
indivisible service" and notes that the United States shifted to the singular when referring to EPS.  In 
China's view, the evidence establishes that different "elements" or "components" of what the United 
States calls "electronic payment services" are routinely supplied as different services by different 
service suppliers.  Hence, these services are not "supplied and consumed as an integrated service".226   
7.175 In the Panel's view, the arguments by the parties raise three issues:  (i) the scope of 
subsector (d) as it relates to EPS; (ii) whether the fact that different components of EPS can be 
supplied by different suppliers means that these different components must be classified separately; 
and (iii) the relevance of the 2001 Scheduling Guidelines for interpreting subsector (d).  We shall 
examine these three issues in turn. 
7.176 Turning to the scope of subsector (d) as it relates to EPS, we recall that, in China's view, the 
"U.S. interpretation of subsector (d) as encompassing 'any service' that is somehow associated with 
the use of payment cards" is "vastly overbroad and inconsistent with well-established principles of 
interpreting Schedules of Specific Commitments".227 
7.177 In addressing this issue, the Panel must first examine the concept of "sector" under the GATS.  
The Panel recalls that, in US – Gambling, the Appellate Body referred to the definition of "'sector' of a 
service" contained in Article XXVIII(e)228 and explained that: 
… the structure of the GATS necessarily implies two things.  First, because the 
GATS covers all services except those supplied in the exercise of governmental 
authority, it follows that a Member may schedule a specific commitment in respect of 
any service.  Second, because a Member's obligations regarding a particular service 
depend on the specific commitments that it has made with respect to the sector or 
Subsector within which that service falls, a specific service cannot fall within two 
                                                   
225 United States' second written submission, paras. 16 and 17. 
226 China's second written submission, paras. 52 and 53; opening statement at the second substantive 
meeting, para. 20; response to Panel question No. 75, paras. 1-3; and comments on United States' response to 
the Panel question Nos. 73-77, paras. 3-5 and 12. 
227 China's comments on United States' response to Panel question Nos. 73-77.  In this comment, China 
refers to United States' first written submission, para. 22.  We note that the United States referred to by China 
reads in fact:  "China’s commitments pertain to 'all payment and money transmission services, including credit, 
charge and debit cards', indicating that the scope of the commitment covers any service that is essential to 
'payment and money transmission' including 'credit, charge, and debit cards' payment transactions".  United 
States' first written submission, para. 22 (emphasis added). 
228 Article XXVIII provides that: 
 
"(e) 
'sector' of a service means, 
 
 
(i) 
with reference to a specific commitment, one or more, or all, Subsectors of 
 
 
that service, as specified in a Member's Schedule,  
 
 
(ii) 
otherwise, the whole of that service sector, including all of its Subsectors;" 


WT/DS413/R 
Page 54 
 
 
 
different sectors or Subsectors.  In other words, the sectors and subsectors in a 
Member's Schedule must be mutually exclusive.229 
7.178 We also recall that, when referring to Article XXVIII(e)(ii) of the GATS, the panel in China – 
Publications and Audiovisual Products, found that: 
A description of a service sector in a GATS schedule does not need to enumerate 
every activity that is included within the scope of that service, and is not meant to do 
so.  A service sector or subsector in a GATS schedule thus includes not only every 
service activity specifically named within it, but also any service activity that falls 
within the scope of the definition of that sector or subsector referred to in the 
schedule.230 
7.179 Hence, the definition of "sector of a service" contained in the GATS and the finding of the 
Panel in China – Publications and Audiovisual Products confirm that a "sector" may include "any 
service activity that falls within the scope of the definition of that sector", whether or not these 
activities are explicitly enumerated in the definition of that sector or subsector.   
7.180 The Panel observes that, when a card holder pays for a good or a service with a credit card 
and the merchant accepts that form of payment, both the card holder and the merchant naturally 
expect that the transaction for which that payment card is used will be completed.  The completion of 
a transaction in which payment cards are used includes, at a minimum, what we referred to as "front-
end processing" (which serves to authenticate and authorize transactions) and "back-end processing" 
(which essentially entails clearing and settlement of the transaction).231  In our view, there cannot be 
any "payment service" and "money transmission service" if the payment is not effected and the money 
not transferred from the customer's account to the merchant's account.  In that sense and referring to 
the finding cited above, these activities, even though they are not explicitly listed in subsector (d), are 
necessarily included within the scope of the definition of that subsector because they must operate 
together for the payment and money transmission service to be supplied.  The fact that they are not 
specifically listed under the subsector at issue does not matter, as stated by the panel in China – 
Publications and Audiovisual Products.  Hence, we agree with the United States' characterization of 
subsector (d) as encompassing "any service that is essential to 'payment and money transmission'".232  
In the view of the Panel, the classification under a single entry, of a service made up of a combination 
of different services is not incompatible with the principle of mutual exclusivity when these combined 
services result in a distinct service, which is supplied and consumed as such.233 
                                                   
229 Appellate Body Report, US – Gambling, para. 180 (emphasis added).  The Appellate Body further 
explained that "[i]f this were not the case [i.e. if sectors and subsectors were not mutually exclusive], and a 
Member scheduled the same service in two different sectors, then the scope of the Member's commitment would 
not be clear where, for example, it made a full commitment in one of those sectors and a limited, or no, 
commitment, in the other." Ibid. fn. 219.  
230 Panel Report, China – Publications and Audiovisual Products, para. 7.1014. 
231 See paras. 7.20  to 7.24 above. 
232 United States' first written submission, para. 22. 
233 We note that our interpretation is supported by a rule of interpretation in the CPC prov.:   
"1. When services are, prima facie, classifiable under two or more categories, classification shall be 
effected as follows, on the understanding that only categories at the same level (sections, divisions, groups, 
classes or subclasses) are comparable: (a) The category that provides the most specific description shall be 
preferred to categories providing a more general description; (b) Composite services consisting of a combination 
of different services which cannot be classified by reference to 1(a) shall be classified as if they consisted of the 
service which gives them their essential character, in so far as this criterion is applicable."  Provisional Central 
Product Classification, Statistical Papers, Series M No.77, United Nations (1991), p. 20 (emphasis added). 


 
WT/DS413/R 
 
Page 55 
 
 
 
7.181 Finally, contrary to China's view234, we consider that the fact that the United States switched 
from plural to singular when referring to "EPS" is immaterial for the purposes of services 
classification.235  In our view, in a normal hierarchical classification scheme (like the CPC or the 
Annex on Financial Services), a service combining different services can be described simply as a 
"service", or as "services" in the plural.  In the latter case, "services" refers to the sum of the different 
services classified by reference to the "service".   
7.182 We examine now whether the fact that different components of the EPS can be supplied by 
different suppliers means that these different components must be classified separately.  We recall that, 
according to the United States, "EPS for payment card transactions is a single, integrated service – 
one that is supplied and consumed as such". 236  China submits that different "elements" or 
"components" of the services at issue are routinely supplied as different services by different service 
suppliers.  In particular, the network and authorization components of the services at issue are 
frequently supplied by entities other than the entities that provide clearing and settlement services for 
the same transactions.  Hence, according to China, the United States' assertion that the services at 
issue are "supplied and consumed as an integrated service" is incorrect.237 
7.183 The Panel observes that the manner in which the supply of integrated services such as the 
services at issue is organized depends on a number of parameters, including the business models 
adopted by specific companies, the regulatory framework in the country concerned, and how the 
direct users of payment services (e.g. issuing and acquiring institutions) organize their supply in 
specific jurisdictions.238  Some companies may provide the various components of the services at 
issue, thus supplying a final product as a "package" for the direct users and for the ultimate 
beneficiaries of these services (i.e. the card holder, the issuer, the acquirer and the merchant).  There 
may, however, be other circumstances where the different components are supplied by different 
suppliers.239  The evidence submitted by China indicates, for instance, that, in the case of France, the 
authorization process, on the one hand, and clearing and settlement, on the other hand, are provided 
by two different entities.240 
7.184 Thus, the evidence before us suggests that, in practice, the services essential to a payment 
card transaction to be completed may be supplied by one or more service supplier(s).  As we have said, 
while some suppliers provide all the various components of that service in an integrated manner, other 
suppliers may specialize in one segment of that service.  In our view, the fact that some component 
services may be supplied by different suppliers is not a sufficient basis for classifying each or some of 
these services under different subsectors.  Indeed, as noted by the United States, "[i]t is the 
combination that enables the payment card transaction to occur".241  Hence, the mere fact that separate 
suppliers provide one particular component of a service does not in itself imply that that component 
should be classified as a distinct service, or that the component is not part of an integrated service. In 
our view, what is relevant in relation to an integrated service is not whether it is supplied by a single 
supplier or by several suppliers, but rather whether the component services, when combined together, 
result in a new and distinct service, the integrated service.   
                                                   
234 China's comments on United States' response to Panel question Nos. 73-77, paras. 4 and 5. 
235 China's comments on United States' response to the Panel question Nos. 73-77, para. 2. 
236 United States' second written submission, para. 11 (citing further references to United States' written 
submissions).  See also United States' second written submission, paras. 13-18. 
237 China's opening statement at the second substantive meeting, paras. 20 and 21; response to Panel 
question No. 75, paras. 1-3; and comments on the United States' response to Panel question Nos. 73 and 77, 
para. 12. 
238 See above section VII.C.1. 
239 See our discussion above in para. 7.60. 
240 China's response to Panel question No. 75, paras. 1-3, including the evidence indicated therein. 
241 Ibid. 


WT/DS413/R 
Page 56 
 
 
 
7.185 We note that China itself appears to accept that some services, although supplied by different 
suppliers, are nonetheless classifiable under the same subsector.  Indeed, issuing and acquiring 
services could be considered as two "distinct and separately identifiable services", to borrow China's 
terminology.  As evidenced by the arguments of the parties, issuing and acquiring are different 
activities.242  Moreover, for any given payment card transaction, the issuing and acquiring institutions 
are not necessarily the same entity; in the four-party model, they are often different entities.  
Nevertheless, China is not proposing to classify, respectively, issuing services and acquiring services 
under two separate subsectors, but argues instead that these two services fall under subsector (d).243   
7.186 We turn now to the third issue raised by the parties, namely whether the services at issue are 
inputs into a service classified under subsector (d).  We recall that, according to China, the 2001 
Scheduling Guidelines expressly recognize that a specific commitment does not extend to input 
services that are separately classifiable within the relevant taxonomy of services.  In China's view, the 
services at issue are at most "inputs" to card issuance and acceptance services, which, according to 
China, are classified under subsector (d) of its Schedule.244   
7.187 According to China, the 2001 Scheduling Guidelines are a supplementary means of 
interpretation falling under Article 32 of the Vienna Convention. 245  We understand, therefore, that 
China is not proposing that we rely on the 2001 Scheduling Guidelines as context in our interpretation 
of subsector (d) pursuant to Article 31 of the Vienna Convention.  Regardless of whether the 2001 
Scheduling Guidelines may be considered as context or as supplementary means of interpretation, 
however, we are not persuaded by China's argument.246  China has provided no evidence to support its 
assertion that EPS are "input" services into issuing and acquiring services.  Nor has it explained 
through argument why this is so:  it has merely pointed to a rule referring generally to "input" services.  
It is unclear to us, for example, whether it could be argued that issuing and acquiring services are 
                                                   
242 United States' response to China's request for a preliminary ruling, para. 43; and first written 
submission, para. 20. 
243 China submits that "China's actual commitment in subsector (d) … was to allow foreign financial 
institutions to enter its market on a commercial presence basis to issue payment cards to cardholders and acquire 
payment card transactions from merchants".  China's first written submission, para. 8 (emphasis in the original). 
We recall that issuing and acquiring services are not at stake in this dispute and, hence, we do not need to 
determine where these services should be classified.  We accept China's position merely for the sake of 
argument on this issue. 
244 China's first written submission, paras. 106-108; and second written submission, paras. 51 and 52. 
Paragraph 25 of the 2001 Scheduling Guidelines reads as follows:  "[i]t is understood that market access and 
national treatment commitments apply only to the sectors or sub-sectors inscribed in the schedule.  They do not 
imply a right for the supplier of a committed service to supply uncommitted services which are inputs to the 
committed service."  See also paragraph 17 of the 1993 Scheduling Guidelines. 
245 China' response to Panel question No. 58, para. 105 ("The Appellate Body in U.S. – Gambling 
found that the 1993 Guidelines constitute 'supplementary means of interpretation' under Article 32 of the Vienna 
Convention.  China sees no reason to depart from this finding with respect to the 2001 Guidelines.")  In 
response to the same question, the United States submitted that "[w]ith respect to the 2001 Guidelines, there are 
questions that arise as to timing, such as whether they were actually available when China was negotiating its 
Services commitments". United States' response to Panel question No. 58, para. 145. We note that the third 
parties have different views as to whether the 2001 Scheduling Guidelines should be considered under 
Article 31 or 32 of the Vienna Convention.  Australia considers that the 2001 are relevant context pursuant to 
Article 31 of the Vienna Convention, while the European Union and Guatemala view this document as 
belonging to supplementary means of interpretation pursuant to Article 32.  Australia's third-party response to 
Panel question No. 6 (no paragraph numbering provided), the European Union's third-party response to Panel 
question No. 6,  para. 18; and Guatemala's third-party response to Panel question No. 6,  para. 24. 
246 China asserts that "[i]n many cases, services that 'manage' or 'facilitate' the provision of another 
service or that relate to its 'processing' could properly be seen as 'inputs' to the provision of that service".  
China's first written submission, para. 107. 


 
WT/DS413/R 
 
Page 57 
 
 
 
"inputs" into EPS, as opposed to the other way around.247  In the absence of supporting evidence or 
explanation related to EPS as inputs, we are unable to accept China's contention in this respect. 
7.188 To summarize our interpretation of subsector (d) based on the structure of the GATS as 
context, we are of the view that the classification under a single subsector of a service made up of a 
combination of different services is not incompatible with the principle of mutual exclusivity if these 
services, when combined together, result in a distinct service that is supplied and consumed as such.  
Moreover, the mere fact that separate suppliers provide one particular component of a service does 
not in itself imply that that component should be classified as a distinct service, or that the component 
is not part of an integrated service.  In our view, what is relevant in relation to the classification of an 
integrated service is not whether it is supplied by a single supplier or by several suppliers, but rather 
whether the component services, when combined together, result in a new and distinct service, the 
integrated service.  This confirms our view that subsector (d) encompasses the services essential to the 
processing and completion of transactions using payment cards.   
(v) 
Schedules of other WTO Members 
7.189 China submits that other WTO Members consider the services encompassed by subsector (viii) 
to be limited to services that are supplied by banks and other types of financial institutions.  
According to China, there is no indication in any WTO Member's commitments for subsector (viii) 
that these services are provided by suppliers other than banks or other financial institutions.248   
7.190 The United State submits that a 1998 Background Note by the WTO Secretariat indicates 
with respect to credit card services that these are "either part of 'all payment and money transmission 
services'" or "they constitute an independent item."  Hence, WTO Members either treated "credit card 
services" as part of "all payment and money transmission services" or as a separate, independent entry; 
and no Member included "credit card services" in 7.B.j (item (xiv) of the annex) – "settlement and 
clearing services for financial assets, including securities, derivatives, and other negotiable 
instruments".249 
7.191 The Panel recalls that, in US – Gambling and in China – Publications and Audiovisual 
Products, GATS schedules of other WTO Members were used by the panels and the Appellate Body 
as relevant context for the interpretation of a Member's Schedule.  As noted by the Appellate Body, 
"this is the logical consequence of Article XX:3 of the GATS, which provides that WTO Members' 
Schedules are 'an integral part' of the GATS."250  At the same time, the Appellate Body acknowledged 
that use of other WTO Members' schedules as context must be tempered by the recognition 
that"[e]ach Schedule has its own intrinsic logic";  hence, Schedules of other WTO Members may be 
"of limited utility in elucidating the meaning of the entry to be interpreted".251  Thus far, they have not 
figured as a central element in the contextual analysis of a disputed entry.     
                                                   
247 We would observe that, when licensing its brand to a bank, an EPS supplier grants permission to 
that bank to issue a credit card under a trademark. It is the availability of the card that will allow customers to 
make payments.  Hence, the final service, namely the payment service, is supplied by the EPS supplier, not by 
the bank.  From that point of view, it is at least arguable that issuing and acquiring services constitute input 
services into EPS.  As noted above, this discussion is without prejudice to where issuing and acquiring services 
should be classified. 
248 China's first written submission, para. 99; and response to Panel question No. 60, para. 109. 
249 United States' response to Panel question No. 59, para. 150; and second written submission, 
paras. 40 and 41. The United States refers to the WTO Secretariat Background Note on Financial Services, 
S/C/W/72 (2 December1998), para. 13. 
250 Appellate Body Report, US – Gambling, para 182. 
251 Appellate Body Report, China – Publications and Audiovisual Products, para. 383. 


WT/DS413/R 
Page 58 
 
 
 
7.192 We observe that the schedules of other WTO Members cited by China use different names to 
describe entities supplying services under subsector (d).  These include "banks", "commercial banks", 
"financial institutions", "specialized finance companies" and "credit institutions".252  China did not 
submit evidence or make arguments as to the precise nature of these differently named entities in 
China's and other WTO Members' schedules.  For that reason, it is not clear to us whether the 
schedules of other WTO Members cited by China do indicate that "all payment and money 
transmission services" can only be supplied by "banks and other types of financial institutions" within 
the meaning attributed by China to those terms.  Indeed, as noted above, each schedule has its own 
intrinsic logic and we are not in a position to determine, without more, whether, and to what extent, 
the entities referred to in the schedules cited by China do coincide with "banks and other types of 
financial institutions".  Moreover, as we explain in detail further below (see Section VII.F.1), we 
consider that China's commitments in subsectors (a) to (f) apply to all foreign financial institutions 
and that the term "foreign financial institutions" as used in China's Schedule includes EPS suppliers. 
7.193 Hence, the context provided by the Schedules of other WTO Members does not point to an 
interpretation that is different from that suggested by other elements of context examined above. 
(c) 
Object and purpose  
7.194 China argues that the United States' interpretation of China's Schedule or items in the 
Annex on Financial Services is "plainly contrary to the object and purpose of the GATS", because it is 
"arbitrary, illogical, and completely unpredictable".  In China's view, the United States' approach is 
contrary to the "security and predictability of WTO Members' specific commitments, which is an 
important object and purpose of the GATS".  For China, the United States' approach leads to an 
interpretation of China's Schedule and the Annex list in which "nothing means what it says", services 
are not clearly defined, and, as a result, it is "impossible to schedule and interpret specific 
commitments with any degree of security or predictability".  According to China, this approach is 
"manifestly contrary" to the object and purpose of the GATS and must be rejected.253 
7.195 The United States submits that the "progressive liberalization" called for in the Preamble of 
the GATS could never be achieved where, as under China's theory, a recognized, integrated service 
that is supplied and consumed as such, could not be classified in one subsector.  Moreover, regarding 
China's argument that the object and purpose of the GATS calls for greater "transparency," China's 
own theory would render WTO Members' services schedules "indecipherable and impossible to 
reconcile with the commercial reality of the services they are supposed to reflect".  The United States 
questions how transparency could be achieved where a Member could purport to liberalize a 
particular subsector through specific commitments, but then dismantle an integrated service that 
would otherwise fall within that subsector and argue that various pieces constitute separate "services" 
for which that Member has undertaken no commitments.254 
7.196 The Panel begins its consideration of the object and purpose of the GATS and the WTO 
Agreement by noting one of the key objectives listed in the Preamble to the GATS, namely "the 
establishment of a multilateral framework of principles and rules for trade in services with a view to 
the expansion of such trade under conditions of transparency and progressive liberalization" 
(emphasis added).  We note that, in US – Gambling, the Appellate Body found that the purpose of 
transparency contained in the Preamble to the GATS supported the need for precision and clarity in 
                                                   
252 China referred to the schedules of Cambodia (GATS/SC/140), FYR Macedonia (GATS/SC/138), 
India (GATS/SC/42), Jordan (GATS/SC/128), Korea (GATS/SC/48), Macao (GATS/SC/50), Saudi Arabia 
(GATS/SC/141), Slovak Republic (GATS/SC/77), Venezuela (GATS/SC/92) and Vietnam (GATS/SC/142).  
China's first written submission, para. 99. 
253 China's second written submission, paras. 27-29. 
254 United States' opening statement at the second substantive meeting, para. 17. 


 
WT/DS413/R 
 
Page 59 
 
 
 
scheduling GATS commitments, and underlined the importance of having schedules that are readily 
understandable by all other WTO Members, as well as by services suppliers and consumers.255  In that 
dispute, the Appellate Body also recalled that: 
… the security and predictability of "the reciprocal and mutually advantageous 
arrangements directed to the substantial reduction of tariffs and other barriers to 
trade" is an object and purpose of the WTO Agreement ….  This confirms the 
importance of the security and predictability of Members' specific commitments, 
which is equally an object and purpose of the GATS.256   
7.197 We also recall that, in examining the principle of progressive liberalization as an expression 
of the object and purpose of the GATS, the Appellate Body did not consider that this principle "… 
lends support to an interpretation that would constrain the scope and coverage of specific 
commitments that have already been undertaken by WTO Members and by which they are bound."257  
We are also aware that, in both US – Gambling and China – Publications and Audiovisual Products, 
the Appellate Body observed that the objectives of the GATS did not provide specific guidance as to 
the correct interpretation of the entries at stake.258   
7.198 We find that our interpretation of the scope of China's commitment under subsector (d) is 
consistent with the objective of transparency because it classifies under a single subsector services 
which, when combined together, result in a new and distinct service, the integrated service.  This 
integrated service is supplied and consumed as such.  Furthermore, by reconciling the classification of 
EPS with the commercial reality of those services, our interpretation reinforces the predictability, 
security and clarity of GATS specific commitments.  For those same reasons, our interpretation is also 
consistent with the objective of progressive liberalization contained in the Preamble to the GATS. 
7.199 Hence, our conclusion that subsector (d) of China's Schedule encompasses EPS is consistent 
with the object and purpose of the GATS and the WTO Agreement. 
(d) 
Conclusion 
7.200 The Panel has now completed its analysis of the scope of China's commitment in subsector (d) 
of its GATS Schedule on "all payment and money transmission services, including credit, charge and 
debit cards, travellers' cheques and bankers' drafts (including import and export settlement)" 
according to the rules of interpretation codified in Article 31 of the Vienna Convention.   
7.201 Our analysis of the ordinary meaning of the terms "payment", "money" and "transmission", 
when used in combination, refers to the transfer of money from one person or place to another.  The 
transferred money may be due for goods or services, or for settling a debt.  When examining the 
expressions "payment services" and "money transmission services", we determined that "payment and 
money transmission services" can be characterized as those services that "manage", "facilitate" or 
"enable" the act of paying, or transmitting money.  Finally, we observed that the use of the term "all" 
manifests an intention to cover comprehensively the entire spectrum of the "payment and money 
transmission services" encompassed under subsector (d).  With regard to the phrase "including credit, 
charge and debit cards, travellers cheques and bankers drafts" in subsector (d), we concluded that this 
phrase constitutes an illustrative list that provides confirmation that the phrase "[a]ll payment and 
                                                   
255 Appellate Body Report, US – Gambling, para. 188. 
256 Ibid. 
257 Appellate Body Report, China – Publications and Audiovisual Products, para. 394. 
258 "None of the objectives listed in the GATS preamble provides specific guidance as to the correct 
interpretation to be given to China's GATS Schedule entry 'Sound recording distribution services'". Appellate 
Body Report, China – Publications and Audiovisual Products, para. 393.  See also Appellate Body Report, US – 
Gambling, para. 189. 


WT/DS413/R 
Page 60 
 
 
 
money transmission services" refers to those services that are essential to the processing and 
completion of transactions involving the use of payment cards.  Moreover, the parenthetical addition 
"(including import and export settlement)" confirms that subsector (d) includes settlement, and by 
implication clearing, when bankers' drafts are used as payment instruments.  This, in our view, 
provides an indication that settlement, and therefore clearing, of transactions involving the use of 
other payment instruments, such as those listed in subsector (d), is properly classified under 
subsector (d). 
7.202 When examining the remainder of China's Schedule, we found that neither the heading 
"Banking services as listed below", nor the inscriptions under the mode 1 commitment, pointed to a 
different interpretation of the scope of subsector (d).  Moreover, our analysis of the GATS Annex on 
Financial Services led us to the conclusion that subsector (xiv) of that Annex does not encompass the 
clearing and settlement of payment card instruments listed in subsector (d) of China's Schedule.  
Furthermore, our contextual interpretation of subsector (d) based on the structure of the GATS led us 
to the view that the classification, under a single subsector, of a service made up of a combination of 
different services is not incompatible with the principle of mutual exclusivity if these services, when 
combined together, result in a distinct service, which is necessarily supplied and consumed as such.  
Also, the mere fact that separate suppliers may provide particular components of a service does not in 
itself imply that that component should be classified as a distinct service, or that the component is not 
part of an integrated service.  In addition, the arguments submitted with respect to schedules of other 
WTO Members do not point to an interpretation different from that suggested by other elements of the 
context.  Finally, we found that our interpretation of China's commitment under subsector (d) is 
consistent with the object and purpose of the GATS and the WTO Agreement.   
7.203 We recall that the panel request defines the services at issue as follows:  
[E]lectronic payment services involve the services through which transactions 
involving payment cards … are processed and through which transfers of funds 
between institutions participating in the transactions are managed and facilitated. 
7.204 Having regard to our examination of the scope of subsector (d) in China's Schedule, the Panel 
finds that this subsector includes the services at issue.259 
3. 
Recourse to supplementary means of interpretation  
7.205 Pursuant to Article 32 of the Vienna Convention, a treaty interpreter may have recourse to 
supplementary means of interpretation "in order to confirm the meaning resulting from the application 
of Article 31, or to determine the meaning when the interpretation according to Article 31 leaves the 
meaning ambiguous or obscure or leads to a result which is manifestly absurd or unreasonable."   
7.206 The parties to the dispute referred to the CPC as supplementary means of interpretation.260  
China also referred to the 2001 Scheduling Guidelines as a source of interpretation under 
Article 32.261  The Panel considers that its interpretation of China's Schedule pursuant to Article 31 of 
the Vienna Convention does not leave the meaning ambiguous or obscure, nor does it lead to a result 
which is manifestly absurd or unreasonable. 
                                                   
259 In our view, the services at issue are covered by subsector (d), whether they are provided in 
connection with payment cards that are used, for instance, at POS terminals to purchase goods or services or in 
connection with payment cards that are used at ATMs to withdraw cash. 
260 United States' response to Panel question No. 76, paras. 12 and 39. 
261 China's first written submission, paras. 102-108. 


 
WT/DS413/R 
 
Page 61 
 
 
 
7.207 Accordingly, we do not find it necessary to resort to supplementary means of interpretation 
under Article 32 of the Vienna Convention.   
E. 
THE MEASURES AT ISSUE 
7.208 The United States has identified a series of six requirements, or measures, which it claims 
operate alone or in combination to impose market access restrictions and national treatment 
limitations on service suppliers of other WTO Members seeking to supply EPS in China.  The 
United States argues that these measures are maintained through a series of legal instruments.  As will 
be discussed in detail in Sections VII.F and VII.G, the United States asserts that these six 
requirements are inconsistent with China's obligations under Articles XVI:1 and XVI:2(a), and 
Article XVII of the GATS. 
7.209 The United States has alleged the existence of the following requirements262: 
(a) 
Requirements that mandate the use of CUP and/or establish CUP as the sole supplier 
of EPS for all domestic transactions denominated and paid in Renminbi (RMB) 
(hereafter referred to by the Panel as "sole supplier requirements");  
(b) 
Requirements on issuers that payment cards issued in China bear the CUP logo 
("issuer requirements");  
(c) 
Requirements that all ATMs, merchant card processing equipment and POS terminals 
in China accept CUP cards ("terminal equipment requirements");   
(d) 
Requirements on acquiring institutions to post the CUP logo and be capable of 
accepting all payment cards bearing the CUP logo ("acquirer requirements"); 
(e) 
Prohibitions on the use of non-CUP cards for cross-region or inter-bank transactions 
("cross-region/inter-bank prohibitions"); and 
(f) 
Requirements pertaining to card-based electronic transactions in China, Macao, and 
Hong Kong ("Hong Kong/Macao requirements")263.   
7.210 The United States considers that these requirements are maintained through a series of 
Chinese legal instruments that are themselves identified in the United States' request for establishment 
of a panel.264 
7.211 China contends that the United States has failed to demonstrate that the alleged measures 
operate in a manner that is inconsistent with either Article XVI265 or XVII266 of the GATS.  China 
submits that the requirements identified by the United States as measures at issue in this dispute do 
not violate these WTO provisions, as the United States alleges. Rather, it considers that the identified 
measures establish a national inter-bank network for clearing and settling RMB payment card 
transactions and otherwise create uniform technical and commercial standards that allow this inter-
                                                   
262 The short descriptions of the relevant requirements provided below are identical or closely similar to 
those that appear in written submissions of the United States.  E.g., United States' response to China's request 
for a preliminary ruling, para. 77; first written submission, para. 12; and second written submission, para. 6. 
263 Consistent with the views taken by of the parties, this Report refers to the separate customs 
territories of Hong Kong, China and Macao, China as Hong Kong and Macao, respectively. 
264 WT/DS413/2, pp. 3-4. 
265 China's second written submission, paras. 90-102. 
266 China's first written submission, paras. 151-160; second written submission, paras. 115-121.