IT WAS TEN o’clock in the morning. The day was warm
for April and the golden sunlight streamed brilliantly
into Scarlett’s room through the blue curtains of the
wide windows.
The cream-colored walls glowed
with light and the depths of the mahogany furniture
gleamed deep red like wine, while the ﬂoor glistened
as if it were glass, except where the rag rugs covered
it and they were spots of gay color.
Already summer was in the air, the ﬁrst hint of
Georgia summer when the high tide of spring gives
way reluctantly before a ﬁercer heat. A balmy, soft
warmth poured into the room, heavy with velvety
smells, redolent of many blossoms, of newly ﬂedged
trees and of the moist, freshly turned red earth.
Through the window Scarlett could see the bright riot
of the twin lanes of daffodils bordering the graveled
driveway and the golden masses of yellow jessamine
spreading ﬂowery sprangles modestly to the earth
like crinolines. The mockingbirds and the jays, en-
gaged in their old feud for possession of the magno-
lia tree beneath her window, were bickering, the jays
strident, acrimonious, the mockers sweet voiced and
plaintive.
Such a glowing morning usually called Scarlett to


PART ONE
the window, to lean arms on the broad sill and drink
in the scents and sounds of Tara. But, today she had
no eye for sun or azure sky beyond a hasty thought,
“Thank God, it isn’t raining.”
On the bed lay the
apple-green, watered-silk ball dress with its festoons
of ecru lace, neatly packed in a large cardboard box. It
was ready to be carried to Twelve Oaks to be donned
before the dancing began, but Scarlett shrugged at the
sight of it. If her plans were successful, she would not
wear that dress tonight. Long before the ball began,
she and Ashley would be on their way to Jonesboro
to be married. The troublesome question was–what
dress should she wear to the barbecue?
What dress would best set off her charms and make
her most irresistible to Ashley? Since eight o’clock
she had been trying on and rejecting dresses, and now
she stood dejected and irritable in lace pantalets, linen
corset cover and three billowing lace and linen petti-
coats. Discarded garments lay about her on the ﬂoor,
the bed, the chairs, in bright heaps of color and stray-
ing ribbons.
The rose organdie with long pink sash was becom-
ing, but she had worn it last summer when Melanie
visited Twelve Oaks and she’d be sure to remember
it. And might be catty enough to mention it. The
148


PART ONE
black bombazine, with its puffed sleeves and princess
lace collar, set off her white skin superbly, but it did
make her look a triﬂe elderly. Scarlett peered anx-
iously in the mirror at her sixteen-year-old face as
if expecting to see wrinkles and sagging chin mus-
cles. It would never do to appear sedate and elderly
before Melanie’s sweet youthfulness. The lavender
barred muslin was beautiful with those wide insets
of lace and net about the hem, but it had never suited
her type. It would suit Carreen’s delicate proﬁle and
wishy-washy expression perfectly, but Scarlett felt
that it made her look like a schoolgirl. It would never
do to appear schoolgirlish beside Melanie’s poised
self. The green plaid taffeta, frothing with ﬂounces
and each ﬂounce edged in green velvet ribbon, was
most becoming, in fact her favorite dress, for it dark-
ened her eyes to emerald. But there was unmistak-
ably a grease spot on the front of the basque.
Of
course, her brooch could be pinned over the spot,
but perhaps Melanie had sharp eyes. There remained
varicolored cotton dresses which Scarlett felt were not
festive enough for the occasion, ball dresses and the
green sprigged muslin she had worn yesterday. But
it was an afternoon dress. It was not suitable for a
barbecue, for it had only tiny puffed sleeves and the
neck was low enough for a dancing dress. But there
149


PART ONE
was nothing else to do but wear it. After all she was
not ashamed of her neck and arms and bosom, even
if it was not correct to show them in the morning.
As she stood before the mirror and twisted her-
self about to get a side view, she thought that there
was absolutely nothing about her ﬁgure to cause her
shame. Her neck was short but rounded and her arms
plump and enticing.
Her breasts, pushed high by
her stays, were very nice breasts. She had never had
to sew tiny rows of silk rufﬂes in the lining of her
basques, as most sixteen-year- old girls did, to give
their ﬁgures the desired curves and fullness. She was
glad she had inherited Ellen’s slender white hands
and tiny feet, and she wished she had Ellen’s height,
too, but her own height pleased her very well. What a
pity legs could not be shown, she thought, pulling up
her petticoats and regretfully viewing them, plump
and neat under pantalets.
She had such nice legs.
Even the girls at the Fayetteville Academy had admit-
ted as much. And as for her waist–there was no one
in Fayetteville, Jonesboro or in three counties, for that
matter, who had so small a waist.
The thought of her waist brought her back to prac-
tical matters. The green muslin measured seventeen
inches about the waist, and Mammy had laced her for
150


PART ONE
the eighteen-inch bombazine. Mammy would have
to lace her tighter.
She pushed open the door, lis-
tened and heard Mammy’s heavy tread in the down-
stairs hall. She shouted for her impatiently, knowing
she could raise her voice with impunity, as Ellen was
in the smokehouse, measuring out the day’s food to
Cookie.
“Some folks thinks as how Ah kin ﬂy,” grumbled
Mammy, shufﬂing up the stairs.
She entered puff-
ing, with the expression of one who expects battle
and welcomes it. In her large black hands was a tray
upon which food smoked, two large yams covered
with butter, a pile of buckwheat cakes dripping syrup,
and a large slice of ham swimming in gravy. Catch-
ing sight of Mammy’s burden, Scarlett’s expression
changed from one of minor irritation to obstinate bel-
ligerency. In the excitement of trying on dresses she
had forgotten Mammy’s ironclad rule that, before go-
ing to any party, the O’Hara girls must be crammed
so full of food at home they would be unable to eat
any refreshments at the party.
“It’s no use. I won’t eat it. You can just take it back
to the kitchen.”
Mammy set the tray on the table and squared her-
self, hands on hips.
151


PART ONE
“Yas’m, you is! Ah ain’ ﬁggerin’ on havin’ happen
whut happen at dat las’ barbecue w’en Ah wuz too
sick frum dem chittlins Ah et ter fetch you no tray
befo’ you went. You is gwine eat eve’y bite of dis.”
“I am not! Now, come here and lace me tighter be-
cause we are late already. I heard the carriage come
round to the front of the house.”
Mammy’s tone became wheedling.
“Now, Miss Scarlett, you be good an’ come eat jes’a
lil. Miss Carreen an’ Miss Suellen done eat all dey’n.”
“They would,” said Scarlett contemptuously. “They
haven’t any more spirit than a rabbit. But I won’t!
I’m through with trays. I’m not forgetting the time I
ate a whole tray and went to the Calverts’ and they
had ice cream out of ice they’d brought all the way
from Savannah, and I couldn’t eat but a spoonful. I’m
going to have a good time today and eat as much as I
please.”
At this deﬁant heresy, Mammy’s brow lowered with
indignation. What a young miss could do and what
she could not do were as different as black and white
in Mammy’s mind; there was no middle ground of
deportment between. Suellen and Carreen were clay
in her powerful hands and harkened respectfully to
her warning.
But it had always been a struggle
152


PART ONE
to teach Scarlett that most of her natural impulses
were unladylike.
Mammy’s victories over Scarlett
were hard-won and represented guile unknown to
the white mind.
“Ef you doan care ‘bout how folks talks ‘bout dis
fainbly, Ah does,” she rumbled. “Ah ain’ gwine stand
by an’ have eve’ybody at de pahty sayin’ how you
ain’ fotched up right. Ah has tole you an’ tole you dat
you kin allus tell a lady by dat she eat lak a bird. An’
Ah ain’ aimin’ ter have you go ter Mist’ Wilkes’ an’
eat lak a fe’el han’ an’ gobble lak a hawg.”
“Mother is a lady and she eats,” countered Scarlett.
“W’en you is mahied, you kin eat, too,” retorted
Mammy.
“W’en Miss Ellen yo’ age, she never et
nuthin’ w’en she went out, an’ needer yo’ Aunt
Pauline nor yo’ Aunt Eulalie.
An’ dey all done
mahied. Young misses whut eats heavy mos’ gener’ly
doan never ketch husbands.”
“I don’t believe it. At that barbecue when you were
sick and I didn’t eat beforehand, Ashley Wilkes told
me he LIKED to see a girl with a healthy appetite.”
Mammy shook her head ominously.
“Whut gempmums says an’ whut dey thinks is two
diffunt things. An’ Ah ain’ noticed Mist’ Ashley axing
fer ter mahy you.”
153


PART ONE
Scarlett scowled, started to speak sharply and then
caught herself. Mammy had her there and there was
no argument. Seeing the obdurate look on Scarlett’s
face, Mammy picked up the tray and, with the bland
guile of her race, changed her tactics. As she started
for the door, she sighed.
“Well’m, awright. Ah wuz tellin’ Cookie w’ile she
wuz a-ﬁxin’ dis tray. ‘You kin sho tell a lady by whut
she DOAN eat,’ an’ Ah say ter Cookie. ‘Ah ain’ seed
no w’ite lady who et less’n Miss Melly Hamilton did
las’ time she wuz visitin’ Mist’ Ashley’–Ah means,
visitin’ Miss India.”
Scarlett shot a look of sharp suspicion at her, but
Mammy’s broad face carried only a look of innocence
and of regret that Scarlett was not the lady Melanie
Hamilton was.
“Put down that tray and come lace me tighter,” said
Scarlett irritably. “And I’ll try to eat a little afterwards.
If I ate now I couldn’t lace tight enough.”
Cloaking her triumph, Mammy set down the tray.
“Whut mah lamb gwine wear?”
“That,” answered Scarlett, pointing at the ﬂuffy
mass of green ﬂowered muslin.
Instantly Mammy
was in arms.
“No, you ain’. It ain’ ﬁttin’ fer mawnin’. You kain
154


PART ONE
show yo’ buzzum befo’ three o’clock an’ dat dress ain’
got no neck an’ no sleeves. An’ you’ll git freckled sho
as you born, an’ Ah ain’ ﬁggerin’ on you gittin’ freck-
led affer all de buttermilk Ah been puttin’ on you all
dis winter, bleachin’ dem freckles you got at Savan-
nah settin’ on de beach. Ah sho gwine speak ter yo’
Ma ‘bout you.”
“If you say one word to her before I’m dressed
I won’t eat a bite,” said Scarlett coolly.
“Mother
won’t have time to send me back to change once I’m
dressed.”
Mammy sighed resignedly, beholding herself out-
guessed. Between the two evils, it was better to have
Scarlett wear an afternoon dress at a morning barbe-
cue than to have her gobble like a hog.
“Hole onter sumpin’ an’ suck in yo’ breaf,” she com-
manded.
Scarlett obeyed, bracing herself and catching ﬁrm
hold of one of the bedposts.
Mammy pulled and
jerked vigorously and, as the tiny circumference of
whalebone-girdled waist grew smaller, a proud, fond
look came into her eyes.
“Ain’ nobody got a wais’ lak mah lamb,” she said
approvingly. “Eve’y time Ah pulls Miss Suellen littler
dan twenty inches, she up an’ faint.”
155


PART ONE
“Pooh!” gasped Scarlctt, speaking with difﬁculty. “I
never fainted in my life.”
“Well, ‘twouldn’ do no hahm ef you wuz ter faint
now an’ den,” advised Mammy.
“You is so brash
sometimes, Miss Scarlett. Ah been aimin’ ter tell you,
it jes’ doan look good de way you doan faint ‘bout
snakes an’ mouses an’ sech. Ah doan mean round
home but w’en you is out in comp’ny. An’ Ah has
tole you an’–”
“Oh, hurry! Don’t talk so much. I’ll catch a hus-
band. See if I don’t, even if I don’t scream and faint.
Goodness, but my stays are tight! Put on the dress.”
Mammy carefully dropped the twelve yards of
green sprigged muslin over the mountainous petti-
coats and hooked up the back of the tight, low-cut
basque.
“You keep yo’ shawl on yo’ shoulders w’en you is
in de sun, an’ doan you go takin’ off yo’ hat w’en you
is wahm,” she commanded. “Elsewise you be comin’
home lookin’ brown lak Ole Miz Slattery. Now, you
come eat, honey, but doan eat too fas’. No use havin’
it come right back up agin.”
Scarlett obediently sat down before the tray, won-
dering if she would be able to get any food into her
stomach and still have room to breathe.
Mammy
156


PART ONE
plucked a large towel from the washstand and care-
fully tied it around Scarlett’s neck, spreading the
white folds over her lap. Scarlett began on the ham,
because she liked ham, and forced it down.
“I wish to Heaven I was married,” she said resent-
fully as she attacked the yams with loathing. “I’m
tired of everlastingly being unnatural and never do-
ing anything I want to do. I’m tired of acting like I
don’t eat more than a bird, and walking when I want
to run and saying I feel faint after a waltz, when I
could dance for two days and never get tired. I’m
tired of saying, ‘How wonderful you are!’ to fool men
who haven’t got one-half the sense I’ve got, and I’m
tired of pretending I don’t know anything, so men can
tell me things and feel important while they’re doing
it. . . . I can’t eat another bite.”
“Try a hot cake,” said Mammy inexorably.
“Why is it a girl has to be so silly to catch a hus-
band?”
“Ah specs it’s kase gempmums doan know whut
dey wants.
Dey jes’ knows whut dey thinks dey
wants. An’ givin’ dem whut dey thinks dey wants
saves a pile of mizry an’ bein’ a ole maid. An’ dey
thinks dey wants mousy lil gals wid bird’s tastes an’
no sense at all. It doan make a gempmum feel lak
157


PART ONE
mahyin’ a lady ef he suspicions she got mo’ sense dan
he has.”
“Don’t you suppose men get surprised after they’re
married to ﬁnd that their wives do have sense?”
“Well, it’s too late den.
Dey’s already mahied.
‘Sides, gempmums specs dey wives ter have sense.”
“Some day I’m going to do and say everything I
want to do and say, and if people don’t like it I don’t
care.”
“No, you ain’,” said Mammy grimly. “Not while Ah
got breaf. You eat dem cakes. Sop dem in de gravy,
honey.”
“I don’t think Yankee girls have to act like such
fools. When we were at Saratoga last year, I noticed
plenty of them acting like they had right good sense
and in front of men, too.”
Mammy snorted.
“Yankee gals!
Yas’m, Ah guess dey speaks dey
minds awright, but Ah ain’ noticed many of dem git-
tin’ proposed ter at Saratoga.”
“But Yankees must get married,” argued Scarlett.
“They don’t just grow. They must get married and
have children. There’s too many of them.”
“Men mahys dem fer dey money,” said Mammy
158


PART ONE
ﬁrmly.
Scarlett sopped the wheat cake in the gravy and put
it in her mouth. Perhaps there was something to what
Mammy said. There must be something in it, for Ellen
said the same things, in different and more delicate
words.
In fact, the mothers of all her girl friends
impressed on their daughters the necessity of being
helpless, clinging, doe-eyed creatures. Really, it took a
lot of sense to cultivate and hold such a pose. Perhaps
she had been too brash. Occasionally she had argued
with Ashley and frankly aired her opinions. Perhaps
this and her healthy enjoyment of walking and riding
had turned him from her to the frail Melanie. Perhaps
if she changed her tactics– But she felt that if Ash-
ley succumbed to premeditated feminine tricks, she
could never respect him as she now did. Any man
who was fool enough to fall for a simper, a faint and
an “Oh, how wonderful you are!” wasn’t worth hav-
ing. But they all seemed to like it.
If she had used the wrong tactics with Ashley in the
past–well, that was the past and done with. Today she
would use different ones, the right ones. She wanted
him and she had only a few hours in which to get
him. If fainting, or pretending to faint, would do the
trick, then she would faint. If simpering, coquetry
159


PART ONE
or empty-headedness would attract him, she would
gladly play the ﬂirt and be more empty-headed than
even Cathleen Calvert. And if bolder measures were
necessary, she would take them. Today was the day!
There was no one to tell Scarlett that her own per-
sonality, frighteningly vital though it was, was more
attractive than any masquerade she might adopt.
Had she been told, she would have been pleased but
unbelieving. And the civilization of which she was a
part would have been unbelieving too, for at no time,
before or since, had so low a premium been placed on
feminine naturalness.
As the carriage bore her down the red road toward
the Wilkes plantation, Scarlett had a feeling of guilty
pleasure that neither her mother nor Mammy was
with the party. There would be no one at the barbecue
who, by delicately lifted brows or out-thrust under-
lip, could interfere with her plan of action. Of course,
Suellen would be certain to tell tales tomorrow, but if
all went as Scarlett hoped, the excitement of the fam-
ily over her engagement to Ashley or her elopement
would more than overbalance their displeasure. Yes,
she was very glad Ellen had been forced to stay at
home.
Gerald, primed with brandy, had given Jonas Wilk-
160


PART ONE
erson his dismissal that morning, and Ellen had re-
mained at Tara to go over the accounts of the planta-
tion before he took his departure. Scarlett had kissed
her mother good-by in the little ofﬁce where she sat
before the tall secretary with its paper-stuffed pigeon-
holes. Jonas Wilkerson, hat in hand, stood beside her,
his sallow tight-skinned face hardly concealing the
fury of hate that possessed him at being so uncere-
moniously turned out of the best overseer’s job in the
County. And all because of a bit of minor philander-
ing. He had told Gerald over and over that Emmie
Slattery’s baby might have been fathered by any one
of a dozen men as easily as himself–an idea in which
Gerald concurred–but that had not altered his case so
far as Ellen was concerned. Jonas hated all Southern-
ers. He hated their cool courtesy to him and their con-
tempt for his social status, so inadequately covered by
their courtesy. He hated Ellen O’Hara above anyone
else, for she was the epitome of all that he hated in
Southerners.
Mammy, as head woman of the plantation, had re-
mained to help Ellen, and it was Dilcey who rode
on the driver’s seat beside Toby, the girls’ dancing
dresses in a long box across her lap. Gerald rode be-
side the carriage on his big hunter, warm with brandy
and pleased with himself for having gotten through
161


PART ONE
with the unpleasant business of Wilkerson so speed-
ily. He had shoved the responsibility onto Ellen, and
her disappointment at missing the barbecue and the
gathering of her friends did not enter his mind; for
it was a ﬁne spring day and his ﬁelds were beautiful
and the birds were singing and he felt too young and
frolicsome to think of anyone else. Occasionally he
burst out with “Peg in a Low- backed Car” and other
Irish ditties or the more lugubrious lament for Robert
Emmet, “She is far from the land where her young
hero sleeps.”
He was happy, pleasantly excited over the prospect
of spending the day shouting about the Yankees and
the war, and proud of his three pretty daughters in
their bright spreading hoop skirts beneath foolish lit-
tle lace parasols. He gave no thought to his conver-
sation of the day before with Scarlett, for it had com-
pletely slipped his mind. He only thought that she
was pretty and a great credit to him and that, today,
her eyes were as green as the hills of Ireland. The
last thought made him think better of himself, for it
had a certain poetic ring to it, and so he favored the
girls with a loud and slightly off-key rendition of “The
Wearin’ o’ the Green.”
Scarlett, looking at him with the affectionate con-
162


PART ONE
tempt that mothers feel for small swaggering sons,
knew that he would be very drunk by sundown.
Coming home in the dark, he would try, as usual,
to jump every fence between Twelve Oaks and Tara
and, she hoped, by the mercy of Providence and the
good sense of his horse, would escape breaking his
neck.
He would disdain the bridge and swim his
horse through the river and come home roaring, to
be put to bed on the sofa in the ofﬁce by Pork who al-
ways waited up with a lamp in the front hall on such
occasions.
He would ruin his new gray broadcloth suit, which
would cause him to swear horribly in the morning
and tell Ellen at great length how his horse fell off
the bridge in the darkness–a palpable lie which would
fool no one but which would be accepted by all and
make him feel very clever.
Pa is a sweet, selﬁsh, irresponsible darling, Scar-
lett thought, with a surge of affection for him. She
felt so excited and happy this morning that she in-
cluded the whole world, as well as Gerald, in her af-
fection. She was pretty and she knew it; she would
have Ashley for her own before the day was over;
the sun was warm and tender and the glory of the
Georgia spring was spread before her eyes. Along
163


PART ONE
the roadside the blackberry brambles were concealing
with softest green the savage red gulches cut by the
winter’s rains, and the bare granite boulders push-
ing up through the red earth were being draped with
sprangles of Cherokee roses and compassed about by
wild violets of palest purple hue. Upon the wooded
hills above the river, the dogwood blossoms lay glis-
tening and white, as if snow still lingered among the
greenery. The ﬂowering crab trees were bursting their
buds and rioting from delicate white to deepest pink
and, beneath the trees where the sunshine dappled
the pine straw, the wild honeysuckle made a varicol-
ored carpet of scarlet and orange and rose. There was
a faint wild fragrance of sweet shrub on the breeze
and the world smelled good enough to eat.
“I’ll remember how beautiful this day is till I die,”
thought Scarlett.
“Perhaps it will be my wedding
day!”
And she thought with a tingling in her heart how
she and Ashley might ride swiftly through this
beauty of blossom and greenery this very afternoon,
or tonight by moonlight, toward Jonesboro and a
preacher. Of course, she would have to be remarried
by a priest from Atlanta, but that would be something
for Ellen and Gerald to worry about. She quailed a lit-
164


PART ONE
tle as she thought how white with mortiﬁcation Ellen
would be at hearing that her daughter had eloped
with another girl’s ﬁance, but she knew Ellen would
forgive her when she saw her happiness. And Ger-
ald would scold and bawl but, for all his remarks of
yesterday about not wanting her to marry Ashley, he
would be pleased beyond words at an alliance be-
tween his family and the Wilkes.
“But that’ll be something to worry about after I’m
married,” she thought, tossing the worry from her.
It was impossible to feel anything but palpitating joy
in this warm sun, in this spring, with the chimneys of
Twelve Oaks just beginning to show on the hill across
the river.
“I’ll live there all my life and I’ll see ﬁfty springs like
this and maybe more, and I’ll tell my children and my
grandchildren how beautiful this spring was, love-
lier than any they’ll ever see.” She was so happy at
this thought that she joined in the last chorus of “The
Wearin’ o’ the Green” and won Gerald’s shouted ap-
proval.
“I don’t know why you’re so happy this morn-
ing,” said Suellen crossly, for the thought still ran-
kled in her mind that she would look far better in
Scarlett’s green silk dancing frock than its rightful
165


PART ONE
owner would. And why was Scarlett always so selﬁsh
about lending her clothes and bonnets? And why did
Mother always back her up, declaring green was not
Suellen’s color? “You know as well as I do that Ash-
ley’s engagement is going to be announced tonight.
Pa said so this morning. And I know you’ve been
sweet on him for months.”
“That’s all you know,” said Scarlett, putting out her
tongue and refusing to lose her good humor. How
surprised Miss Sue would be by this time tomorrow
morning!
“Susie, you know that’s not so,” protested Carreen,
shocked. “It’s Brent that Scarlett cares about.”
Scarlett turned smiling green eyes upon her younger
sister, wondering how anyone could be so sweet. The
whole family knew that Carreen’s thirteen-year-old
heart was set upon Brent Tarleton, who never gave
her a thought except as Scarlett’s baby sister. When
Ellen was not present, the O’Haras teased her to tears
about him.
“Darling, I don’t care a thing about Brent,” declared
Scarlett, happy enough to be generous.
“And he
doesn’t care a thing about me. Why, he’s waiting for
you to grow up!”
Carreen’s round little face became pink, as pleasure
166


PART ONE
struggled with incredulity.
“Oh, Scarlett, really?”
“Scarlett, you know Mother said Carreen was too
young to think about beaux yet, and there you go
putting ideas in her head.”
“Well, go and tattle and see if I care,” replied Scar-
lett. “You want to hold Sissy back, because you know
she’s going to be prettier than you in a year or so.”
“You’ll be keeping civil tongues in your heads this
day, or I’ll be taking me crop to you,” warned Gerald.
“Now whist! Is it wheels I’m hearing? That’ll be the
Tarletons or the Fontaines.”
As they neared the intersecting road that came
down the thickly wooded hill from Mimosa and
Fairhill, the sound of hooves and carriage wheels be-
came plainer and clamorous feminine voices raised
in pleasant dispute sounded from behind the screen
of trees. Gerald, riding ahead, pulled up his horse
and signed to Toby to stop the carriage where the two
roads met.
“‘Tis the Tarleton ladies,” he announced to his
daughters, his ﬂorid face abeam, for excepting Ellen
there was no lady in the County he liked more than
the red-haired Mrs.
Tarleton.
“And ‘tis herself at
the reins. Ah, there’s a woman with ﬁne hands for a
167


PART ONE
horse! Feather light and strong as rawhide, and pretty
enough to kiss for all that. More’s the pity none of you
have such hands,” he added, casting fond but reprov-
ing glances at his girls. “With Carreen afraid of the
poor beasts and Sue with hands like sadirons when it
comes to reins and you, Puss–”
“Well, at any rate I’ve never been thrown,” cried
Scarlett indignantly. “And Mrs. Tarleton takes a toss
at every hunt.”
“And breaks a collar bone like a man,” said Gerald.
“No fainting, no fussing. Now, no more of it, for here
she comes.”
He stood up in his stirrups and took off his hat
with a sweep, as the Tarleton carriage, overﬂowing
with girls in bright dresses and parasols and ﬂutter-
ing veils, came into view, with Mrs. Tarleton on the
box as Gerald had said.
With her four daughters,
their mammy and their ball dresses in long cardboard
boxes crowding the carriage, there was no room for
the coachman. And, besides, Beatrice Tarleton never
willingly permitted anyone, black or white, to hold
reins when her arms were out of slings. Frail, ﬁne-
boned, so white of skin that her ﬂaming hair seemed
to have drawn all the color from her face into its vi-
tal burnished mass, she was nevertheless possessed of
168


PART ONE
exuberant health and untiring energy. She had borne
eight children, as red of hair and as full of life as she,
and had raised them most successfully, so the County
said, because she gave them all the loving neglect and
the stern discipline she gave the colts she bred. “Curb
them but don’t break their spirits,” was Mrs.
Tar-
leton’s motto.
She loved horses and talked horses constantly. She
understood them and handled them better than any
man in the County. Colts overﬂowed the paddock
onto the front lawn, even as her eight children over-
ﬂowed the rambling house on the hill, and colts and
sons and daughters and hunting dogs tagged after
her as she went about the plantation. She credited
her horses, especially her red mare, Nellie, with hu-
man intelligence; and if the cares of the house kept
her busy beyond the time when she expected to take
her daily ride, she put the sugar bowl in the hands of
some small pickaninny and said: “Give Nellie a hand-
ful and tell her I’ll be out terrectly.”
Except on rare occasions she always wore her rid-
ing habit, for whether she rode or not she always ex-
pected to ride and in that expectation put on her habit
upon arising.
Each morning, rain or shine, Nellie
was saddled and walked up and down in front of the
169


PART ONE
house, waiting for the time when Mrs. Tarleton could
spare an hour away from her duties. But Fairhill was
a difﬁcult plantation to manage and spare time hard
to get, and more often than not Nellie walked up and
down riderless hour after hour, while Beatrice Tar-
leton went through the day with the skirt of her habit
absently looped over her arm and six inches of shin-
ing boot showing below it.
Today, dressed in dull black silk over unfashionably
narrow hoops, she still looked as though in her habit,
for the dress was as severely tailored as her riding
costume and the small black hat with its long black
plume perched over one warm, twinkling, brown eye
was a replica of the battered old hat she used for hunt-
ing.
She waved her whip when she saw Gerald and drew
her dancing pair of red horses to a halt, and the
four girls in the back of the carriage leaned out and
gave such vociferous cries of greeting that the team
pranced in alarm. To a casual observer it would seem
that years had passed since the Tarletons had seen the
O’Haras, instead of only two days. But they were a
sociable family and liked their neighbors, especially
the O’Hara girls. That is, they liked Suellen and Car-
reen.
No girl in the County, with the possible ex-
170


PART ONE
ception of the empty-headed Cathleen Calvert, really
liked Scarlett.
In summers, the County averaged a barbecue and
ball nearly every week, but to the red-haired Tarletons
with their enormous capacity for enjoying them-
selves, each barbecue and each ball was as exciting as
if it were the ﬁrst they had ever attended. They were
a pretty, buxom quartette, so crammed into the car-
riage that their hoops and ﬂounces overlapped and
their parasols nudged and bumped together above
their wide leghorn sun hats, crowned with roses and
dangling with black velvet chin ribbons. All shades of
red hair were represented beneath these hats, Hetty’s
plain red hair, Camilla’s strawberry blonde, Randa’s
coppery auburn and small Betsy’s carrot top.
“That’s a ﬁne bevy, Ma’m,” said Gerald gallantly,
reining his horse alongside the carriage. “But it’s far
they’ll go to beat their mother.”
Mrs. Tarleton rolled her red-brown eyes and sucked
in her lower lip in burlesqued appreciation, and the
girls cried, “Ma, stop making eyes or we’ll tell Pa!” “I
vow, Mr. O’Hara, she never gives us a chance when
there’s a handsome man like you around!”
Scarlett laughed with the rest at these sallies but, as
always, the freedom with which the Tarletons treated
171


PART ONE
their mother came as a shock. They acted as if she
were one of themselves and not a day over sixteen.
To Scarlett, the very idea of saying such things to
her own mother was almost sacrilegious. And yet–
and yet–there was something very pleasant about the
Tarleton girls’ relations with their mother, and they
adored her for all that they criticized and scolded and
teased her. Not, Scarlett loyally hastened to tell her-
self, that she would prefer a mother like Mrs. Tar-
leton to Ellen, but still it would be fun to romp with
a mother. She knew that even that thought was disre-
spectful to Ellen and felt ashamed of it. She knew no
such troublesome thoughts ever disturbed the brains
under the four ﬂaming thatches in the carriage and, as
always when she felt herself different from her neigh-
bors, an irritated confusion fell upon her.
Quick though her brain was, it was not made for
analysis, but she half-consciously realized that, for
all the Tarleton girls were as unruly as colts and
wild as March hares, there was an unworried single-
mindedness about them that was part of their in-
heritance. On both their mother’s and their father’s
side they were Georgians, north Georgians, only a
generation away from pioneers. They were sure of
themselves and of their environment. They knew in-
stinctively what they were about, as did the Wilke-
172


PART ONE
ses, though in widely divergent ways, and in them
there was no such conﬂict as frequently raged in
Scarlett’s bosom where the blood of a soft- voiced,
overbred Coast aristocrat mingled with the shrewd,
earthy blood of an Irish peasant. Scarlett wanted to
respect and adore her mother like an idol and to rum-
ple her hair and tease her too. And she knew she
should be altogether one way or the other. It was the
same conﬂicting emotion that made her desire to ap-
pear a delicate and high-bred lady with boys and to
be, as well, a hoyden who was not above a few kisses.
“Where’s Ellen this morning?” asked Mrs. Tarleton.
“She’s after discharging our overseer and stayed
home to go over the accounts with him. Where’s him-
self and the lads?”
“Oh, they rode over to Twelve Oaks hours ago–to
sample the punch and see if it was strong enough, I
dare say, as if they wouldn’t have from now till tomor-
row morning to do it! I’m going to ask John Wilkes
to keep them overnight, even if he has to bed them
down in the stable. Five men in their cups are just too
much for me. Up to three, I do very well but–”
Gerald hastily interrupted to change the subject. He
could feel his own daughters snickering behind his
back as they remembered in what condition he had
173


PART ONE
come home from the Wilkeses’ last barbecue the au-
tumn before.
“And why aren’t you riding today, Mrs. Tarleton?
Sure, you don’t look yourself at all without Nellie. It’s
a stentor, you are.”
“A stentor, me ignorant broth of a boy!” cried Mrs.
Tarleton, aping his brogue.
“You mean a centaur.
Stentor was a man with a voice like a brass gong.”
“Stentor or centaur, ‘tis no matter,” answered Ger-
ald, unrufﬂed by his error. “And ‘tis a voice like brass
you have, Ma’m, when you’re urging on the hounds,
so it is.”
“That’s one on you, Ma,” said Betty. “I told you you
yelled like a Comanche whenever you saw a fox.”
“But not as loud as you yell when Mammy washes
your ears,” returned Mrs. Tarleton. “And you sixteen!
Well, as to why I’m not riding today, Nellie foaled
early this morning.”
“Did she now!” cried Gerald with real interest, his
Irishman’s passion for horses shining in his eyes, and
Scarlett again felt the sense of shock in comparing her
mother with Mrs. Tarleton. To Ellen, mares never
foaled nor cows calved. In fact, hens almost didn’t
lay eggs. Ellen ignored these matters completely. But
Mrs. Tarleton had no such reticences.
174


PART ONE
“A little ﬁlly, was it?”
“No, a ﬁne little stallion with legs two yards long.
You must ride over and see him, Mr. O’Hara. He’s a
real Tarleton horse. He’s as red as Hetty’s curls.”
“And looks a lot like Betty, too,” said Camilla, and
then disappeared shrieking amid a welter of skirts
and pantalets and bobbing hats, as Betty, who did
have a long face, began pinching her.
“My ﬁllies are feeling their oats this morning,” said
Mrs. Tarleton. “They’ve been kicking up their heels
ever since we heard the news this morning about Ash-
ley and that little cousin of his from Atlanta. What’s
her name? Melanie? Bless the child, she’s a sweet lit-
tle thing, but I can never remember either her name or
her face. Our cook is the broad wife of the Wilkes but-
ler, and he was over last night with the news that the
engagement would be announced tonight and Cookie
told us this morning. The girls are all excited about
it, though I can’t see why. Everybody’s known for
years that Ashley would marry her, that is, if he didn’t
marry one of his Burr cousins from Macon. Just like
Honey Wilkes is going to marry Melanie’s brother,
Charles. Now, tell me, Mr. O’Hara, is it illegal for
the Wilkes to marry outside of their family? Because
if–”
175


PART ONE
Scarlett did not hear the rest of the laughing words.
For one short instant, it was as though the sun had
ducked behind a cool cloud, leaving the world in
shadow, taking the color out of things. The freshly
green foliage looked sickly, the dogwood pallid, and
the ﬂowering crab, so beautifully pink a moment ago,
faded and dreary. Scarlett dug her ﬁngers into the up-
holstery of the carriage and for a moment her parasol
wavered. It was one thing to know that Ashley was
engaged but it was another to hear people talk about
it so casually. Then her courage ﬂowed strongly back
and the sun came out again and the landscape glowed
anew.
She knew Ashley loved her.
That was cer-
tain. And she smiled as she thought how surprised
Mrs. Tarleton would be when no engagement was
announced that night–how surprised if there were an
elopement. And she’d tell neighbors what a sly boots
Scarlett was to sit there and listen to her talk about
Melanie when all the time she and Ashley– She dim-
pled at her own thoughts and Betty, who had been
watching sharply the effect of her mother’s words,
sank back with a small puzzled frown.
“I don’t care what you say, Mr. O’Hara,” Mrs. Tar-
leton was saying emphatically. “It’s all wrong, this
marrying of cousins. It’s bad enough for Ashley to
be marrying the Hamilton child, but for Honey to be
176


PART ONE
marrying that pale-looking Charles Hamilton–”
“Honey’ll never catch anybody else if she doesn’t
marry Charlie,” said Randa, cruel and secure in her
own popularity. “She’s never had another beau ex-
cept him. And he’s never acted very sweet on her, for
all that they’re engaged. Scarlett, you remember how
he ran after you last Christmas–”
“Don’t be a cat, Miss,” said her mother. “Cousins
shouldn’t marry, even second cousins. It weakens the
strain. It isn’t like horses. You can breed a mare to
a brother or a sire to a daughter and get good results
if you know your blood strains, but in people it just
doesn’t work. You get good lines, perhaps, but no
stamina. You–”
“Now, Ma’m, I’m taking issue with you on that! Can
you name me better people than the Wilkes? And
they’ve been intermarrying since Brian Boru was a
boy.”
“And high time they stopped it, for it’s beginning
to show. Oh, not Ashley so much, for he’s a good-
looking devil, though even he– But look at those two
washed-out-looking Wilkes girls, poor things! Nice
girls, of course, but washed out. And look at little
Miss Melanie. Thin as a rail and delicate enough for
the wind to blow away and no spirit at all. Not a no-
177


PART ONE
tion of her own. ‘No, Ma’m!’ ‘Yes, Ma’m!’ That’s
all she has to say. You see what I mean? That fam-
ily needs new blood, ﬁne vigorous blood like my red
heads or your Scarlett.
Now, don’t misunderstand
me. The Wilkes are ﬁne folks in their way, and you
know I’m fond of them all, but be frank! They are
overbred and inbred too, aren’t they? They’ll do ﬁne
on a dry track, a fast track, but mark my words, I
don’t believe the Wilkes can run on a mud track. I
believe the stamina has been bred out of them, and
when the emergency arises I don’t believe they can
run against odds. Dry-weather stock. Give me a big
horse who can run in any weather! And their inter-
marrying has made them different from other folks
around here. Always ﬁddling with the piano or stick-
ing their heads in a book. I do believe Ashley would
rather read than hunt! Yes, I honestly believe that, Mr.
O’Hara! And just look at the bones on them. Too slen-
der. They need dams and sires with strength–”
“Ah-ah-hum,” said Gerald, suddenly and guiltily
aware that the conversation, a most interesting and
entirely proper one to him, would seem quite other-
wise to Ellen. In fact, he knew she would never re-
cover should she learn that her daughters had been
exposed to so frank a conversation. But Mrs. Tarleton
was, as usual, deaf to all other ideas when pursuing
178


PART ONE
her favorite topic, breeding, whether it be horses or
humans.
“I know what I’m talking about because I had some
cousins who married each other and I give you my
word their children all turned out as popeyed as bull-
frogs, poor things. And when my family wanted me
to marry a second cousin, I bucked like a colt. I said,
‘No, Ma.
Not for me.
My children will all have
spavins and heaves.’ Well, Ma fainted when I said
that about spavins, but I stood ﬁrm and Grandma
backed me up. She knew a lot about horse breeding
too, you see, and said I was right. And she helped
me run away with Mr. Tarleton. And look at my chil-
dren! Big and healthy and not a sickly one or a runt
among them, though Boyd is only ﬁve feet ten. Now,
the Wilkes–”
“Not meaning to change the subject, Ma’m,” broke
in Gerald hurriedly, for he had noticed Carreen’s be-
wildered look and the avid curiosity on Suellen’s
face and feared lest they might ask Ellen embarrass-
ing questions which would reveal how inadequate
a chaperon he was.
Puss, he was glad to notice,
appeared to be thinking of other matters as a lady
should.
Betty Tarleton rescued him from his predicament.
179


PART ONE
“Good Heavens, Ma, do let’s get on!” she cried im-
patiently. “This sun is broiling me and I can just hear
freckles popping out on my neck.”
“Just a minute, Ma’m, before you go,” said Gerald.
“But what have you decided to do about selling us the
horses for the Troop? War may break any day now
and the boys want the matter settled. It’s a Clayton
County troop and it’s Clayton County horses we want
for them. But you, obstinate creature that you are, are
still refusing to sell us your ﬁne beasts.”
“Maybe there won’t be any war,” Mrs.
Tarleton
temporized, her mind diverted completely from the
Wilkeses’ odd marriage habits.
“Why, Ma’m, you can’t–”
“Ma,” Betty interrupted again, “can’t you and Mr.
O’Hara talk about the horses at Twelve Oaks as well
as here?”
“That’s just it, Miss Betty,” said Gerald.
“And I
won’t be keeping you but one minute by the clock.
We’ll be getting to Twelve Oaks in a little bit, and ev-
ery man there, old and young, wanting to know about
the horses. Ah, but it’s breaking me heart to see such
a ﬁne pretty lady as your mother so stingy with her
beasts! Now, where’s your patriotism, Mrs. Tarleton?
Does the Confederacy mean nothing to you at all?”
180


PART ONE
“Ma,” cried small Betsy, “Randa’s sitting on my
dress and I’m getting all wrinkled.”
“Well, push Randa off you, Betsy, and hush. Now,
listen to me, Gerald O’Hara,” she retorted, her eyes
beginning to snap. “Don’t you go throwing the Con-
federacy in my face! I reckon the Confederacy means
as much to me as it does to you, me with four boys in
the Troop and you with none. But my boys can take
care of themselves and my horses can’t. I’d gladly
give the horses free of charge if I knew they were go-
ing to be ridden by boys I know, gentlemen used to
thoroughbreds. No, I wouldn’t hesitate a minute. But
let my beauties be at the mercy of back-woodsmen
and Crackers who are used to riding mules!
No,
sir!
I’d have nightmares thinking they were being
ridden with saddle galls and not groomed properly.
Do you think I’d let ignorant fools ride my tender-
mouthed darlings and saw their mouths to pieces and
beat them till their spirits were broken? Why, I’ve got
goose ﬂesh this minute, just thinking about it! No, Mr.
O’Hara, you’re mighty nice to want my horses, but
you’d better go to Atlanta and buy some old plugs
for your clodhoppers. They’ll never know the differ-
ence.”
“Ma, can’t we please go on?” asked Camilla, joining
181


PART ONE
the impatient chorus. “You know mighty well you’re
going to end up giving them your darlings anyhow.
When Pa and the boys get through talking about the
Confederacy needing them and so on, you’ll cry and
let them go.”
Mrs. Tarleton grinned and shook the lines.
“I’ll do no such thing,” she said, touching the horses
lightly with the whip. The carriage went off swiftly.
“That’s a ﬁne woman,” said Gerald, putting on his
hat and taking his place beside his own carriage.
“Drive on, Toby. We’ll wear her down and get the
horses yet. Of course, she’s right. She’s right. If a
man’s not a gentleman, he’s no business on a horse.
The infantry is the place for him. But more’s the pity,
there’s not enough planters’ sons in this County to
make up a full troop. What did you say, Puss?”
“Pa, please ride behind us or in front of us. You
kick up such a heap of dust that we’re choking,” said
Scarlett, who felt that she could endure conversation
no longer. It distracted her from her thoughts and
she was very anxious to arrange both her thoughts
and her face in attractive lines before reaching Twelve
Oaks. Gerald obediently put spurs to his horse and
was off in a red cloud after the Tarleton carriage
where he could continue his horsy conversation.
182


THEY CROSSED THE river and the carriage mounted the
hill. Even before Twelve Oaks came into view Scar-
lett saw a haze of smoke hanging lazily in the tops of
the tall trees and smelled the mingled savory odors of
burning hickory logs and roasting pork and mutton.
The barbecue pits, which had been slowly burning
since last night, would now be long troughs of rose-
red embers, with the meats turning on spits above
them and the juices trickling down and hissing into
the coals. Scarlett knew that the fragrance carried on
the faint breeze came from the grove of great oaks in
the rear of the big house. John Wilkes always held
his barbecues there, on the gentle slope leading down
to the rose garden, a pleasant shady place and a far
pleasanter place, for instance, than that used by the
Calverts.
Mrs.
Calvert did not like barbecue food
and declared that the smells remained in the house
for days, so her guests always sweltered on a ﬂat un-
shaded spot a quarter of a mile from the house. But
John Wilkes, famed throughout the state for his hos-
pitality, really knew how to give a barbecue.
The long trestled picnic tables, covered with the
ﬁnest of the Wilkeses’ linen, always stood under the
thickest shade, with backless benches on either side;


PART ONE
and chairs, hassocks and cushions from the house
were scattered about the glade for those who did not
fancy the benches. At a distance great enough to keep
the smoke away from the guests were the long pits
where the meats cooked and the huge iron wash-pots
from which the succulent odors of barbecue sauce
and Brunswick stew ﬂoated. Mr. Wilkes always had
at least a dozen darkies busy running back and forth
with trays to serve the guests. Over behind the barns
there was always another barbecue pit, where the
house servants and the coachmen and maids of the
guests had their own feast of hoecakes and yams and
chitterlings, that dish of hog entrails so dear to negro
hearts, and, in season, watermelons enough to satiate.
As the smell of crisp fresh pork came to her, Scarlett
wrinkled her nose appreciatively, hoping that by the
time it was cooked she would feel some appetite. As
it was she was so full of food and so tightly laced that
she feared every moment she was going to belch. That
would be fatal, as only old men and very old ladies
could belch without fear of social disapproval.
They topped the rise and the white house reared its
perfect symmetry before her, tall of columns, wide of
verandas, ﬂat of roof, beautiful as a woman is beau-
tiful who is so sure of her charm that she can be gen-
184


PART ONE
erous and gracious to all. Scarlett loved Twelve Oaks
even more than Tara, for it had a stately beauty, a mel-
lowed dignity that Gerald’s house did not possess.
The wide curving driveway was full of saddle
horses and carriages and guests alighting and call-
ing greetings to friends. Grinning negroes, excited
as always at a party, were leading the animals to the
barnyard to be unharnessed and unsaddled for the
day. Swarms of children, black and white, ran yelling
about the newly green lawn, playing hopscotch and
tag and boasting how much they were going to eat.
The wide hall which ran from front to back of the
house was swarming with people, and as the O’Hara
carriage drew up at the front steps, Scarlett saw girls
in crinolines, bright as butterﬂies, going up and com-
ing down the stairs from the second ﬂoor, arms about
each other’s waists, stopping to lean over the deli-
cate handrail of the banisters, laughing and calling to
young men in the hall below them.
Through the open French windows, she caught
glimpses of the older women seated in the drawing
room, sedate in dark silks as they sat fanning them-
selves and talking of babies and sicknesses and who
had married whom and why. The Wilkes butler, Tom,
was hurrying through the halls, a silver tray in his
185


PART ONE
hands, bowing and grinning, as he offered tall glasses
to young men in fawn and gray trousers and ﬁne ruf-
ﬂed linen shirts.
The sunny front veranda was thronged with guests.
Yes, the whole County was here, thought Scarlett. The
four Tarleton boys and their father leaned against the
tall columns, the twins, Stuart and Brent, side by side
inseparable as usual, Boyd and Tom with their father,
James Tarleton. Mr. Calvert was standing close by the
side of his Yankee wife, who even after ﬁfteen years
in Georgia never seemed to quite belong anywhere.
Everyone was very polite and kind to her because he
felt sorry for her, but no one could forget that she had
compounded her initial error of birth by being the
governess of Mr. Calvert’s children. The two Calvert
boys, Raiford and Cade, were there with their dash-
ing blonde sister, Cathleen, teasing the dark-faced Joe
Fontaine and Sally Munroe, his pretty bride-to-be.
Alex and Tony Fontaine were whispering in the ears
of Dimity Munroe and sending her into gales of gig-
gles. There were families from as far as Lovejoy, ten
miles away, and from Fayetteville and Jonesboro, a
few even from Atlanta and Macon. The house seemed
bursting with the crowd, and a ceaseless babble of
talking and laughter and giggles and shrill feminine
squeaks and screams rose and fell.
186


PART ONE
On the porch steps stood John Wilkes, silver-haired,
erect, radiating the quiet charm and hospitality that
was as warm and never failing as the sun of Geor-
gia summer. Beside him Honey Wilkes, so called be-
cause she indiscriminately addressed everyone from
her father to the ﬁeld hands by that endearment, ﬁd-
geted and giggled as she called greetings to the arriv-
ing guests.
Honey’s nervously obvious desire to be attractive to
every man in sight contrasted sharply with her fa-
ther’s poise, and Scarlett had the thought that per-
haps there was something in what Mrs.
Tarleton
said, after all. Certainly the Wilkes men got the fam-
ily looks. The thick deep-gold lashes that set off the
gray eyes of John Wilkes and Ashley were sparse and
colorless in the faces of Honey and her sister India.
Honey had the odd lashless look of a rabbit, and In-
dia could be described by no other word than plain.
India was nowhere to be seen, but Scarlett knew she
probably was in the kitchen giving ﬁnal instructions
to the servants. Poor India, thought Scarlett, she’s had
so much trouble keeping house since her mother died
that she’s never had the chance to catch any beau ex-
cept Stuart Tarleton, and it certainly wasn’t my fault
if he thought I was prettier than she.
187


PART ONE
John Wilkes came down the steps to offer his arm to
Scarlett. As she descended from the carriage, she saw
Suellen smirk and knew that she must have picked
out Frank Kennedy in the crowd.
If I couldn’t catch a better beau than that old maid in
britches! she thought contemptuously, as she stepped
to the ground and smiled her thanks to John Wilkes.
Frank Kennedy was hurrying to the carriage to as-
sist Suellen, and Suellen was bridling in a way that
made Scarlett want to slap her.
Frank Kennedy
might own more land than anyone in the County and
he might have a very kind heart, but these things
counted for nothing against the fact that he was forty,
slight and nervous and had a thin ginger-colored
beard and an old-maidish, fussy way about him.
However, remembering her plan, Scarlett smothered
her contempt and cast such a ﬂashing smile of greet-
ing at him that he stopped short, his arm outheld to
Suellen and goggled at Scarlett in pleased bewilder-
ment.
Scarlett’s eyes searched the crowd for Ashley, even
while she made pleasant small talk with John Wilkes,
but he was not on the porch. There were cries of greet-
ing from a dozen voices and Stuart and Brent Tarleton
moved toward her. The Munroe girls rushed up to
188


PART ONE
exclaim over her dress, and she was speedily the cen-
ter of a circle of voices that rose higher and higher
in efforts to be heard above the din. But where was
Ashley? And Melanie and Charles? She tried not to
be obvious as she looked about and peered down the
hall into the laughing group inside.
As she chattered and laughed and cast quick glances
into the house and the yard, her eyes fell on a stranger,
standing alone in the hall, staring at her in a cool
impertinent way that brought her up sharply with a
mingled feeling of feminine pleasure that she had at-
tracted a man and an embarrassed sensation that her
dress was too low in the bosom. He looked quite old,
at least thirty-ﬁve.
He was a tall man and power-
fully built. Scarlett thought she had never seen a man
with such wide shoulders, so heavy with muscles, al-
most too heavy for gentility. When her eye caught
his, he smiled, showing animal-white teeth below a
close-clipped black mustache. He was dark of face,
swarthy as a pirate, and his eyes were as bold and
black as any pirate’s appraising a galleon to be scut-
tled or a maiden to be ravished. There was a cool reck-
lessness in his face and a cynical humor in his mouth
as he smiled at her, and Scarlett caught her breath.
She felt that she should be insulted by such a look and
was annoyed with herself because she did not feel in-
189


PART ONE
sulted. She did not know who he could be, but there
was undeniably a look of good blood in his dark face.
It showed in the thin hawk nose over the full red lips,
the high forehead and the wide-set eyes.
She dragged her eyes away from his without smil-
ing back, and he turned as someone called: “Rhett!
Rhett Butler! Come here! I want you to meet the most
hardhearted girl in Georgia.”
Rhett Butler?
The name had a familiar sound,
somehow connected with something pleasantly scan-
dalous, but her mind was on Ashley and she dis-
missed the thought.
“I must run upstairs and smooth my hair,” she told
Stuart and Brent, who were trying to get her cornered
from the crowd. “You boys wait for me and don’t run
off with any other girl or I’ll be furious.”
She could see that Stuart was going to be difﬁcult to
handle today if she ﬂirted with anyone else. He had
been drinking and wore the arrogant looking-for-a-
ﬁght expression that she knew from experience meant
trouble. She paused in the hall to speak to friends and
to greet India who was emerging from the back of the
house, her hair untidy and tiny beads of perspiration
on her forehead. Poor India! It would be bad enough
to have pale hair and eyelashes and a jutting chin that
190


PART ONE
meant a stubborn disposition, without being twenty
years old and an old maid in the bargain. She won-
dered if India resented very much her taking Stuart
away from her. Lots of people said she was still in
love with him, but then you could never tell what a
Wilkes was thinking about. If she did resent it, she
never gave any sign of it, treating Scarlett with the
same slightly aloof, kindly courtesy she had always
shown her.
Scarlett spoke pleasantly to her and started up the
wide stairs. As she did, a shy voice behind her called
her name and, turning, she saw Charles Hamilton.
He was a nice-looking boy with a riot of soft brown
curls on his white forehead and eyes as deep brown,
as clean and as gentle as a collie dog’s. He was well
turned out in mustard-colored trousers and black coat
and his pleated shirt was topped by the widest and
most fashionable of black cravats. A faint blush was
creeping over his face as she turned for he was timid
with girls. Like most shy men he greatly admired airy,
vivacious, always-at-ease girls like Scarlett. She had
never given him more than perfunctory courtesy be-
fore, and so the beaming smile of pleasure with which
she greeted him and the two hands outstretched to his
almost took his breath away.
191


PART ONE
“Why Charles Hamilton, you handsome old thing,
you! I’ll bet you came all the way down here from
Atlanta just to break my poor heart!”
Charles almost stuttered with excitement, holding
her warm little hands in his and looking into the danc-
ing green eyes. This was the way girls talked to other
boys but never to him. He never knew why but girls
always treated him like a younger brother and were
very kind, but never bothered to tease him. He had
always wanted girls to ﬂirt and frolic with him as they
did with boys much less handsome and less endowed
with this world’s goods than he. But on the few occa-
sions when this had happened he could never think
of anything to say and he suffered agonies of embar-
rassment at his dumbness. Then he lay awake at night
thinking of all the charming gallantries he might have
employed; but he rarely got a second chance, for the
girls left him alone after a trial or two.
Even with Honey, with whom he had an unspo-
ken understanding of marriage when he came into
his property next fall, he was difﬁdent and silent. At
times, he had an ungallant feeling that Honey’s co-
quetries and proprietary airs were no credit to him,
for she was so boy-crazy he imagined she would
use them on any man who gave her the opportunity.
192


PART ONE
Charles was not excited over the prospect of marry-
ing her, for she stirred in him none of the emotions of
wild romance that his beloved books had assured him
were proper for a lover. He had always yearned to be
loved by some beautiful, dashing creature full of ﬁre
and mischief.
And here was Scarlett O’Hara teasing him about
breaking her heart!
He tried to think of something to say and couldn’t,
and silently he blessed her because she kept up a
steady chatter which relieved him of any necessity for
conversation. It was too good to be true.
“Now, you wait right here till I come back, for I want
to eat barbecue with you. And don’t you go off phi-
landering with those other girls, because I’m mighty
jealous,” came the incredible words from red lips with
a dimple on each side; and briskly black lashes swept
demurely over green eyes.
“I won’t,” he ﬁnally managed to breathe, never
dreaming that she was thinking he looked like a calf
waiting for the butcher.
Tapping him lightly on the arm with her folded fan,
she turned to start up the stairs and her eyes again fell
on the man called Rhett Butler who stood alone a few
feet away from Charles. Evidently he had overheard
193


PART ONE
the whole conversation, for he grinned up at her as
maliciously as a tomcat, and again his eyes went over
her, in a gaze totally devoid of the deference she was
accustomed to.
“God’s nightgown!” said Scarlett to herself in indig-
nation, using Gerald’s favorite oath. “He looks as if–
as if he knew what I looked like without my shimmy,”
and, tossing her head, she went up the steps.
In the bedroom where the wraps were laid, she
found Cathleen Calvert preening before the mirror
and biting her lips to make them look redder. There
were fresh roses in her sash that matched her cheeks,
and her cornﬂower-blue eyes were dancing with ex-
citement.
“Cathleen,” said Scarlett, trying to pull the corsage
of her dress higher, “who is that nasty man down-
stairs named Butler?”
“My dear, don’t you know?” whispered Cathleen
excitedly, a weather eye on the next room where Dil-
cey and the Wilkes girls’ mammy were gossiping. “I
can’t imagine how Mr. Wilkes must feel having him
here, but he was visiting Mr. Kennedy in Jonesboro–
something about buying cotton–and, of course, Mr.
Kennedy had to bring him along with him.
He
couldn’t just go off and leave him.”
194


PART ONE
“What is the matter with him?”
“My dear, he isn’t received!”
“Not really!”
“No.”
Scarlett digested this in silence, for she had never be-
fore been under the same roof with anyone who was
not received. It was very exciting.
“What did he do?”
“Oh, Scarlett, he has the most terrible reputation.
His name is Rhett Butler and he’s from Charleston
and his folks are some of the nicest people there, but
they won’t even speak to him. Caro Rhett told me
about him last summer. He isn’t any kin to her family,
but she knows all about him, everybody does. He was
expelled from West Point. Imagine! And for things
too bad for Caro to know. And then there was that
business about the girl he didn’t marry.”
“Do tell me!”
“Darling, don’t you know anything? Caro told me
all about it last summer and her mama would die if
she thought Caro even knew about it. Well, this Mr.
Butler took a Charleston girl out buggy riding. I never
did know who she was, but I’ve got my suspicions.
She couldn’t have been very nice or she wouldn’t
195


PART ONE
have gone out with him in the late afternoon with-
out a chaperon. And, my dear, they stayed out nearly
all night and walked home ﬁnally, saying the horse
had run away and smashed the buggy and they had
gotten lost in the woods. And guess what–”
“I can’t guess. Tell me,” said Scarlett enthusiasti-
cally, hoping for the worst.
“He refused to marry her the next day!”
“Oh,” said Scarlett, her hopes dashed.
“He said he hadn’t–er–done anything to her and he
didn’t see why he should marry her. And, of course,
her brother called him out, and Mr. Butler said he’d
rather be shot than marry a stupid fool. And so they
fought a duel and Mr. Butler shot the girl’s brother
and he died, and Mr. Butler had to leave Charleston
and now nobody receives him,” ﬁnished Cathleen tri-
umphantly, and just in time, for Dilcey came back into
the room to oversee the toilet of her charge.
“Did she have a baby?” whispered Scarlett in Cath-
leen’s ear.
Cathleen shook her head violently. “But she was ru-
ined just the same,” she hissed back.
I wish I had gotten Ashley to compromise me,
thought Scarlett suddenly. He’d be too much of a gen-
tleman not to marry me. But somehow, unbidden, she
196


PART ONE
had a feeling of respect for Rhett Butler for refusing to
marry a girl who was a fool.
Scarlett sat on a high rosewood ottoman, under
the shade of a huge oak in the rear of the house,
her ﬂounces and rufﬂes billowing about her and two
inches of green morocco slippers–all that a lady could
show and still remain a lady–peeping from beneath
them. She had scarcely touched plate in her hands
and seven cavaliers about her.
The barbecue had
reached its peak and the warm air was full of laughter
and talk, the click of silver on porcelain and the rich
heavy smells of roasting meats and redolent gravies.
Occasionally when the slight breeze veered, puffs of
smoke from the long barbecue pits ﬂoated over the
crowd and were greeted with squeals of mock dismay
from the ladies and violent ﬂappings of palmetto fans.
Most of the young ladies were seated with partners
on the long benches that faced the tables, but Scarlett,
realizing that a girl has only two sides and only one
man can sit on each of these sides, had elected to sit
apart so she could gather about her as many men as
possible.
Under the arbor sat the married women, their dark
dresses decorous notes in the surrounding color and
gaiety.
Matrons, regardless of their ages, always
197


PART ONE
grouped together apart from the bright-eyed girls,
beaux and laughter, for there were no married belles
in the South.
From Grandma Fontaine, who was
belching frankly with the privilege of her age, to
seventeen-year-old Alice Munroe, struggling against
the nausea of a ﬁrst pregnancy, they had their heads
together in the endless genealogical and obstetrical
discussions that made such gatherings very pleasant
and instructive affairs.
Casting contemptuous glances at them, Scarlett
thought that they looked like a clump of fat crows.
Married women never had any fun. It did not occur
to her that if she married Ashley she would automat-
ically be relegated to arbors and front parlors with
staid matrons in dull silks, as staid and dull as they
and not a part of the fun and frolicking. Like most
girls, her imagination carried her just as far as the al-
tar and no further. Besides, she was too unhappy now
to pursue an abstraction.
She dropped her eyes to her plate and nibbled dain-
tily on a beaten biscuit with an elegance and an utter
lack of appetite that would have won Mammy’s ap-
proval. For all that she had a superﬂuity of beaux,
she had never been more miserable in her life.
In
some way that she could not understand, her plans of
198


PART ONE
last night had failed utterly so far as Ashley was con-
cerned. She had attracted other beaux by the dozens,
but not Ashley, and all the fears of yesterday after-
noon were sweeping back upon her, making her heart
beat fast and then slow, and color ﬂame and whiten in
her cheeks.
Ashley had made no attempt to join the circle about
her, in fact she had not had a word alone with him
since arriving, or even spoken to him since their ﬁrst
greeting. He had come forward to welcome her when
she came into the back garden, but Melanie had been
on his arm then, Melanie who hardly came up to his
shoulder.
She was a tiny, frailly built girl, who gave the ap-
pearance of a child masquerading in her mother’s
enormous hoop skirts–an illusion that was height-
ened by the shy, almost frightened look in her too
large brown eyes. She had a cloud of curly dark hair
which was so sternly repressed beneath its net that
no vagrant tendrils escaped, and this dark mass, with
its long widow’s peak, accentuated the heart shape of
her face. Too wide across the cheek bones, too pointed
at the chin, it was a sweet, timid face but a plain face,
and she had no feminine tricks of allure to make ob-
servers forget its plainness. She looked–and was–as
199


PART ONE
simple as earth, as good as bread, as transparent as
spring water. But for all her plainness of feature and
smallness of stature, there was a sedate dignity about
her movements that was oddly touching and far older
than her seventeen years.
Her gray organdie dress, with its cherry-colored
satin sash, disguised with its billows and rufﬂes how
childishly undeveloped her body was, and the yellow
hat with long cherry streamers made her creamy skin
glow. Her heavy earbobs with their long gold fringe
hung down from loops of tidily netted hair, swinging
close to her brown eyes, eyes that had the still gleam
of a forest pool in winter when brown leaves shine up
through quiet water.
She had smiled with timid liking when she greeted
Scarlett and told her how pretty her green dress
was, and Scarlett had been hard put to be even civil
in reply, so violently did she want to speak alone
with Ashley. Since then, Ashley had sat on a stool
at Melanie’s feet, apart from the other guests, and
talked quietly with her, smiling the slow drowsy
smile that Scarlett loved. What made matters worse
was that under his smile a little sparkle had come into
Melanie’s eyes, so that even Scarlett had to admit that
she looked almost pretty. As Melanie looked at Ash-
200


PART ONE
ley, her plain face lit up as with an inner ﬁre, for if
ever a loving heart showed itself upon a face, it was
showing now on Melanie Hamilton’s.
Scarlett tried to keep her eyes from these two but
could not, and after each glance she redoubled her
gaiety with her cavaliers, laughing, saying daring
things, teasing, tossing her head at their compliments
until her earrings danced. She said “ﬁddle-dee-dee”
many times, declared that the truth wasn’t in any of
them, and vowed that she’d never believe anything
any man told her. But Ashley did not seem to notice
her at all. He only looked up at Melanie and talked
on, and Melanie looked down at him with an expres-
sion that radiated the fact that she belonged to him.
So, Scarlett was miserable.
To the outward eye, never had a girl less cause to
be miserable. She was undoubtedly the belle of the
barbecue, the center of attention. The furore she was
causing among the men, coupled with the heart burn-
ings of the other girls, would have pleased her enor-
mously at any other time.
Charles Hamilton, emboldened by her notice, was
ﬁrmly planted on her right, refusing to be dislodged
by the combined efforts of the Tarleton twins. He held
her fan in one hand and his untouched plate of barbe-
201


PART ONE
cue in the other and stubbornly refused to meet the
eyes of Honey, who seemed on the verge of an out-
burst of tears. Cade lounged gracefully on her left,
plucking at her skirt to attract her attention and star-
ing up with smoldering eyes at Stuart. Already the
air was electric between him and the twins and rude
words had passed. Frank Kennedy fussed about like
a hen with one chick, running back and forth from
the shade of the oak to the tables to fetch dainties to
tempt Scarlett, as if there were not a dozen servants
there for that purpose. As a result, Suellen’s sullen
resentment had passed beyond the point of ladylike
concealment and she glowered at Scarlett. Small Car-
reen could have cried because, for all Scarlett’s en-
couraging words that morning, Brent had done no
more than say “Hello, Sis” and jerk her hair ribbon
before turning his full attention to Scarlett. Usually
he was so kind and treated her with a careless def-
erence that made her feel grown up, and Carreen se-
cretly dreamed of the day when she would put her
hair up and her skirts down and receive him as a real
beau. And now it seemed that Scarlett had him. The
Munroe girls were concealing their chagrin at the de-
fection of the swarthy Fontaine boys, but they were
annoyed at the way Tony and Alex stood about the
circle, jockeying for a position near Scarlett should
202


PART ONE
any of the others arise from their places.
They telegraphed their disapproval of Scarlett’s con-
duct to Hetty Tarleton by delicately raised eyebrows.
“Fast” was the only word for Scarlett.
Simultane-
ously, the three young ladies raised lacy parasols, said
they had had quite enough to eat, thank you, and, lay-
ing light ﬁngers on the arms of the men nearest them,
clamored sweetly to see the rose garden, the spring
and the summerhouse. This strategic retreat in good
order was not lost on a woman present or observed
by a man.
Scarlett giggled as she saw three men dragged out
of the line of her charms to investigate landmarks fa-
miliar to the girls from childhood, and cut her eye
sharply to see if Ashley had taken note. But he was
playing with the ends of Melanie’s sash and smiling
up at her. Pain twisted Scarlett’s heart. She felt that
she could claw Melanie’s ivory skin till the blood ran
and take pleasure in doing it.
As her eyes wandered from Melanie, she caught the
gaze of Rhett Butler, who was not mixing with the
crowd but standing apart talking to John Wilkes. He
had been watching her and when she looked at him
he laughed outright. Scarlett had an uneasy feeling
that this man who was not received was the only one
203


PART ONE
present who knew what lay behind her wild gaiety
and that it was affording him sardonic amusement.
She could have clawed him with pleasure too.
“If I can just live through this barbecue till this after-
noon,” she thought, “all the girls will go upstairs to
take naps to be fresh for tonight and I’ll stay down-
stairs and get to talk to Ashley. Surely he must have
noticed how popular I am.” She soothed her heart
with another hope: “Of course, he has to be attentive
to Melanie because, after all, she is his cousin and she
isn’t popular at all, and if he didn’t look out for her
she’d just be a wallﬂower.”
She took new courage at this thought and redoubled
her efforts in the direction of Charles, whose brown
eyes glowed down eagerly at her. It was a wonder-
ful day for Charles, a dream day, and he had fallen
in love with Scarlett with no effort at all. Before this
new emotion, Honey receded into a dim haze. Honey
was a shrill- voiced sparrow and Scarlett a gleaming
hummingbird. She teased him and favored him and
asked him questions and answered them herself, so
that he appeared very clever without having to say
a word. The other boys were puzzled and annoyed
by her obvious interest in him, for they knew Charles
was too shy to hitch two consecutive words together,
204


PART ONE
and politeness was being severely strained to conceal
their growing rage. Everyone was smoldering, and it
would have been a positive triumph for Scarlett, ex-
cept for Ashley.
When the last forkful of pork and chicken and mut-
ton had been eaten, Scarlett hoped the time had come
when India would rise and suggest that the ladies re-
tire to the house. It was two o’clock and the sun was
warm overhead, but India, wearied with the three-
day preparations for the barbecue, was only too glad
to remain sitting beneath the arbor, shouting remarks
to a deaf old gentleman from Fayetteville.
A lazy somnolence descended on the crowd. The
negroes idled about, clearing the long tables on which
the food had been laid. The laughter and talking be-
came less animated and groups here and there fell
silent. All were waiting for their hostess to signal the
end of the morning’s festivities. Palmetto fans were
wagging more slowly, and several gentlemen were
nodding from the heat and overloaded stomachs. The
barbecue was over and all were content to take their
ease while sun was at its height.
In this interval between the morning party and the
evening’s ball, they seemed a placid, peaceful lot.
Only the young men retained the restless energy
205


PART ONE
which had ﬁlled the whole throng a short while be-
fore. Moving from group to group, drawling in their
soft voices, they were as handsome as blooded stal-
lions and as dangerous. The languor of midday had
taken hold of the gathering, but underneath lurked
tempers that could rise to killing heights in a sec-
ond and ﬂare out as quickly. Men and women, they
were beautiful and wild, all a little violent under their
pleasant ways and only a little tamed.
Some time dragged by while the sun grew hotter,
and Scarlett and others looked again toward India.
Conversation was dying out when, in the lull, every-
one in the grove heard Gerald’s voice raised in furious
accents. Standing some little distance away from the
barbecue tables, he was at the peak of an argument
with John Wilkes.
“God’s nightgown, man! Pray for a peaceable settle-
ment with the Yankees after we’ve ﬁred on the rascals
at Fort Sumter? Peaceable? The South should show
by arms that she cannot be insulted and that she is
not leaving the Union by the Union’s kindness but by
her own strength!”
“Oh, my God!”
thought Scarlett.
“He’s done it!
Now, we’ll all sit here till midnight.”
In an instant, the somnolence had ﬂed from the
206


PART ONE
lounging throng and something electric went snap-
ping through the air. The men sprang from benches
and chairs, arms in wide gestures, voices clashing
for the right to be heard above other voices. There
had been no talk of politics or impending war all
during the morning, because of Mr. Wilkes’ request
that the ladies should not be bored. But now Gerald
had bawled the words “Fort Sumter,” and every man
present forgot his host’s admonition.
“Of course we’ll ﬁght–” “Yankee thieves–” “We
could lick them in a month–” “Why, one Southerner
can lick twenty Yankees–” “Teach them a lesson they
won’t soon forget–” “Peaceably? They won’t let us go
in peace–” “No, look how Mr. Lincoln insulted our
Commissioners!”
“Yes, kept them hanging around
for weeks– swearing he’d have Sumter evacuated!”
“They want war; we’ll make them sick of war–” And
above all the voices, Gerald’s boomed. All Scarlett
could hear was “States’ rights, by God!” shouted over
and over. Gerald was having an excellent time, but
not his daughter.
Secession, war–these words long since had become
acutely boring to Scarlett from much repetition, but
now she hated the sound of them, for they meant that
the men would stand there for hours haranguing one
207


PART ONE
another and she would have no chance to corner Ash-
ley. Of course there would be no war and the men all
knew it. They just loved to talk and hear themselves
talk.
Charles Hamilton had not risen with the others and,
ﬁnding himself comparatively alone with Scarlett, he
leaned closer and, with the daring born of new love,
whispered a confession.
“Miss O’Hara–I–I had already decided that if we did
ﬁght, I’d go over to South Carolina and join a troop
there. It’s said that Mr. Wade Hampton is organizing
a cavalry troop, and of course I would want to go with
him. He’s a splendid person and was my father’s best
friend.”
Scarlett thought, “What am I supposed to do–give
three cheers?” for Charles’ expression showed that he
was baring his heart’s secrets to her. She could think
of nothing to say and so merely looked at him, won-
dering why men were such fools as to think women
interested in such matters. He took her expression
to mean stunned approbation and went on rapidly,
daringly–
“If
I
went–would–would
you
be
sorry,
Miss
O’Hara?”
“I should cry into my pillow every night,” said Scar-
208


PART ONE
lett, meaning to be ﬂippant, but he took the state-
ment at face value and went red with pleasure. Her
hand was concealed in the folds of her dress and he
cautiously wormed his hand to it and squeezed it,
overwhelmed at his own boldness and at her acqui-
escence.
“Would you pray for me?”
“What a fool!” thought Scarlett bitterly, casting a
surreptitious glance about her in the hope of being
rescued from the conversation.
“Would you?”
“Oh–yes, indeed, Mr. Hamilton. Three Rosaries a
night, at least!”
Charles gave a swift look about him, drew in his
breath, stiffened the muscles of his stomach. They
were practically alone and he might never get an-
other such opportunity.
And, even given another
such Godsent occasion, his courage might fail him.
“Miss O’Hara–I must tell you something. I–I love
you!”
“Um?” said Scarlett absently, trying to peer through
the crowd of arguing men to where Ashley still sat
talking at Melanie’s feet.
“Yes!” whispered Charles, in a rapture that she had
209


PART ONE
neither laughed, screamed nor fainted, as he had al-
ways imagined young girls did under such circum-
stances. “I love you! You are the most–the most–” and
he found his tongue for the ﬁrst time in his life. “The
most beautiful girl I’ve ever known and the sweetest
and the kindest, and you have the dearest ways and
I love you with all my heart. I cannot hope that you
could love anyone like me but, my dear Miss O’Hara,
if you can give me any encouragement, I will do any-
thing in the world to make you love me. I will–”
Charles stopped, for he couldn’t think of anything
difﬁcult enough of accomplishment to really prove to
Scarlett the depth of his feeling, so he said simply: “I
want to marry you.”
Scarlett came back to earth with a jerk, at the sound
of the word “marry.” She had been thinking of mar-
riage and of Ashley, and she looked at Charles with
poorly concealed irritation. Why must this calf-like
fool intrude his feelings on this particular day when
she was so worried she was about to lose her mind?
She looked into the pleading brown eyes and she saw
none of the beauty of a shy boy’s ﬁrst love, of the
adoration of an ideal come true or the wild happiness
and tenderness that were sweeping through him like
a ﬂame. Scarlett was used to men asking her to marry
210


PART ONE
them, men much more attractive than Charles Hamil-
ton, and men who had more ﬁnesse than to propose
at a barbecue when she had more important matters
on her mind. She only saw a boy of twenty, red as a
beet and looking very silly. She wished that she could
tell him how silly he looked. But automatically, the
words Ellen had taught her to say in such emergen-
cies rose to her lips and casting down her eyes, from
force of long habit, she murmured: “Mr. Hamilton, I
am not unaware of the honor you have bestowed on
me in wanting me to become your wife, but this is all
so sudden that I do not know what to say.”
That was a neat way of smoothing a man’s vanity
and yet keeping him on the string, and Charles rose
to it as though such bait were new and he the ﬁrst to
swallow it.
“I would wait forever! I wouldn’t want you unless
you were quite sure. Please, Miss O’Hara, tell me that
I may hope!”
“Um,” said Scarlett, her sharp eyes noting that Ash-
ley, who had not risen to take part in the war talk, was
smiling up at Melanie. If this fool who was grappling
for her hand would only keep quiet for a moment,
perhaps she could hear what they were saying. She
must hear what they said. What did Melanie say to
211


PART ONE
him that brought that look of interest to his eyes?
Charles’ words blurred the voices she strained to
hear.
“Oh, hush!” she hissed at him, pinching his hand
and not even looking at him.
Startled, at ﬁrst abashed, Charles blushed at the re-
buff and then, seeing how her eyes were fastened
on his sister, he smiled. Scarlett was afraid someone
might hear his words. She was naturally embarrassed
and shy, and in agony lest they be overheard. Charles
felt a surge of masculinity such as he had never expe-
rienced, for this was the ﬁrst time in his life that he
had ever embarrassed any girl. The thrill was intox-
icating. He arranged his face in what he fancied was
an expression of careless unconcern and cautiously
returned Scarlett’s pinch to show that he was man of
the world enough to understand and accept her re-
proof.
She did not even feel his pinch, for she could
hear clearly the sweet voice that was Melanie’s chief
charm: “I fear I cannot agree with you about Mr.
Thackeray’s works. He is a cynic. I fear he is not the
gentleman Mr. Dickens is.”
What a silly thing to say to a man, thought Scar-
lett, ready to giggle with relief. Why, she’s no more
212


PART ONE
than a bluestocking and everyone knows what men
think of bluestockings. . . . The way to get a man
interested and to hold his interest was to talk about
him, and then gradually lead the conversation around
to yourself– and keep it there. Scarlett would have
felt some cause for alarm if Melanie had been say-
ing: “How wonderful you are!”
or “How do you
ever think of such things? My little ole brain would
bust if I even tried to think about them!” But here she
was, with a man at her feet, talking as seriously as if
she were in church. The prospect looked brighter to
Scarlett, so bright in fact that she turned beaming eyes
on Charles and smiled from pure joy. Enraptured at
this evidence of her affection, he grabbed up her fan
and plied it so enthusiastically her hair began to blow
about untidily.
“Ashley, you have not favored us with your opin-
ion,” said Jim Tarleton, turning from the group of
shouting men, and with an apology Ashley excused
himself and rose. There was no one there so hand-
some, thought Scarlett, as she marked how grace-
ful was his negligent pose and how the sun gleamed
on his gold hair and mustache. Even the older men
stopped to listen to his words.
“Why, gentlemen, if Georgia ﬁghts, I’ll go with her.
213


PART ONE
Why else would I have joined the Troop?” he said.
His gray eyes opened wide and their drowsiness dis-
appeared in an intensity that Scarlett had never seen
before. “But, like Father, I hope the Yankees will let
us go in peace and that there will be no ﬁghting–” He
held up his hand with a smile, as a babel of voices
from the Fontaine and Tarleton boys began. “Yes, yes,
I know we’ve been insulted and lied to–but if we’d
been in the Yankees’ shoes and they were trying to
leave the Union, how would we have acted? Pretty
much the same. We wouldn’t have liked it.”
“There he goes again,” thought Scarlett. “Always
putting himself in the other fellow’s shoes.” To her,
there was never but one fair side to an argument.
Sometimes, there was no understanding Ashley.
“Let’s don’t be too hot headed and let’s don’t have
any war. Most of the misery of the world has been
caused by wars. And when the wars were over, no
one ever knew what they were all about.”
Scarlett sniffed. Lucky for Ashley that he had an
unassailable reputation for courage, or else there’d be
trouble. As she thought this, the clamor of dissenting
voices rose up about Ashley, indignant, ﬁery.
Under the arbor, the deaf old gentleman from Fayet-
teville punched India.
214


PART ONE
“What’s it all about? What are they saying?”
“War!” shouted India, cupping her hand to his ear.
“They want to ﬁght the Yankees!”
“War, is it?” he cried, fumbling about him for his
cane and heaving himself out of his chair with more
energy than he had shown in years.
“I’ll tell ‘um
about war. I’ve been there.” It was not often that Mr.
McRae had the opportunity to talk about war, the way
his women folks shushed him.
He stumped rapidly to the group, waving his cane
and shouting and, because he could not hear the
voices about him, he soon had undisputed possession
of the ﬁeld.
“You ﬁre-eating young bucks, listen to me.
You
don’t want to ﬁght. I fought and I know. Went out
in the Seminole War and was a big enough fool to go
to the Mexican War, too. You all don’t know what
war is. You think it’s riding a pretty horse and hav-
ing the girls throw ﬂowers at you and coming home a
hero. Well, it ain’t. No, sir! It’s going hungry, and get-
ting the measles and pneumonia from sleeping in the
wet. And if it ain’t measles and pneumonia, it’s your
bowels. Yes sir, what war does to a man’s bowels–
dysentery and things like that–”
The ladies were pink with blushes. Mr. McRae was
215


PART ONE
a reminder of a cruder era, like Grandma Fontaine
and her embarrassingly loud belches, an era everyone
would like to forget.
“Run get your grandpa,” hissed one of the old gen-
tleman’s daughters to a young girl standing near by.
“I declare,” she whispered to the ﬂuttering matrons
about her, “he gets worse every day. Would you be-
lieve it, this very morning he said to Mary–and she’s
only sixteen: ‘Now, Missy . . .”’ And the voice went
off into a whisper as the granddaughter slipped out
to try to induce Mr. McRae to return to his seat in the
shade.
Of all the group that milled about under the trees,
girls smiling excitedly, men talking impassionedly,
there was only one who seemed calm. Scarlett’s eyes
turned to Rhett Butler, who leaned against a tree,
his hands shoved deep in his trouser pockets.
He
stood alone, since Mr. Wilkes had left his side, and
had uttered no word as the conversation grew hotter.
The red lips under the close-clipped black mustache
curled down and there was a glint of amused con-
tempt in his black eyes–contempt, as if he listened to
the braggings of children. A very disagreeable smile,
Scarlett thought. He listened quietly until Stuart Tar-
leton, his red hair tousled and his eyes gleaming, re-
216


PART ONE
peated: “Why, we could lick them in a month! Gentle-
men always ﬁght better than rabble. A month– why,
one battle–”
“Gentlemen,” said Rhett Butler, in a ﬂat drawl that
bespoke his Charleston birth, not moving from his po-
sition against the tree or taking his hands from his
pockets, “may I say a word?”
There was contempt in his manner as in his eyes,
contempt overlaid with an air of courtesy that some-
how burlesqued their own manners.
The group turned toward him and accorded him the
politeness always due an outsider.
“Has any one of you gentlemen ever thought that
there’s not a cannon factory south of the Mason-
Dixon Line? Or how few iron foundries there are in
the South? Or woolen mills or cotton factories or tan-
neries? Have you thought that we would not have
a single warship and that the Yankee ﬂeet could bot-
tle up our harbors in a week, so that we could not
sell our cotton abroad? But–of course–you gentlemen
have thought of these things.”
“Why, he means the boys are a passel of fools!”
thought Scarlett indignantly, the hot blood coming to
her cheeks.
Evidently, she was not the only one to whom this
217


PART ONE
idea occurred, for several of the boys were begin-
ning to stick out their chins. John Wilkes casually but
swiftly came back to his place beside the speaker, as if
to impress on all present that this man was his guest
and that, moreover, there were ladies present.
“The trouble with most of us Southerners,” con-
tinued Rhett Butler, “is that we either don’t travel
enough or we don’t proﬁt enough by our travels.
Now, of course, all you gentlemen are well traveled.
But what have you seen? Europe and New York and
Philadelphia and, of course, the ladies have been to
Saratoga” (he bowed slightly to the group under the
arbor). “You’ve seen the hotels and the museums and
the balls and the gambling houses. And you’ve come
home believing that there’s no place like the South.
As for me, I was Charleston born, but I have spent the
last few years in the North.” His white teeth showed
in a grin, as though he realized that everyone present
knew just why he no longer lived in Charleston, and
cared not at all if they did know. “I have seen many
things that you all have not seen. The thousands of
immigrants who’d be glad to ﬁght for the Yankees for
food and a few dollars, the factories, the foundries,
the shipyards, the iron and coal mines–all the things
we haven’t got. Why, all we have is cotton and slaves
and arrogance. They’d lick us in a month.”
218


PART ONE
For a tense moment, there was silence. Rhett But-
ler removed a ﬁne linen handkerchief from his coat
pocket and idly ﬂicked dust from his sleeve. Then
an ominous murmuring arose in the crowd and from
under the arbor came a humming as unmistakable as
that of a hive of newly disturbed bees. Even while
she felt the hot blood of wrath still in her cheeks,
something in Scarlett’s practical mind prompted the
thought that what this man said was right, and it
sounded like common sense. Why, she’d never even
seen a factory, or known anyone who had seen a fac-
tory. But, even if it were true, he was no gentleman
to make such a statement–and at a party, too, where
everyone was having a good time.
Stuart Tarleton, brows lowering, came forward with
Brent close at his heels. Of course, the Tarleton twins
had nice manners and they wouldn’t make a scene
at a barbecue, even though tremendously provoked.
Just the same, all the ladies felt pleasantly excited, for
it was so seldom that they actually saw a scene or a
quarrel. Usually they had to hear of it third-hand.
“Sir,” said Stuart heavily, “what do you mean?”
Rhett looked at him with polite but mocking eyes.
“I mean,” he answered, “what Napoleon–perhaps
you’ve heard of him?–remarked once, ‘God is on the
219


PART ONE
side of the strongest battalion!”’ and, turning to John
Wilkes, he said with courtesy that was unfeigned:
“You promised to show me your library, sir. Would
it be too great a favor to ask to see it now? I fear I
must go back to Jonesboro early this afternoon where
a bit of business calls me.”
He swung about, facing the crowd, clicked his heels
together and bowed like a dancing master, a bow that
was graceful for so powerful a man, and as full of im-
pertinence as a slap in the face. Then he walked across
the lawn with John Wilkes, his black head in the air,
and the sound of his discomforting laughter ﬂoated
back to the group about the tables.
There was a startled silence and then the buzzing
broke out again. India rose tiredly from her seat be-
neath the arbor and went toward the angry Stuart Tar-
leton. Scarlett could not hear what she said, but the
look in her eyes as she gazed up into his lowering face
gave Scarlett something like a twinge of conscience.
It was the same look of belonging that Melanie wore
when she looked at Ashley, only Stuart did not see it.
So India did love him. Scarlett thought for an instant
that if she had not ﬂirted so blatantly with Stuart at
that political speaking a year ago, he might have mar-
ried India long ere this. But then the twinge passed
220


PART ONE
with the comforting thought that it wasn’t her fault if
other girls couldn’t keep their men.
Finally Stuart smiled down at India, an unwilling
smile, and nodded his head. Probably India had been
pleading with him not to follow Mr. Butler and make
trouble. A polite tumult broke out under the trees as
the guests arose, shaking crumbs from laps. The mar-
ried women called to nurses and small children and
gathered their broods together to take their departure,
and groups of girls started off, laughing and talking,
toward the house to exchange gossip in the upstairs
bedrooms and to take their naps.
All the ladies except Mrs. Tarleton moved out of the
back yard, leaving the shade of oaks and arbor to the
men. She was detained by Gerald, Mr. Calvert and
the others who wanted an answer from her about the
horses for the Troop.
Ashley strolled over to where Scarlett and Charles
sat, a thoughtful and amused smile on his face.
“Arrogant devil, isn’t he?” he observed, looking af-
ter Butler. “He looks like one of the Borgias.”
Scarlett thought quickly but could remember no
family in the County or Atlanta or Savannah by that
name.
“I don’t know them. Is he kin to them? Who are
221


PART ONE
they?”
An odd look came over Charles’ face, incredulity
and shame struggling with love. Love triumphed as
he realized that it was enough for a girl to be sweet
and gentle and beautiful, without having an educa-
tion to hamper her charms, and he made swift an-
swer: “The Borgias were Italians.”
“Oh,” said Scarlett, losing interest, “foreigners.”
She turned her prettiest smile on Ashley, but for
some reason he was not looking at her. He was look-
ing at Charles, and there was understanding in his
face and a little pity.
Scarlett stood on the landing and peered cautiously
over the banisters into the hall below. It was empty.
From the bedrooms on the ﬂoor above came an un-
ending hum of low voices, rising and falling, punctu-
ated with squeaks of laughter and, “Now, you didn’t,
really!” and “What did he say then?” On the beds
and couches of the six great bedrooms, the girls were
resting, their dresses off, their stays loosed, their hair
ﬂowing down their backs.
Afternoon naps were a
custom of the country and never were they so nec-
essary as on the all-day parties, beginning early in the
morning and culminating in a ball. For half an hour,
the girls would chatter and laugh, and then servants
222


PART ONE
would pull the shutters and in the warm half-gloom
the talk would die to whispers and ﬁnally expire in
silence broken only by soft regular breathing.
Scarlett had made certain that Melanie was lying
down on the bed with Honey and Hetty Tarleton be-
fore she slipped into the hall and started down the
stairs. From the window on the landing, she could
see the group of men sitting under the arbor, drink-
ing from tall glasses, and she knew they would re-
main there until late afternoon. Her eyes searched the
group but Ashley was not among them. Then she lis-
tened and she heard his voice. As she had hoped, he
was still in the front driveway bidding good-by to de-
parting matrons and children.
Her heart in her throat, she went swiftly down the
stairs. What if she should meet Mr. Wilkes? What
excuse could she give for prowling about the house
when all the other girls were getting their beauty
naps? Well, that had to be risked.
As she reached the bottom step, she heard the ser-
vants moving about in the dining room under the but-
ler’s orders, lifting out the table and chairs in prepa-
ration for the dancing. Across the wide hall was the
open door of the library and she sped into it noise-
lessly. She could wait there until Ashley ﬁnished his
223


PART ONE
adieux and then call to him when he came into the
house.
The library was in semidarkness, for the blinds had
been drawn against the sun.
The dim room with
towering walls completely ﬁlled with dark books de-
pressed her. It was not the place which she would
have chosen for a tryst such as she hoped this one
would be. Large numbers of books always depressed
her, as did people who liked to read large numbers of
books. That is–all people except Ashley. The heavy
furniture rose up at her in the half- light, high-backed
chairs with deep seats and wide arms, made for the
tall Wilkes men, squatty soft chairs of velvet with
velvet hassocks before them for the girls. Far across
the long room before the hearth, the seven-foot sofa,
Ashley’s favorite seat, reared its high back, like some
huge sleeping animal.
She closed the door except for a crack and tried to
make her heart beat more slowly. She tried to remem-
ber just exactly what she had planned last night to
say to Ashley, but she couldn’t recall anything. Had
she thought up something and forgotten it–or had she
only planned that Ashley should say something to
her? She couldn’t remember, and a sudden cold fright
fell upon her. If her heart would only stop pounding
224


PART ONE
in her ears, perhaps she could think of what to say.
But the quick thudding only increased as she heard
him call a ﬁnal farewell and walk into the front hall.
All she could think of was that she loved him–
everything about him, from the proud lift of his gold
head to his slender dark boots, loved his laughter
even when it mystiﬁed her, loved his bewildering si-
lences. Oh, if only he would walk in on her now and
take her in his arms, so she would be spared the need
of saying anything. He must love her–“Perhaps if I
prayed–” She squeezed her eyes tightly and began
gabbling to herself “Hail Mary, full of grace–”
“Why, Scarlett!”
said Ashley’s voice, breaking in
through the roaring in her ears and throwing her into
utter confusion. He stood in the hall peering at her
through the partly opened door, a quizzical smile on
his face.
“Who are you hiding from–Charles or the Tar-
letons?”
She gulped. So he had noticed how the men had
swarmed about her! How unutterably dear he was
standing there with his eyes twinkling, all unaware
of her excitement. She could not speak, but she put
out a hand and drew him into the room. He entered,
puzzled but interested. There was a tenseness about
225


PART ONE
her, a glow in her eyes that he had never seen before,
and even in the dim light he could see the rosy ﬂush
on her cheeks. Automatically he closed the door be-
hind him and took her hand.
“What is it?” he said, almost in a whisper.
At the touch of his hand, she began to tremble. It
was going to happen now, just as she had dreamed
it. A thousand incoherent thoughts shot through her
mind, and she could not catch a single one to mold
into a word. She could only shake and look up into
his face. Why didn’t he speak?
“What is it?” he repeated. “A secret to tell me?”
Suddenly she found her tongue and just as sud-
denly all the years of Ellen’s teachings fell away, and
the forthright Irish blood of Gerald spoke from his
daughter’s lips.
“Yes–a secret. I love you.”
For an instance there was a silence so acute it
seemed that neither of them even breathed. Then the
trembling fell away from her, as happiness and pride
surged through her. Why hadn’t she done this before?
How much simpler than all the ladylike maneuver-
ings she had been taught. And then her eyes sought
his.
There was a look of consternation in them, of in-
226


PART ONE
credulity and something more–what was it? Yes, Ger-
ald had looked that way the day his pet hunter had
broken his leg and he had had to shoot him. Why did
she have to think of that now? Such a silly thought.
And why did Ashley look so oddly and say nothing?
Then something like a well-trained mask came down
over his face and he smiled gallantly.
“Isn’t it enough that you’ve collected every other
man’s heart here today?” he said, with the old, teas-
ing, caressing note in his voice. “Do you want to make
it unanimous? Well, you’ve always had my heart, you
know. You cut your teeth on it.”
Something was wrong–all wrong! This was not the
way she had planned it. Through the mad tearing of
ideas round and round in her brain, one was begin-
ning to take form. Somehow–for some reason–Ashley
was acting as if he thought she was just ﬂirting with
him. But he knew differently. She knew he did.
“Ashley–Ashley–tell me–you must–oh, don’t tease
me now! Have I your heart? Oh, my dear, I lo–”
His hand went across her lips, swiftly. The mask
was gone.
“You must not say these things, Scarlett!
You
mustn’t.
You don’t mean them.
You’ll hate your-
self for saying them, and you’ll hate me for hearing
227


PART ONE
them!”
She jerked her head away. A hot swift current was
running through her.
“I couldn’t ever hate you.
I tell you I love you
and I know you must care about me because–” She
stopped. Never before had she seen so much misery
in anyone’s face. “Ashley, do you care–you do, don’t
you?”
“Yes,” he said dully. “I care.”
If he had said he loathed her, she could not have
been more frightened.
She plucked at his sleeve,
speechless.
“Scarlett,” he said, “can’t we go away and forget
that we have ever said these things?”
“No,” she whispered. “I can’t. What do you mean?
Don’t you want to–to marry me?”
He replied, “I’m going to marry Melanie.”
Somehow she found that she was sitting on the low
velvet chair and Ashley, on the hassock at her feet,
was holding both her hands in his, in a hard grip. He
was saying things–things that made no sense. Her
mind was quite blank, quite empty of all the thoughts
that had surged through it only a moment before,
and his words made no more impression than rain on
228


PART ONE
glass. They fell on unhearing ears, words that were
swift and tender and full of pity, like a father speak-
ing to a hurt child.
The sound of Melanie’s name caught in her con-
sciousness and she looked into his crystal-gray eyes.
She saw in them the old remoteness that had always
bafﬂed her–and a look of self-hatred.
“Father is to announce the engagement tonight. We
are to be married soon. I should have told you, but
I thought you knew. I thought everyone knew–had
known for years. I never dreamed that you– You’ve
so many beaux. I thought Stuart–”
Life and feeling and comprehension were beginning
to ﬂow back into her.
“But you just said you cared for me.”
His warm hands hurt hers.
“My dear, must you make me say things that will
hurt you?”
Her silence pressed him on.
“How can I make you see these things, my dear. You
who are so young and unthinking that you do not
know what marriage means.”
“I know I love you.”
“Love isn’t enough to make a successful marriage
229


PART ONE
when two people are as different as we are.
You
would want all of a man, Scarlett, his body, his heart,
his soul, his thoughts. And if you did not have them,
you would be miserable. And I couldn’t give you all
of me. I couldn’t give all of me to anyone. And I
would not want all of your mind and your soul. And
you would be hurt, and then you would come to hate
me–how bitterly! You would hate the books I read
and the music I loved, because they took me away
from you even for a moment. And I–perhaps I–”
“Do you love her?”
“She is like me, part of my blood, and we under-
stand each other. Scarlett! Scarlett! Can’t I make you
see that a marriage can’t go on in any sort of peace
unless the two people are alike?”
Some one else had said that: “Like must marry like
or there’ll be no happiness.” Who was it? It seemed a
million years since she had heard that, but it still did
not make sense.
“But you said you cared.”
“I shouldn’t have said it.”
Somewhere in her brain, a slow ﬁre rose and rage
began to blot out everything else.
“Well, having been cad enough to say it–”
230


PART ONE
His face went white.
“I was a cad to say it, as I’m going to marry Melanie.
I did you a wrong and Melanie a greater one. I should
not have said it, for I knew you wouldn’t understand.
How could I help caring for you– you who have all
the passion for life that I have not? You who can love
and hate with a violence impossible to me? Why you
are as elemental as ﬁre and wind and wild things and
I–”
She thought of Melanie and saw suddenly her quiet
brown eyes with their far-off look, her placid little
hands in their black lace mitts, her gentle silences.
And then her rage broke, the same rage that drove
Gerald to murder and other Irish ancestors to mis-
deeds that cost them their necks. There was nothing
in her now of the well-bred Robillards who could bear
with white silence anything the world might cast.
“Why don’t you say it, you coward! You’re afraid
to marry me! You’d rather live with that stupid little
fool who can’t open her mouth except to say ‘Yes’ or
‘No’ and raise a passel of mealy- mouthed brats just
like her! Why–”
“You must not say these things about Melanie!”
“‘I mustn’t’ be damned to you! Who are you to tell
me I mustn’t? You coward, you cad, you– You made
231


PART ONE
me believe you were going to marry me–”
“Be fair,” his voice pleaded. “Did I ever–”
She did not want to be fair, although she knew what
he said was true. He had never once crossed the bor-
ders of friendliness with her and, when she thought
of this fresh anger rose, the anger of hurt pride and
feminine vanity. She had run after him and he would
have none of her. He preferred a whey-faced little fool
like Melanie to her. Oh, far better that she had fol-
lowed Ellen and Mammy’s precepts and never, never
revealed that she even liked him–better anything than
to be faced with this scorching shame!
She sprang to her feet, her hands clenched and he
rose towering over her, his face full of the mute mis-
ery of one forced to face realities when realities are
agonies.
“I shall hate you till I die, you cad–you lowdown–
lowdown–” What was the word she wanted?
She
could not think of any word bad enough.
“Scarlett–please–”
He put out his hand toward her and, as he did, she
slapped him across the face with all the strength she
had. The noise cracked like a whip in the still room
and suddenly her rage was gone, and there was des-
olation in her heart.
232


PART ONE
The red mark of her hand showed plainly on his
white tired face. He said nothing but lifted her limp
hand to his lips and kissed it. Then he was gone be-
fore she could speak again, closing the door softly be-
hind him.
She sat down again very suddenly, the reaction from
her rage making her knees feel weak. He was gone
and the memory of his stricken face would haunt her
till she died.
She heard the soft mufﬂed sound of his footsteps dy-
ing away down the long hall, and the complete enor-
mity of her actions came over her. She had lost him
forever. Now he would hate her and every time he
looked at her he would remember how she threw her-
self at him when he had given her no encouragement
at all.
“I’m as bad as Honey Wilkes,” she thought sud-
denly, and remembered how everyone, and she more
than anyone else, had laughed contemptuously at
Honey’s forward conduct.
She saw Honey’s awk-
ward wigglings and heard her silly titters as she hung
onto boys’ arms, and the thought stung her to new
rage, rage at herself, at Ashley, at the world. Because
she hated herself, she hated them all with the fury of
the thwarted and humiliated love of sixteen. Only a
233


PART ONE
little true tenderness had been mixed into her love.
Mostly it had been compounded out of vanity and
complacent conﬁdence in her own charms. Now she
had lost and, greater than her sense of loss, was the
fear that she had made a public spectacle of herself.
Had she been as obvious as Honey? Was everyone
laughing at her? She began to shake at the thought.
Her hand dropped to a little table beside her, ﬁn-
gering a tiny china rose-bowl on which two china
cherubs smirked. The room was so still she almost
screamed to break the silence. She must do something
or go mad. She picked up the bowl and hurled it vi-
ciously across the room toward the ﬁreplace. It barely
cleared the tall back of the sofa and splintered with a
little crash against the marble mantelpiece.
“This,” said a voice from the depths of the sofa, “is
too much.”
Nothing had ever startled or frightened her so
much, and her mouth went too dry for her to utter
a sound. She caught hold of the back of the chair, her
knees going weak under her, as Rhett Butler rose from
the sofa where he had been lying and made her a bow
of exaggerated politeness.
“It is bad enough to have an afternoon nap dis-
turbed by such a passage as I’ve been forced to hear,
234


PART ONE
but why should my life be endangered?”
He was real. He wasn’t a ghost. But, saints preserve
us, he had heard everything! She rallied her forces
into a semblance of dignity.
“Sir, you should have made known your presence.”
“Indeed?” His white teeth gleamed and his bold
dark eyes laughed at her.
“But you were the in-
truder. I was forced to wait for Mr. Kennedy, and
feeling that I was perhaps persona non grata in the
back yard, I was thoughtful enough to remove my
unwelcome presence here where I thought I would
be undisturbed. But, alas!” he shrugged and laughed
softly.
Her temper was beginning to rise again at the
thought that this rude and impertinent man had
heard everything–heard things she now wished she
had died before she ever uttered.
“Eavesdroppers–” she began furiously.
“Eavesdroppers often hear highly entertaining and
instructive things,” he grinned. “From a long experi-
ence in eavesdropping, I–”
“Sir,” she said, “you are no gentleman!”
“An apt observation,” he answered airily.
“And,
you, Miss, are no lady.” He seemed to ﬁnd her very
235


PART ONE
amusing, for he laughed softly again. “No one can re-
main a lady after saying and doing what I have just
overheard. However, ladies have seldom held any
charms for me. I know what they are thinking, but
they never have the courage or lack of breeding to
say what they think. And that, in time, becomes a
bore. But you, my dear Miss O’Hara, are a girl of rare
spirit, very admirable spirit, and I take off my hat to
you. I fail to understand what charms the elegant Mr.
Wilkes can hold for a girl of your tempestuous nature.
He should thank God on bended knee for a girl with
your–how did he put it?–‘passion for living,’ but be-
ing a poor-spirited wretch–”
“You aren’t ﬁt to wipe his boots!” she shouted in
rage.
“And you were going to hate him all your life!” He
sank down on the sofa and she heard him laughing.
If she could have killed him, she would have done
it. Instead, she walked out of the room with such dig-
nity as she could summon and banged the heavy door
behind her.
She went up the stairs so swiftly that when she
reached the landing, she thought she was going to
faint. She stopped, clutching the banisters, her heart
hammering so hard from anger, insult and exertion
236


PART ONE
that it seemed about to burst through her basque.
She tried to draw deep breaths but Mammy’s lacings
were too tight. If she should faint and they should
ﬁnd her here on the landing, what would they think?
Oh, they’d think everything.
Ashley and that vile
Butler man and those nasty girls who were so jeal-
ous! For once in her life, she wished that she carried
smelling salts, like the other girls, but she had never
even owned a vinaigrette. She had always been so
proud of never feeling giddy. She simply could not
let herself faint now!
Gradually the sickening feeling began to depart. In
a minute, she’d feel all right and then she’d slip qui-
etly into the little dressing room adjoining India’s
room, unloose her stays and creep in and lay herself
on one of the beds beside the sleeping girls. She tried
to quiet her heart and ﬁx her face into more composed
lines, for she knew she must look like a crazy woman.
If any of the girls were awake, they’d know some-
thing was wrong. And no one must ever, ever know
that anything had happened.
Through the wide bay window on the lawn she
could see the men still lounging in their chairs un-
der the trees and in the shade of the arbor.
How
she envied them! How wonderful to be a man and
237


PART ONE
never have to undergo miseries such as she had just
passed through.
As she stood watching them, hot
eyed and dizzy, she heard the rapid pounding of a
horse’s hooves on the front drive, the scattering of
gravel and the sound of an excited voice calling a
question to one of the negroes. The gravel ﬂew again
and across her vision a man on horseback galloped
over the green lawn toward the lazy group under the
trees.
Some late-come guest, but why did he ride his horse
across the turf that was India’s pride? She could not
recognize him, but as he ﬂung himself from the sad-
dle and clutched John Wilkes’ arm, she could see that
there was excitement in every line of him. The crowd
swarmed about him, tall glasses and palmetto fans
abandoned on tables and on the ground. In spite of
the distance, she could hear the hubbub of voices,
questioning, calling, feel the fever- pitch tenseness of
the men. Then above the confused sounds Stuart Tar-
leton’s voice rose, in an exultant shout “Yee-aay-ee!”
as if he were on the hunting ﬁeld. And she heard for
the ﬁrst time, without knowing it, the Rebel yell.
As she watched, the four Tarletons followed by the
Fontaine boys broke from the group and began hur-
rying toward the stable, yelling as they ran, “Jeems!
238


PART ONE
You, Jeems! Saddle the horses!”
“Somebody’s house must have caught ﬁre,” Scarlett
thought. But ﬁre or no ﬁre, her job was to get herself
back into the bedroom before she was discovered.
Her heart was quieter now and she tiptoed up the
steps into the silent hall.
A heavy warm somno-
lence lay over the house, as if it slept at ease like
the girls, until night when it would burst into its full
beauty with music and candle ﬂames. Carefully, she
eased open the door of the dressing room and slipped
in. Her hand was behind her, still holding the knob,
when Honey Wilkes’ voice, low pitched, almost in a
whisper, came to her through the crack of the oppo-
site door leading into the bedroom.
“I think Scarlett acted as fast as a girl could act to-
day.”
Scarlett felt her heart begin its mad racing again
and she clutched her hand against it unconsciously,
as if she would squeeze it into submission. “Eaves-
droppers often hear highly instructive things,” jibed a
memory. Should she slip out again? Or make herself
known and embarrass Honey as she deserved? But
the next voice made her pause. A team of mules could
not have dragged her away when she heard Melanie’s
voice.
239


PART ONE
“Oh, Honey, no! Don’t be unkind. She’s just high
spirited and vivacious. I thought her most charming.”
“Oh,” thought Scarlett, clawing her nails into her
basque. “To have that mealymouthed little mess take
up for me!”
It was harder to bear than Honey’s out-and-out cat-
tiness.
Scarlett had never trusted any woman and
had never credited any woman except her mother
with motives other than selﬁsh ones. Melanie knew
she had Ashley securely, so she could well afford
to show such a Christian spirit. Scarlett felt it was
just Melanie’s way of parading her conquest and get-
ting credit for being sweet at the same time. Scarlett
had frequently used the same trick herself when dis-
cussing other girls with men, and it had never failed
to convince foolish males of her sweetness and un-
selﬁshness.
“Well, Miss,” said Honey tartly, her voice rising,
“you must be blind.”
“Hush, Honey,” hissed the voice of Sally Munroe.
“They’ll hear you all over the house!”
Honey lowered her voice but went on.
“Well, you saw how she was carrying on with every
man she could get hold of–even Mr. Kennedy and
he’s her own sister’s beau. I never saw the like! And
240


PART ONE
she certainly was going after Charles.” Honey gig-
gled self-consciously. “And you know, Charles and
I–”
“Are you really?” whispered voices excitedly.
“Well, don’t tell anybody, girls–not yet!”
There were more gigglings and the bed springs
creaked as someone squeezed Honey. Melanie mur-
mured something about how happy she was that
Honey would be her sister.
“Well, I won’t be happy to have Scarlett for my sis-
ter, because she’s a fast piece if ever I saw one,” came
the aggrieved voice of Hefty Tarleton. “But she’s as
good as engaged to Stuart. Brent says she doesn’t give
a rap about him, but, of course, Brent’s crazy about
her, too.”
“If you should ask me,” said Honey with mysterious
importance, “there’s only one person she does give a
rap about. And that’s Ashley!”
As the whisperings merged together violently, ques-
tioning, interrupting, Scarlett felt herself go cold with
fear and humiliation.
Honey was a fool, a silly, a
simpleton about men, but she had a feminine instinct
about other women that Scarlett had underestimated.
The mortiﬁcation and hurt pride that she had suf-
fered in the library with Ashley and with Rhett But-
241


PART ONE
ler were pin pricks to this. Men could be trusted to
keep their mouths shut, even men like Mr. Butler,
but with Honey Wilkes giving tongue like a hound in
the ﬁeld, the entire County would know about it be-
fore six o’clock. And Gerald had said only last night
that he wouldn’t be having the County laughing at
his daughter. And how they would all laugh now!
Clammy perspiration, starting under her armpits, be-
gan to creep down her ribs.
Melanie’s voice, measured and peaceful, a little re-
proving, rose above the others.
“Honey, you know that isn’t so. And it’s so unkind.”
“It is too, Melly, and if you weren’t always so busy
looking for the good in people that haven’t got any
good in them, you’d see it. And I’m glad it’s so. It
serves her right. All Scarlett O’Hara has ever done
has been to stir up trouble and try to get other girls’
beaux. You know mighty well she took Stuart from
India and she didn’t want him. And today she tried
to take Mr. Kennedy and Ashley and Charles–”
“I must get home!” thought Scarlett. “I must get
home!”
If she could only be transferred by magic to Tara and
to safety. If she could only be with Ellen, just to see
her, to hold onto her skirt, to cry and pour out the
242


PART ONE
whole story in her lap. If she had to listen to another
word, she’d rush in and pull out Honey’s straggly
pale hair in big handfuls and spit on Melanie Hamil-
ton to show her just what she thought of her char-
ity. But she’d already acted common enough today,
enough like white trash–that was where all her trou-
ble lay.
She pressed her hands hard against her skirts, so
they would not rustle and backed out as stealthily as
an animal. Home, she thought, as she sped down the
hall, past the closed doors and still rooms, I must go
home.
She was already on the front porch when a new
thought brought her up sharply–she couldn’t go
home! She couldn’t run away! She would have to
see it through, bear all the malice of the girls and her
own humiliation and heartbreak. To run away would
only give them more ammunition.
She pounded her clenched ﬁst against the tall white
pillar beside her, and she wished that she were Sam-
son, so that she could pull down all of Twelve Oaks
and destroy every person in it.
She’d make them
sorry. She’d show them. She didn’t quite see how
she’d show them, but she’d do it all the same. She’d
hurt them worse than they hurt her.
243


PART ONE
For the moment, Ashley as Ashley was forgotten.
He was not the tall drowsy boy she loved but part and
parcel of the Wilkeses, Twelve Oaks, the County–and
she hated them all because they laughed. Vanity was
stronger than love at sixteen and there was no room
in her hot heart now for anything but hate.
“I won’t go home,” she thought. “I’ll stay here and
I’ll make them sorry. And I’ll never tell Mother. No,
I’ll never tell anybody.” She braced herself to go back
into the house, to reclimb the stairs and go into an-
other bedroom.
As she turned, she saw Charles coming into the
house from the other end of the long hall. When he
saw her, he hurried toward her. His hair was tousled
and his face near geranium with excitement.
“Do you know what’s happened?” he cried, even
before he reached her. “Have you heard? Paul Wilson
just rode over from Jonesboro with the news!”
He paused, breathless, as he came up to her. She
said nothing and only stared at him.
“Mr. Lincoln has called for men, soldiers–I mean
volunteers– seventy-ﬁve thousand of them!”
Mr. Lincoln again! Didn’t men ever think about any-
thing that really mattered? Here was this fool expect-
ing her to be excited about Mr. Lincoln’s didoes when
244


PART ONE
her heart was broken and her reputation as good as
ruined.
Charles stared at her. Her face was paper white and
her narrow eyes blazing like emeralds. He had never
seen such ﬁre in any girl’s face, such a glow in any-
one’s eyes.
“I’m so clumsy,” he said. “I should have told you
more gently.
I forgot how delicate ladies are.
I’m
sorry I’ve upset you so. You don’t feel faint, do you?
Can I get you a glass of water?”
“No,” she said, and managed a crooked smile.
“Shall we go sit on the bench?” he asked, taking her
arm.
She nodded and he carefully handed her down the
front steps and led her across the grass to the iron
bench beneath the largest oak in the front yard. How
fragile and tender women are, he thought, the mere
mention of war and harshness makes them faint. The
idea made him feel very masculine and he was dou-
bly gentle as he seated her. She looked so strangely,
and there was a wild beauty about her white face that
set his heart leaping. Could it be that she was dis-
tressed by the thought that he might go to the war?
No, that was too conceited for belief. But why did she
look at him so oddly? And why did her hands shake
245


PART ONE
as they ﬁngered her lace handkerchief. And her thick
sooty lashes–they were ﬂuttering just like the eyes of
girls in romances he had read, ﬂuttering with timidity
and love.
He cleared his throat three times to speak and failed
each time.
He dropped his eyes because her own
green ones met his so piercingly, almost as if she were
not seeing him.
“He has a lot of money,” she was thinking swiftly, as
a thought and a plan went through her brain. “And
he hasn’t any parents to bother me and he lives in At-
lanta. And if I married him right away, it would show
Ashley that I didn’t care a rap–that I was only ﬂirting
with him. And it would just kill Honey. She’d never,
never catch another beau and everybody’d laugh ﬁt
to die at her. And it would hurt Melanie, because
she loves Charles so much. And it would hurt Stu
and Brent–” She didn’t quite know why she wanted
to hurt them, except that they had catty sisters. “And
they’d all be sorry when I came back here to visit in
a ﬁne carriage and with lots of pretty clothes and a
house of my own. And they would never, never laugh
at me.”
“Of course, it will mean ﬁghting,” said Charles, after
several more embarrassed attempts. “But don’t you
246


PART ONE
fret, Miss Scarlett, it’ll be over in a month and we’ll
have them howling. Yes, sir! Howling! I wouldn’t
miss it for anything. I’m afraid there won’t be much
of a ball tonight, because the Troop is going to meet at
Jonesboro. The Tarleton boys have gone to spread the
news. I know the ladies will be sorry.”
She said, “Oh,” for want of anything better, but it
sufﬁced.
Coolness was beginning to come back to her and
her mind was collecting itself. A frost lay over all
her emotions and she thought that she would never
feel anything warmly again. Why not take this pretty,
ﬂushed boy? He was as good as anyone else and she
didn’t care. No, she could never care about anything
again, not if she lived to be ninety.
“I can’t decide now whether to go with Mr. Wade
Hampton’s South Carolina Legion or with the Atlanta
Gate City Guard.”
She said, “Oh,” again and their eyes met and the
ﬂuttering lashes were his undoing.
“Will you wait for me, Miss Scarlett? It–it would
be Heaven just knowing that you were waiting for
me until after we licked them!” He hung breathless
on her words, watching the way her lips curled up
at the corners, noting for the ﬁrst time the shadows
247


PART ONE
about these corners and thinking what it would mean
to kiss them. Her hand, with palm clammy with per-
spiration, slid into his.
“I wouldn’t want to wait,” she said and her eyes
were veiled.
He sat clutching her hand, his mouth wide open.
Watching him from under her lashes, Scarlett thought
detachedly that he looked like a gigged frog. He stut-
tered several times, closed his mouth and opened it
again, and again became geranium colored.
“Can you possibly love me?”
She said nothing but looked down into her lap, and
Charles was thrown into new states of ecstasy and
embarrassment. Perhaps a man should not ask a girl
such a question. Perhaps it would be unmaidenly for
her to answer it. Having never possessed the courage
to get himself into such a situation before, Charles
was at a loss as to how to act. He wanted to shout and
to sing and to kiss her and to caper about the lawn
and then run tell everyone, black and white, that she
loved him. But he only squeezed her hand until he
drove her rings into the ﬂesh.
“You will marry me soon, Miss Scarlett?”
“Um,” she said, ﬁngering a fold of her dress.
“Shall we make it a double wedding with Mel–”
248


PART ONE
“No,” she said quickly, her eyes glinting up at him
ominously. Charles knew again that he had made an
error. Of course, a girl wanted her own wedding–not
shared glory. How kind she was to overlook his blun-
derings. If it were only dark and he had the courage of
shadows and could kiss her hand and say the things
he longed to say.
“When may I speak to your father?”
“The sooner the better,” she said, hoping that per-
haps he would release the crushing pressure on her
rings before she had to ask him to do it.
He leaped up and for a moment she thought he was
going to cut a caper, before dignity claimed him. He
looked down at her radiantly, his whole clean sim-
ple heart in his eyes.
She had never had anyone
look at her thus before and would never have it from
any other man, but in her queer detachment she only
thought that he looked like a calf.
“I’ll go now and ﬁnd your father,” he said, smiling
all over his face. “I can’t wait. Will you excuse me–
dear?” The endearment came hard but having said it
once, he repeated it again with pleasure.
“Yes,” she said. “I’ll wait here. It’s so cool and nice
here.”
He went off across the lawn and disappeared
249


PART ONE
around the house, and she was alone under the
rustling oak. From the stables, men were streaming
out on horseback, negro servants riding hard behind
their masters.
The Munroe boys tore past waving
their hats, and the Fontaines and Calverts went down
the road yelling. The four Tarletons charged across
the lawn by her and Brent shouted: “Mother’s going
to give us the horses! Yee-aay-ee!” Turf ﬂew and they
were gone, leaving her alone again.
The white house reared its tall columns before her,
seeming to withdraw with digniﬁed aloofness from
her. It would never be her house now. Ashley would
never carry her over the threshold as his bride. Oh,
Ashley, Ashley! What have I done? Deep in her, un-
der layers of hurt pride and cold practicality, some-
thing stirred hurtingly.
An adult emotion was be-
ing born, stronger than her vanity or her willful self-
ishness. She loved Ashley and she knew she loved
him and she had never cared so much as in that in-
stant when she saw Charles disappearing around the
curved graveled walk.
250


WITHIN TWO WEEKS Scarlett had become a wife, and
within two months more she was a widow. She was
soon released from the bonds she had assumed with
so much haste and so little thought, but she was never
again to know the careless freedom of her unmarried
days. Widowhood had crowded closely on the heels
of marriage but, to her dismay, motherhood soon fol-
lowed.
In after years when she thought of those last days
of April, 1861, Scarlett could never quite remember
details. Time and events were telescoped, jumbled to-
gether like a nightmare that had no reality or reason.
Till the day she died there would be blank spots in
her memories of those days. Especially vague were
her recollections of the time between her acceptance
of Charles and her wedding. Two weeks! So short an
engagement would have been impossible in times of
peace. Then there would have been a decorous inter-
val of a year or at least six months. But the South was
aﬂame with war, events roared along as swiftly as if
carried by a mighty wind and the slow tempo of the
old days was gone. Ellen had wrung her hands and
counseled delay, in order that Scarlett might think the
matter over at greater length. But to her pleadings,


PART ONE
Scarlett turned a sullen face and a deaf ear. Marry she
would! and quickly too. Within two weeks.
Learning that Ashley’s wedding had been moved
up from the autumn to the ﬁrst of May, so he could
leave with the Troop as soon as it was called into ser-
vice, Scarlett set the date of her wedding for the day
before his. Ellen protested but Charles pleaded with
new-found eloquence, for he was impatient to be off
to South Carolina to join Wade Hampton’s Legion,
and Gerald sided with the two young people.
He
was excited by the war fever and pleased that Scar-
lett had made so good a match, and who was he to
stand in the way of young love when there was a
war? Ellen, distracted, ﬁnally gave in as other moth-
ers throughout the South were doing. Their leisured
world had been turned topsy-turvy, and their plead-
ings, prayers and advice availed nothing against the
powerful forces sweeping them along.
The South was intoxicated with enthusiasm and ex-
citement. Everyone knew that one battle would end
the war and every young man hastened to enlist be-
fore the war should end–hastened to marry his sweet-
heart before he rushed off to Virginia to strike a blow
at the Yankees. There were dozens of war weddings
in the County and there was little time for the sor-
252


PART ONE
row of parting, for everyone was too busy and ex-
cited for either solemn thoughts or tears. The ladies
were making uniforms, knitting socks and rolling
bandages, and the men were drilling and shooting.
Train loads of troops passed through Jonesboro daily
on their way north to Atlanta and Virginia. Some de-
tachments were gaily uniformed in the scarlets and
light blues and greens of select social-militia compa-
nies; some small groups were in homespun and coon-
skin caps; others, ununiformed, were in broadcloth
and ﬁne linen; all were half-drilled, half-armed, wild
with excitement and shouting as though en route to a
picnic. The sight of these men threw the County boys
into a panic for fear the war would be over before they
could reach Virginia, and preparations for the Troop’s
departure were speeded.
In the midst of this turmoil, preparations went for-
ward for Scarlett’s wedding and, almost before she
knew it, she was clad in Ellen’s wedding dress and
veil, coming down the wide stairs of Tara on her fa-
ther’s arm, to face a house packed full with guests.
Afterward she remembered, as from a dream, the
hundreds of candles ﬂaring on the walls, her mother’s
face, loving, a little bewildered, her lips moving in
a silent prayer for her daughter’s happiness, Gerald
ﬂushed with brandy and pride that his daughter was
253


PART ONE
marrying both money, a ﬁne name and an old one–
and Ashley, standing at the bottom of the steps with
Melanie’s arm through his.
When she saw the look on his face, she thought:
“This can’t be real. It can’t be. It’s a nightmare. I’ll
wake up and ﬁnd it’s all been a nightmare. I mustn’t
think of it now, or I’ll begin screaming in front of all
these people. I can’t think now. I’ll think later, when I
can stand it–when I can’t see his eyes.”
It was all very dreamlike, the passage through the
aisle of smiling people, Charles’ scarlet face and stam-
mering voice and her own replies, so startlingly clear,
so cold. And the congratulations afterward and the
kissing and the toasts and the dancing–all, all like
a dream.
Even the feel of Ashley’s kiss upon her
cheek, even Melanie’s soft whisper, “Now, we’re re-
ally and truly sisters,” were unreal.
Even the ex-
citement caused by the swooning spell that overtook
Charles’ plump emotional aunt, Miss Pittypat Hamil-
ton, had the quality of a nightmare.
But when the dancing and toasting were ﬁnally
ended and the dawn was coming, when all the At-
lanta guests who could be crowded into Tara and the
overseer’s house had gone to sleep on beds, sofas and
pallets on the ﬂoor and all the neighbors had gone
254


PART ONE
home to rest in preparation for the wedding at Twelve
Oaks the next day, then the dreamlike trance shat-
tered like crystal before reality. The reality was the
blushing Charles, emerging from her dressing room
in his nightshirt, avoiding the startled look she gave
him over the high-pulled sheet.
Of course, she knew that married people occupied
the same bed but she had never given the matter a
thought before. It seemed very natural in the case
of her mother and father, but she had never applied
it to herself. Now for the ﬁrst time since the barbe-
cue she realized just what she had brought on herself.
The thought of this strange boy whom she hadn’t re-
ally wanted to marry getting into bed with her, when
her heart was breaking with an agony of regret at her
hasty action and the anguish of losing Ashley forever,
was too much to be borne.
As he hesitatingly ap-
proached the bed she spoke in a hoarse whisper.
“I’ll scream out loud if you come near me. I will! I
will–at the top of my voice! Get away from me! Don’t
you dare touch me!”
So Charles Hamilton spent his wedding night in an
armchair in the corner, not too unhappily, for he un-
derstood, or thought he understood, the modesty and
delicacy of his bride. He was willing to wait until her
255


PART ONE
fears subsided, only–only– He sighed as he twisted
about seeking a comfortable position, for he was go-
ing away to the war so very soon.
Nightmarish as her own wedding had been, Ash-
ley’s wedding was even worse.
Scarlett stood in
her apple-green “second-day” dress in the parlor of
Twelve Oaks amid the blaze of hundreds of candles,
jostled by the same throng as the night before, and
saw the plain little face of Melanie Hamilton glow
into beauty as she became Melanie Wilkes. Now, Ash-
ley was gone forever. Her Ashley. No, not her Ash-
ley now. Had he ever been hers? It was all so mixed
up in her mind and her mind was so tired, so bewil-
dered.
He had said he loved her, but what was it
that had separated them? If she could only remem-
ber. She had stilled the County’s gossiping tongue
by marrying Charles, but what did that matter now?
It had seemed so important once, but now it didn’t
seem important at all. All that mattered was Ashley.
Now he was gone and she was married to a man she
not only did not love but for whom she had an active
contempt.
Oh, how she regretted it all. She had often heard of
people cutting off their noses to spite their faces but
heretofore it had been only a ﬁgure of speech. Now
256


PART ONE
she knew just what it meant. And mingled with her
frenzied desire to be free of Charles and safely back at
Tara, an unmarried girl again, ran the knowledge that
she had only herself to blame. Ellen had tried to stop
her and she would not listen.
So she danced through the night of Ashley’s wed-
ding in a daze and said things mechanically and
smiled and irrelevantly wondered at the stupidity of
people who thought her a happy bride and could not
see that her heart was broken. Well, thank God, they
couldn’t see!
That night after Mammy had helped her undress
and had departed and Charles had emerged shyly
from the dressing room, wondering if he was to spend
a second night in the horsehair chair, she burst into
tears. She cried until Charles climbed into bed beside
her and tried to comfort her, cried without words un-
til no more tears would come and at last she lay sob-
bing quietly on his shoulder.
If there had not been a war, there would have been
a week of visiting about the County, with balls and
barbecues in honor of the two newly married couples
before they set off to Saratoga or White Sulphur for
wedding trips. If there had not been a war, Scarlett
would have had third-day and fourth-day and ﬁfth-
257


PART ONE
day dresses to wear to the Fontaine and Calvert and
Tarleton parties in her honor. But there were no par-
ties now and no wedding trips. A week after the wed-
ding Charles left to join Colonel Wade Hampton, and
two weeks later Ashley and the Troop departed, leav-
ing the whole County bereft.
In those two weeks, Scarlett never saw Ashley alone,
never had a private word with him. Not even at the
terrible moment of parting, when he stopped by Tara
on his way to the train, did she have a private talk.
Melanie, bonneted and shawled, sedate in newly ac-
quired matronly dignity, hung on his arm and the en-
tire personnel of Tara, black and white, turned out to
see Ashley off to the war.
Melanie said: “You must kiss Scarlett, Ashley. She’s
my sister now,” and Ashley bent and touched her
cheek with cold lips, his face drawn and taut. Scarlett
could hardly take any joy from that kiss, so sullen was
her heart at Melly’s prompting it. Melanie smothered
her with an embrace at parting.
“You will come to Atlanta and visit me and Aunt
Pittypat, won’t you? Oh, darling, we want to have
you so much! We want to know Charlie’s wife better.”
Five weeks passed during which letters, shy, ec-
static, loving, came from Charles in South Carolina
258


PART ONE
telling of his love, his plans for the future when the
war was over, his desire to become a hero for her
sake and his worship of his commander, Wade Hamp-
ton. In the seventh week, there came a telegram from
Colonel Hampton himself, and then a letter, a kind,
digniﬁed letter of condolence. Charles was dead. The
colonel would have wired earlier, but Charles, think-
ing his illness a triﬂing one, did not wish to have his
family worried. The unfortunate boy had not only
been cheated of the love he thought he had won but
also of his high hopes of honor and glory on the ﬁeld
of battle. He had died ignominiously and swiftly of
pneumonia, following measles, without ever having
gotten any closer to the Yankees than the camp in
South Carolina.
In due time, Charles’ son was born and, because
it was fashionable to name boys after their fathers’
commanding ofﬁcers, he was called Wade Hamp-
ton Hamilton. Scarlett had wept with despair at the
knowledge that she was pregnant and wished that
she were dead. But she carried the child through its
time with a minimum of discomfort, bore him with
little distress and recovered so quickly that Mammy
told her privately it was downright common–ladies
should suffer more.
She felt little affection for the
child, hide the fact though she might. She had not
259


PART ONE
wanted him and she resented his coming and, now
that he was here, it did not seem possible that he was
hers, a part of her.
Though she recovered physically from Wade’s birth
in a disgracefully short time, mentally she was dazed
and sick. Her spirits drooped, despite the efforts of
the whole plantation to revive them. Ellen went about
with a puckered, worried forehead and Gerald swore
more frequently than usual and brought her useless
gifts from Jonesboro. Even old Dr. Fontaine admitted
that he was puzzled, after his tonic of sulphur, mo-
lasses and herbs failed to perk her up. He told Ellen
privately that it was a broken heart that made Scarlett
so irritable and listless by turns. But Scarlett, had she
wished to speak, could have told them that it was a
far different and more complex trouble. She did not
tell them that it was utter boredom, bewilderment at
actually being a mother and, most of all, the absence
of Ashley that made her look so woebegone.
Her boredom was acute and ever present.
The
County had been devoid of any entertainment or so-
cial life ever since the Troop had gone away to war.
All of the interesting young men were gone– the
four Tarletons, the two Calverts, the Fontaines, the
Munroes and everyone from Jonesboro, Fayetteville
260


PART ONE
and Lovejoy who was young and attractive. Only the
older men, the cripples and the women were left, and
they spent their time knitting and sewing, growing
more cotton and corn, raising more hogs and sheep
and cows for the army. There was never a sight of
a real man except when the commissary troop un-
der Suellen’s middle-aged beau, Frank Kennedy, rode
by every month to collect supplies. The men in the
commissary were not very exciting, and the sight of
Frank’s timid courting annoyed her until she found it
difﬁcult to be polite to him. If he and Suellen would
only get it over with!
Even if the commissary troop had been more inter-
esting, it would not have helped her situation any.
She was a widow and her heart was in the grave. At
least, everyone thought it was in the grave and ex-
pected her to act accordingly. This irritated her for, try
as she would, she could recall nothing about Charles
except the dying-calf look on his face when she told
him she would marry him.
And even that picture
was fading. But she was a widow and she had to
watch her behavior. Not for her the pleasures of un-
married girls. She had to be grave and aloof. Ellen
had stressed this at great length after catching Frank’s
lieutenant swinging Scarlett in the garden swing and
making her squeal with laughter. Deeply distressed,
261


PART ONE
Ellen had told her how easily a widow might get her-
self talked about. The conduct of a widow must be
twice as circumspect as that of a matron.
“And God only knows,” thought Scarlett, listening
obediently to her mother’s soft voice, “matrons never
have any fun at all.
So widows might as well be
dead.”
A widow had to wear hideous black dresses without
even a touch of braid to enliven them, no ﬂower or
ribbon or lace or even jewelry, except onyx mourning
brooches or necklaces made from the deceased’s hair.
And the black crepe veil on her bonnet had to reach
to her knees, and only after three years of widow-
hood could it be shortened to shoulder length. Wid-
ows could never chatter vivaciously or laugh aloud.
Even when they smiled, it must be a sad, tragic smile.
And, most dreadful of all, they could in no way in-
dicate an interest in the company of gentlemen. And
should a gentleman be so ill bred as to indicate an in-
terest in her, she must freeze him with a digniﬁed but
well-chosen reference to her dead husband. Oh, yes,
thought Scarlett, drearily, some widows do remarry
eventually, when they are old and stringy. Though
Heaven knows how they manage it, with their neigh-
bors watching. And then it’s generally to some des-
262


PART ONE
perate old widower with a large plantation and a
dozen children.
Marriage was bad enough, but to be widowed–oh,
then life was over forever! How stupid people were
when they talked about what a comfort little Wade
Hampton must be to her, now that Charles was gone.
How stupid of them to say that now she had some-
thing to live for! Everyone talked about how sweet it
was that she had this posthumous token of her love
and she naturally did not disabuse their minds. But
that thought was farthest from her mind. She had
very little interest in Wade and sometimes it was dif-
ﬁcult to remember that he was actually hers.
Every morning she woke up and for a drowsy mo-
ment she was Scarlett O’Hara again and the sun was
bright in the magnolia outside her window and the
mockers were singing and the sweet smell of frying
bacon was stealing to her nostrils. She was carefree
and young again.
Then she heard the fretful hun-
gry wail and always–always there was a startled mo-
ment when she thought: “Why, there’s a baby in the
house!” Then she remembered that it was her baby. It
was all very bewildering.
And Ashley! Oh, most of all Ashley! For the ﬁrst
time in her life, she hated Tara, hated the long red
263


PART ONE
road that led down the hill to the river, hated the
red ﬁelds with springing green cotton. Every foot of
ground, every tree and brook, every lane and bridle
path reminded her of him. He belonged to another
woman and he had gone to the war, but his ghost still
haunted the roads in the twilight, still smiled at her
from drowsy gray eyes in the shadows of the porch.
She never heard the sound of hooves coming up the
river road from Twelve Oaks that for a sweet moment
she did not think–Ashley!
She hated Twelve Oaks now and once she had loved
it. She hated it but she was drawn there, so she could
hear John Wilkes and the girls talk about him–hear
them read his letters from Virginia. They hurt her but
she had to hear them. She disliked the stiff- necked
India and the foolish prattling Honey and knew they
disliked her equally, but she could not stay away from
them. And every time she came home from Twelve
Oaks, she lay down on her bed morosely and refused
to get up for supper.
It was this refusal of food that worried Ellen and
Mammy more than anything else. Mammy brought
up tempting trays, insinuating that now she was a
widow she might eat as much as she pleased, but
Scarlett had no appetite.
264


PART ONE
When Dr.
Fontaine told Ellen gravely that heart-
break frequently led to a decline and women pined
away into the grave, Ellen went white, for that fear
was what she had carried in her heart.
“Isn’t there anything to be done, Doctor?”
“A change of scene will be the best thing in the
world for her,” said the doctor, only too anxious to
be rid of an unsatisfactory patient.
So Scarlett, unenthusiastic, went off with her child,
ﬁrst to visit her O’Hara and Robillard relatives in Sa-
vannah and then to Ellen’s sisters, Pauline and Eu-
lalie, in Charleston. But she was back at Tara a month
before Ellen expected her, with no explanation of her
return. They had been kind in Savannah, but James
and Andrew and their wives were old and content
to sit quietly and talk of a past in which Scarlett had
no interest. It was the same with the Robillards, and
Charleston was terrible, Scarlett thought.
Aunt Pauline and her husband, a little old man, with
a formal, brittle courtesy and the absent air of one liv-
ing in an older age, lived on a plantation on the river,
far more isolated than Tara. Their nearest neighbor
was twenty miles away by dark roads through still
jungles of cypress swamp and oak. The live oaks with
their waving curtains of gray moss gave Scarlett the
265


PART ONE
creeps and always brought to her mind Gerald’s sto-
ries of Irish ghosts roaming in shimmering gray mists.
There was nothing to do but knit all day and at night
listen to Uncle Carey read aloud from the improving
works of Mr. Bulwer-Lytton.
Eulalie, hidden behind a high-walled garden in a
great house on the Battery in Charleston, was no more
entertaining. Scarlett, accustomed to wide vistas of
rolling red hills, felt that she was in prison. There
was more social life here than at Aunt Pauline’s, but
Scarlett did not like the people who called, with their
airs and their traditions and their emphasis on fam-
ily. She knew very well they all thought she was a
child of a mesalliance and wondered how a Robillard
ever married a newly come Irishman. Scarlett felt that
Aunt Eulalie apologized for her behind her back. This
aroused her temper, for she cared no more about fam-
ily than her father. She was proud of Gerald and what
he had accomplished unaided except by his shrewd
Irish brain.
And the Charlestonians took so much upon them-
selves about Fort Sumter! Good Heavens, didn’t they
realize that if they hadn’t been silly enough to ﬁre the
shot that started the war some other fools would have
done it? Accustomed to the brisk voices of upland
266


PART ONE
Georgia, the drawling ﬂat voices of the low coun-
try seemed affected to her. She thought if she ever
again heard voices that said “paams” for “palms” and
“hoose” for “house” and “woon’t” for “won’t” and
“Maa and Paa” for “Ma and Pa,” she would scream.
It irritated her so much that during one formal call
she aped Gerald’s brogue to her aunt’s distress. Then
she went back to Tara. Better to be tormented with
memories of Ashley than Charleston accents.
Ellen, busy night and day, doubling the produc-
tiveness of Tara to aid the Confederacy, was ter-
riﬁed when her eldest daughter came home from
Charleston thin, white and sharp tongued. She had
known heartbreak herself, and night after night she
lay beside the snoring Gerald, trying to think of some
way to lessen Scarlett’s distress. Charles’ aunt, Miss
Pittypat Hamilton, had written her several times, urg-
ing her to permit Scarlett to come to Atlanta for a long
visit, and now for the ﬁrst time Ellen considered it se-
riously.
She and Melanie were alone in a big house “and
without male protection,” wrote Miss Pittypat, “now
that dear Charlie has gone. Of course, there is my
brother Henry but he does not make his home with
us. But perhaps Scarlett has told you of Henry. Deli-
267


PART ONE
cacy forbids my putting more concerning him on pa-
per. Melly and I would feel so much easier and safer if
Scarlett were with us. Three lonely women are better
than two. And perhaps dear Scarlett could ﬁnd some
ease for her sorrow, as Melly is doing, by nursing our
brave boys in the hospitals here–and, of course, Melly
and I are longing to see the dear baby. . . .”
So Scarlett’s trunk was packed again with her
mourning clothes and off she went to Atlanta with
Wade Hampton and his nurse Prissy, a headful of ad-
monitions as to her conduct from Ellen and Mammy
and a hundred dollars in Confederate bills from Ger-
ald. She did not especially want to go to Atlanta. She
thought Aunt Pitty the silliest of old ladies and the
very idea of living under the same roof with Ashley’s
wife was abhorrent. But the County with its mem-
ories was impossible now, and any change was wel-
come.
268


269


AS THE TRAIN carried Scarlett northward that May
morning in 1862, she thought that Atlanta couldn’t
possibly be so boring as Charleston and Savannah
had been and, in spite of her distaste for Miss Pittypat
and Melanie, she looked forward with some curiosity
toward seeing how the town had fared since her last
visit, in the winter before the war began.
Atlanta had always interested her more than any
other town because when she was a child Gerald had
told her that she and Atlanta were exactly the same
age. She discovered when she grew older that Gerald
had stretched the truth somewhat, as was his habit
when a little stretching would improve a story; but
Atlanta was only nine years older than she was, and
that still left the place amazingly young by compari-
son with any other town she had ever heard of. Sa-
vannah and Charleston had the dignity of their years,
one being well along in its second century and the
other entering its third, and in her young eyes they
had always seemed like aged grandmothers fanning
themselves placidly in the sun. But Atlanta was of
her own generation, crude with the crudities of youth
and as headstrong and impetuous as herself.
The story Gerald had told her was based on the


PART TWO
fact that she and Atlanta were christened in the same
year.
In the nine years before Scarlett was born,
the town had been called, ﬁrst, Terminus and then
Marthasville, and not until the year of Scarlett’s birth
had it become Atlanta.
When Gerald ﬁrst moved to north Georgia, there
had been no Atlanta at all, not even the semblance of
a village, and wilderness rolled over the site. But the
next year, in 1836, the State had authorized the build-
ing of a railroad northwestward through the territory
which the Cherokees had recently ceded. The des-
tination of the proposed railroad, Tennessee and the
West, was clear and deﬁnite, but its beginning point
in Georgia was somewhat uncertain until, a year later,
an engineer drove a stake in the red clay to mark the
southern end of the line, and Atlanta, born Terminus,
had begun.
There were no railroads then in north Georgia, and
very few anywhere else. But during the years before
Gerald married Ellen, the tiny settlement, twenty-ﬁve
miles north of Tara, slowly grew into a village and
the tracks slowly pushed northward. Then the rail-
road building era really began. From the old city of
Augusta, a second railroad was extended westward
across the state to connect with the new road to Ten-
271


PART TWO
nessee. From the old city of Savannah, a third railroad
was built ﬁrst to Macon, in the heart of Georgia, and
then north through Gerald’s own county to Atlanta,
to link up with the other two roads and give Savan-
nah’s harbor a highway to the West. From the same
junction point, the young Atlanta, a fourth railroad
was constructed southwestward to Montgomery and
Mobile.
Born of a railroad, Atlanta grew as its railroads grew.
With the completion of the four lines, Atlanta was
now connected with the West, with the South, with
the Coast and, through Augusta, with the North and
East. It had become the crossroads of travel north and
south and east and west, and the little village leaped
to life.
In a space of time but little longer than Scarlett’s
seventeen years, Atlanta had grown from a single
stake driven in the ground into a thriving small city
of ten thousand that was the center of attention for
the whole state. The older, quieter cities were wont to
look upon the bustling new town with the sensations
of a hen which has hatched a duckling. Why was the
place so different from the other Georgia towns? Why
did it grow so fast? After all, they thought, it had
nothing whatever to recommend it–only its railroads
272


PART TWO
and a bunch of mighty pushy people.
The people who settled the town called successively
Terminus, Marthasville and Atlanta, were a pushy
people. Restless, energetic people from the older sec-
tions of Georgia and from more distant states were
drawn to this town that sprawled itself around the
junction of the railroads in its center. They came with
enthusiasm. They built their stores around the ﬁve
muddy red roads that crossed near the depot. They
built their ﬁne homes on Whitehall and Washington
streets and along the high ridge of land on which
countless generations of moccasined Indian feet had
beaten a path called the Peachtree Trail. They were
proud of the place, proud of its growth, proud of
themselves for making it grow. Let the older towns
call Atlanta anything they pleased. Atlanta did not
care.
Scarlett had always liked Atlanta for the very same
reasons that made Savannah, Augusta and Macon
condemn it.
Like herself, the town was a mixture
of the old and new in Georgia, in which the old of-
ten came off second best in its conﬂicts with the self-
willed and vigorous new. Moreover, there was some-
thing personal, exciting about a town that was born–
or at least christened–the same year she was chris-
273


PART TWO
tened.
The night before had been wild and wet with rain,
but when Scarlett arrived in Atlanta a warm sun was
at work, bravely attempting to dry the streets that
were winding rivers of red mud. In the open space
around the depot, the soft ground had been cut and
churned by the constant ﬂow of trafﬁc in and out until
it resembled an enormous hog wallow, and here and
there vehicles were mired to the hubs in the ruts. A
never-ceasing line of army wagons and ambulances,
loading and unloading supplies and wounded from
the trains, made the mud and confusion worse as they
toiled in and struggled out, drivers swearing, mules
plunging and mud spattering for yards.
Scarlett stood on the lower step of the train, a pale
pretty ﬁgure in her black mourning dress, her crepe
veil ﬂuttering almost to her heels. She hesitated, un-
willing to soil her slippers and hems, and looked
about in the shouting tangle of wagons, buggies and
carriages for Miss Pittypat. There was no sign of that
chubby pink-cheeked lady, but as Scarlett searched
anxiously a spare old negro, with grizzled kinks and
an air of digniﬁed authority, came toward her through
the mud, his hat in his hand.
“Dis Miss Scarlett, ain’ it?
Dis hyah Peter, Miss
274


PART TWO
Pitty’s coachman. Doan step down in dat mud,” he
ordered severely, as Scarlett gathered up her skirts
preparatory to descending. “You is as bad as Miss
Pitty an’ she lak a chile ‘bout gittin’ her feets wet.
Lemme cahy you.”
He picked Scarlett up with ease despite his appar-
ent frailness and age and, observing Prissy standing
on the platform of the train, the baby in her arms, he
paused: “Is dat air chile yo’ nuss? Miss Scarlett, she
too young ter be handlin’ Mist’ Charles’ onlies’ baby!
But we ten’ to dat later. You gal, foller me, an’ doan
you go drappin’ dat baby.”
Scarlett submitted meekly to being carried toward
the carriage and also to the peremptory manner in
which Uncle Peter criticized her and Prissy. As they
went through the mud with Prissy sloshing, pouting,
after them, she recalled what Charles had said about
Uncle Peter.
“He went through all the Mexican campaigns with
Father, nursed him when he was wounded–in fact, he
saved his life. Uncle Peter practically raised Melanie
and me, for we were very young when Father and
Mother died. Aunt Pitty had a falling out with her
brother, Uncle Henry, about that time, so she came
to live with us and take care of us. She is the most
275


PART TWO
helpless soul–just like a sweet grown-up child, and
Uncle Peter treats her that way. To save her life, she
couldn’t make up her mind about anything, so Peter
makes it up for her. He was the one who decided I
should have a larger allowance when I was ﬁfteen,
and he insisted that I should go to Harvard for my
senior year, when Uncle Henry wanted me to take my
degree at the University. And he decided when Melly
was old enough to put up her hair and go to parties.
He tells Aunt Pitty when it’s too cold or too wet for
her to go calling and when she should wear a shawl.
. . . He’s the smartest old darky I’ve ever seen and
about the most devoted. The only trouble with him is
that he owns the three of us, body and soul, and he
knows it.”
Charles’ words were conﬁrmed as Peter climbed
onto the box and took the whip.
“Miss Pitty in a state bekase she din’ come ter meet
you. She’s feared you mout not unnerstan’ but Ah
tole her she an’ Miss Melly jes’ git splashed wid mud
an’ ruin dey new dresses an’ Ah’d ‘splain ter you.
Miss Scarlett, you better tek dat chile. Dat lil pick-
aninny gwine let it drap.”
Scarlett looked at Prissy and sighed. Prissy was not
the most adequate of nurses. Her recent graduation
276


PART TWO
from a skinny pickaninny with brief skirts and stifﬂy
wrapped braids into the dignity of a calico dress and
starched white turban was an intoxicating affair. She
would never have arrived at this eminence so early in
life had not the exigencies of war and the demands of
the commissary department on Tara made it impossi-
ble for Ellen to spare Mammy or Dilcey or even Rosa
or Teena. Prissy had never been more than a mile
away from Twelve Oaks or Tara before, and the trip
on the train plus her elevation to nurse was almost
more than the brain in her little black skull could bear.
The twenty-mile journey from Jonesboro to Atlanta
had so excited her that Scarlett had been forced to
hold the baby all the way. Now, the sight of so many
buildings and people completed Prissy’s demoraliza-
tion. She twisted from side to side, pointed, bounced
about and so jounced the baby that he wailed miser-
ably.
Scarlett longed for the fat old arms of Mammy.
Mammy had only to lay hands on a child and it
hushed crying. But Mammy was at Tara and there
was nothing Scarlett could do.
It was useless for
her to take little Wade from Prissy. He yelled just as
loudly when she held him as when Prissy did. Be-
sides, he would tug at the ribbons of her bonnet and,
no doubt, rumple her dress. So she pretended she had
277


PART TWO
not heard Uncle Peter’s suggestion.
“Maybe I’ll learn about babies sometime,” she
thought irritably, as the carriage jolted and swayed
out of the morass surrounding the station, “but I’m
never going to like fooling with them.”
And as
Wade’s face went purple with his squalling, she
snapped crossly: “Give him that sugar-tit in your
pocket, Priss. Anything to make him hush. I know
he’s hungry, but I can’t do anything about that now.”
Prissy produced the sugar-tit, given her that morn-
ing by Mammy, and the baby’s wails subsided. With
quiet restored and with the new sights that met her
eyes, Scarlest’s spirits began to rise a little. When Un-
cle Peter ﬁnally maneuvered the carriage out of the
mudholes and onto Peachtree Street, she felt the ﬁrst
surge of interest she had known in months.
How
the town had grown! It was not much more than a
year since she had last been here, and it did not seem
possible that the little Atlanta she knew could have
changed so much.
For the past year, she had been so engrossed in her
own woes, so bored by any mention of war, she did
not know that from the minute the ﬁghting ﬁrst be-
gan, Atlanta had been transformed. The same rail-
roads which had made the town the crossroads of
278


PART TWO
commerce in time of peace were now of vital strate-
gic importance in time of war. Far from the battle
lines, the town and its railroads provided the connect-
ing link between the two armies of the Confederacy,
the army in Virginia and the army in Tennessee and
the West.
And Atlanta likewise linked both of the
armies with the deeper South from which they drew
their supplies. Now, in response to the needs of war,
Atlanta had become a manufacturing center, a hospi-
tal base and one of the South’s chief depots for the
collecting of food and supplies for the armies in the
ﬁeld.
Scarlett looked about her for the little town she re-
membered so well. It was gone. The town she was
now seeing was like a baby grown overnight into a
busy, sprawling giant.
Atlanta was humming like a beehive, proudly con-
scious of its importance to the Confederacy, and work
was going forward night and day toward turning an
agricultural section into an industrial one. Before the
war there had been few cotton factories, woolen mills,
arsenals and machine shops south of Maryland–a fact
of which all Southerners were proud. The South pro-
duced statesmen and soldiers, planters and doctors,
lawyers and poets, but certainly not engineers or me-
279


PART TWO
chanics. Let the Yankees adopt such low callings. But
now the Confederate ports were stoppered with Yan-
kee gunboats, only a trickle of blockade-run goods
was slipping in from Europe, and the South was des-
perately trying to manufacture her own war materi-
als. The North could call on the whole world for sup-
plies and for soldiers, and thousands of Irish and Ger-
mans were pouring into the Union Army, lured by the
bounty money offered by the North. The South could
only turn in upon itself.
In Atlanta, there were machine factories tediously
turning out machinery to manufacture war materials–
tediously, because there were few machines in the
South from which they could model and nearly ev-
ery wheel and cog had to be made from drawings that
came through the blockade from England. There were
strange faces on the streets of Atlanta now, and citi-
zens who a year ago would have pricked up their ears
at the sound of even a Western accent paid no heed
to the foreign tongues of Europeans who had run the
blockade to build machines and turn out Confeder-
ate munitions. Skilled men these, without whom the
Confederacy would have been hard put to make pis-
tols, riﬂes, cannon and powder.
Almost the pulsing of the town’s heart could be felt
280


PART TWO
as the work went forward night and day, pumping
the materials of war up the railway arteries to the two
battle fronts. Trains roared in and out of the town
at all hours. Soot from the newly erected factories
fell in showers on the white houses. By night, the
furnaces glowed and the hammers clanged long af-
ter townsfolk were abed. Where vacant lots had been
a year before, there were now factories turning out
harness, saddles and shoes, ordnance-supply plants
making riﬂes and cannon, rolling mills and foundries
producing iron rails and freight cars to replace those
destroyed by the Yankees, and a variety of indus-
tries manufacturing spurs, bridle bits, buckles, tents,
buttons, pistols and swords. Already the foundries
were beginning to feel the lack of iron, for little or
none came through the blockade, and the mines in
Alabama were standing almost idle while the miners
were at the front. There were no iron picket fences,
iron summerhouses, iron gates or even iron statuary
on the lawns of Atlanta now, for they had early found
their way into the melting pots of the rolling mills.
Here along Peachtree Street and near-by streets were
the headquarters of the various army departments,
each ofﬁce swarming with uniformed men, the com-
missary, the signal corps, the mail service, the rail-
way transport, the provost marshal. On the outskirts
281


PART TWO
of town were the remount depots where horses and
mules milled about in large corrals, and along side
streets were the hospitals. As Uncle Peter told her
about them, Scarlett felt that Atlanta must be a city of
the wounded, for there were general hospitals, conta-
gious hospitals, convalescent hospitals without num-
ber. And every day the trains just below Five Points
disgorged more sick and more wounded.
The little town was gone and the face of the rapidly
growing city was animated with never-ceasing en-
ergy and bustle. The sight of so much hurrying made
Scarlett, fresh from rural leisure and quiet, almost
breathless, but she liked it. There was an exciting at-
mosphere about the place that uplifted her. It was as
if she could actually feel the accelerated steady pulse
of the town’s heart beating in time with her own.
As they slowly made their way through the mud-
holes of the town’s chief street, she noted with inter-
est all the new buildings and the new faces. The side-
walks were crowded with men in uniform, bearing
the insignia of all ranks and all service branches; the
narrow street was jammed with vehicles–carriages,
buggies, ambulances, covered army wagons with
profane drivers swearing as the mules struggled
through the ruts; gray-clad couriers dashed spatter-
282


PART TWO
ing through the streets from one headquarters to an-
other, bearing orders and telegraphic dispatches; con-
valescents limped about on crutches, usually with a
solicitous lady at either elbow; bugle and drum and
barked orders sounded from the drill ﬁelds where the
recruits were being turned into soldiers; and with her
heart in her throat, Scarlett had her ﬁrst sight of Yan-
kee uniforms, as Uncle Peter pointed with his whip
to a detachment of dejected-looking bluecoats being
shepherded toward the depot by a squad of Confed-
erates with ﬁxed bayonets, to entrain for the prison
camp.
“Oh,” thought Scarlett, with the ﬁrst feeling of real
pleasure she had experienced since the day of the bar-
becue, “I’m going to like it here! It’s so alive and ex-
citing!”
The town was even more alive than she realized, for
there were new barrooms by the dozens; prostitutes,
following the army, swarmed the town and bawdy
houses were blossoming with women to the conster-
nation of the church people. Every hotel, boarding
house and private residence was crammed with vis-
itors who had come to be near wounded relatives in
the big Atlanta hospitals. There were parties and balls
and bazaars every week and war weddings without
283


PART TWO
number, with the grooms on furlough in bright gray
and gold braid and the brides in blockade-run ﬁn-
ery, aisles of crossed swords, toasts drunk in block-
aded champagne and tearful farewells. Nightly the
dark tree-lined streets resounded with dancing feet,
and from parlors tinkled pianos where soprano voices
blended with those of soldier guests in the pleasing
melancholy of “The Bugles Sang Truce” and “Your
Letter Came, but Came Too Late”–plaintive ballads
that brought exciting tears to soft eyes which had
never known the tears of real grief.
As they progressed down the street, through the
sucking mud, Scarlett bubbled over with questions
and Peter answered them, pointing here and there
with his whip, proud to display his knowledge.
“Dat air de arsenal. Yas’m, dey keeps guns an’ sech
lak dar.
No’m, dem air ain’ sto’s, dey’s blockade
awﬁsses. Law, Miss Scarlett, doan you know whut
blockade awﬁsses is? Dey’s awﬁsses whar furriners
stays dat buy us Confedruts’ cotton an’ ship it outer
Cha’ston and Wilmin’ton an’ ship us back gunpow-
der. No’m, Ah ain’ sho whut kine of furriners dey is.
Miss Pitty, she say dey is Inlish but kain nobody un-
nerstan a’ wud dey says. Yas’m ‘tis pow’ful smoky an’
de soot jes’ ruinin’ Miss Pitty’s silk cuttins. It’ frum de
284


PART TWO
foun’ry an’ de rollin’ mills. An’ de noise dey meks at
night! Kain nobody sleep. No’m, Ah kain stop fer
you ter look around. Ah done promise Miss Pitty Ah
bring you straight home. . . . Miss Scarlett, mek
yo’ cu’tsy. Dar’s Miss Merriwether an’ Miss Elsing
a-bowin’ to you.”
Scarlett vaguely remembered two ladies of those
names who came from Atlanta to Tara to attend her
wedding and she remembered that they were Miss
Pittypat’s best friends. So she turned quickly where
Uncle Peter pointed and bowed. The two were sitting
in a carriage outside a drygoods store. The proprietor
and two clerks stood on the sidewalk with armfuls of
bolts of cotton cloth they had been displaying. Mrs.
Merriwether was a tall, stout woman and so tightly
corseted that her bust jutted forward like the prow of
a ship. Her iron-gray hair was eked out by a curled
false fringe that was proudly brown and disdained to
match the rest of her hair. She had a round, highly
colored face in which was combined good-natured
shrewdness and the habit of command.
Mrs.
Els-
ing was younger, a thin frail woman, who had been
a beauty, and about her there still clung a faded fresh-
ness, a dainty imperious air.
These two ladies with a third, Mrs. Whiting, were
285


PART TWO
the pillars of Atlanta. They ran the three churches to
which they belonged, the clergy, the choirs and the
parishioners. They organized bazaars and presided
over sewing circles, they chaperoned balls and pic-
nics, they knew who made good matches and who
did not, who drank secretly, who were to have ba-
bies and when.
They were authorities on the ge-
nealogies of everyone who was anyone in Georgia,
South Carolina and Virginia and did not bother their
heads about the other states, because they believed
that no one who was anybody ever came from states
other than these three. They knew what was deco-
rous behavior and what was not and they never failed
to make their opinions known–Mrs. Merriwether at
the top of her voice, Mrs. Elsing in an elegant die-
away drawl and Mrs. Whiting in a distressed whisper
which showed how much she hated to speak of such
things. These three ladies disliked and distrusted one
another as heartily as the First Triumvirate of Rome,
and their close alliance was probably for the same rea-
son.
“I told Pitty I had to have you in my hospital,” called
Mrs. Merriweather, smiling. “Don’t you go promis-
ing Mrs. Meade or Mrs. Whiting!”
“I won’t,” said Scarlett, having no idea what Mrs.
286


PART TWO
Merriwether was talking about but feeling a glow of
warmth at being welcomed and wanted. “I hope to
see you again soon.”
The carriage plowed its way farther and halted
for a moment to permit two ladies with baskets of
bandages on their arms to pick precarious passages
across the sloppy street on stepping stones. At the
same moment, Scarlett’s eye was caught by a ﬁg-
ure on the sidewalk in a brightly colored dress–too
bright for street wear– covered by a Paisley shawl
with fringes to the heels. Turning she saw a tall hand-
some woman with a bold face and a mass of red hair,
too red to be true. It was the ﬁrst time she had ever
seen any woman who she knew for certain had “done
something to her hair” and she watched her, fasci-
nated.
“Uncle Peter, who is that?” she whispered.
“Ah doan know.”
“You do, too. I can tell. Who is she?”
“Her name Belle Watling,” said Uncle Peter, his
lower lip beginning to protrude.
Scarlett was quick to catch the fact that he had not
preceded the name with “Miss” or “Mrs.”
“Who is she?”
287


PART TWO
“Miss Scarlett,” said Peter darkly, laying the whip
on the startled horse, “Miss Pitty ain’ gwine ter lak
it you astin’ questions dat ain’ none of yo’ bizness.
Dey’s a passel of no- count folks in dis town now dat
it ain’ no use talkin’ about.”
“Good Heavens!” thought Scarlett, reproved into si-
lence. “That must be a bad woman!”
She had never seen a bad woman before and she
twisted her head and stared after her until she was
lost in the crowd.
The stores and the new war buildings were farther
apart now, with vacant lots between. Finally the busi-
ness section fell behind and the residences came into
view.
Scarlett picked them out as old friends, the
Leyden house, digniﬁed and stately; the Bonnells’,
with little white columns and green blinds; the close-
lipped red- brick Georgian home of the McLure fam-
ily, behind its low box hedges. Their progress was
slower now, for from porches and gardens and side-
walks ladies called to her. Some she knew slightly,
others she vaguely remembered, but most of them she
knew not at all. Pittypat had certainly broadcast her
arrival. Little Wade had to be held up time and again,
so that ladies who ventured as far through the ooze
as their carriage blocks could exclaim over him. They
288


PART TWO
all cried to her that she must join their knitting and
sewing circles and their hospital committees, and no
one else’s, and she promised recklessly to right and
left.
As they passed a rambling green clapboard house, a
little black girl posted on the front steps cried, “Hyah
she come,” and Dr.
Meade and his wife and lit-
tle thirteen-year-old Phil emerged, calling greetings.
Scarlett recalled that they too had been at her wed-
ding. Mrs. Meade mounted her carriage block and
craned her neck for a view of the baby, but the doc-
tor, disregarding the mud, plowed through to the side
of the carriage. He was tall and gaunt and wore a
pointed beard of iron gray, and his clothes hung on
his spare ﬁgure as though blown there by a hurri-
cane. Atlanta considered him the root of all strength
and all wisdom and it was not strange that he had
absorbed something of their belief.
But for all his
habit of making oracular statements and his slightly
pompous manner, he was as kindly a man as the town
possessed.
After shaking her hand and prodding Wade in
the stomach and complimenting him, the doctor an-
nounced that Aunt Pittypat had promised on oath
that Scarlett should be on no other hospital and
289


PART TWO
bandage-rolling committee save Mrs. Meade’s.
“Oh, dear, but I’ve promised a thousand ladies al-
ready!” said Scarlett.
“Mrs.
Merriwether, I’ll be bound!”
cried Mrs.
Meade indignantly. “Drat the woman! I believe she
meets every train!”
“I promised because I hadn’t a notion what it was all
about,” Scarlett confessed. “What are hospital com-
mittees anyway?”
Both the doctor and his wife looked slightly shocked
at her ignorance.
“But, of course, you’ve been buried in the country
and couldn’t know,” Mrs. Meade apologized for her.
“We have nursing committees for different hospitals
and for different days. We nurse the men and help the
doctors and make bandages and clothes and when the
men are well enough to leave the hospitals we take
them into our homes to convalesce till they are able to
go back in the army. And we look after the wives and
families of some of the wounded who are destitute–
yes, worse than destitute. Dr. Meade is at the Institute
hospital where my committee works, and everyone
says he’s marvelous and–”
“There, there, Mrs. Meade,” said the doctor fondly.
“Don’t go bragging on me in front of folks. It’s little
290


PART TWO
enough I can do, since you wouldn’t let me go in the
army.”
“‘Wouldn’t let!”’ she cried indignantly. “Me? The
town wouldn’t let you and you know it. Why, Scar-
lett, when folks heard he was intending to go to Vir-
ginia as an army surgeon, all the ladies signed a pe-
tition begging him to stay here. Of course, the town
couldn’t do without you.”
“There, there, Mrs. Meade,” said the doctor, basking
obviously in the praise. “Perhaps with one boy at the
front, that’s enough for the time being.”
“And I’m going next year!” cried little Phil hopping
about excitedly. “As a drummer boy. I’m learning
how to drum now. Do you want to hear me? I’ll run
get my drum.”
“No, not now,” said Mrs.
Meade, drawing him
closer to her, a sudden look of strain coming over her
face. “Not next year, darling. Maybe the year after.”
“But the war will be over then!” he cried petulantly,
pulling away from her. “And you promised!”
Over his head the eyes of the parents met and Scar-
lett saw the look. Darcy Meade was in Virginia and
they were clinging closer to the little boy that was left.
Uncle Peter cleared his throat.
291


PART TWO
“Miss Pitty were in a state when Ah lef’ home an’ ef
Ah doan git dar soon, she’ll done swooned.”
“Good-by. I’ll be over this afternoon,” called Mrs.
Meade. “And you tell Pitty for me that if you aren’t
on my committee, she’s going to be in a worse state.”
The carriage slipped and slid down the muddy road
and Scarlett leaned back on the cushions and smiled.
She felt better now than she had felt in months. At-
lanta, with its crowds and its hurry and its undercur-
rent of driving excitement, was very pleasant, very
exhilarating, so very much nicer than the lonely plan-
tation out from Charleston, where the bellow of alli-
gators broke the night stillness; better than Charleston
itself, dreaming in its gardens behind its high walls;
better than Savannah with its wide streets lined with
palmetto and the muddy river beside it. Yes, and tem-
porarily even better than Tara, dear though Tara was.
There was something exciting about this town with
its narrow muddy streets, lying among rolling red
hills, something raw and crude that appealed to the
rawness and crudeness underlying the ﬁne veneer
that Ellen and Mammy had given her. She suddenly
felt that this was where she belonged, not in serene
and quiet old cities, ﬂat beside yellow waters.
The houses were farther and farther apart now, and
292


PART TWO
leaning out Scarlett saw the red brick and slate roof of
Miss Pittypat’s house. It was almost the last house on
the north side of town. Beyond it, Peachtree road nar-
rowed and twisted under great trees out of sight into
thick quiet woods. The neat wooden-paneled fence
had been newly painted white and the front yard it
inclosed was yellow starred with the last jonquils of
the season. On the front steps stood two women in
black and behind them a large yellow woman with
her hands under her apron and her white teeth show-
ing in a wide smile. Plump Miss Pittypat was tee-
tering excitedly on tiny feet, one hand pressed to her
copious bosom to still her ﬂuttering heart. Scarlett
saw Melanie standing by her and, with a surge of dis-
like, she realized that the ﬂy in the ointment of At-
lanta would be this slight little person in black mourn-
ing dress, her riotous dark curls subdued to matronly
smoothness and a loving smile of welcome and hap-
piness on her heart-shaped face.
When a Southerner took the trouble to pack a trunk
and travel twenty miles for a visit, the visit was sel-
dom of shorter duration than a month, usually much
longer. Southerners were as enthusiastic visitors as
they were hosts, and there was nothing unusual in
relatives coming to spend the Christmas holidays and
remaining until July. Often when newly married cou-
293


PART TWO
ples went on the usual round of honeymoon visits,
they lingered in some pleasant home until the birth of
their second child. Frequently elderly aunts and un-
cles came to Sunday dinner and remained until they
were buried years later. Visitors presented no prob-
lem, for houses were large, servants numerous and
the feeding of several extra mouths a minor matter in
that land of plenty. All ages and sexes went visiting,
honeymooners, young mothers showing off new ba-
bies, convalescents, the bereaved, girls whose parents
were anxious to remove them from the dangers of un-
wise matches, girls who had reached the danger age
without becoming engaged and who, it was hoped,
would make suitable matches under the guidance of
relatives in other places. Visitors added excitement
and variety to the slow-moving Southern life and they
were always welcome.
So Scarlett had come to Atlanta with no idea as to
how long she would remain. If her visit proved as
dull as those in Savannah and Charleston, she would
return home in a month. If her stay was pleasant,
she would remain indeﬁnitely. But no sooner had she
arrived than Aunt Pitty and Melanie began a cam-
paign to induce her to make her home permanently
with them.
They brought up every possible argu-
ment. They wanted her for her own self because they
294


PART TWO
loved her. They were lonely and often frightened at
night in the big house, and she was so brave she gave
them courage. She was so charming that she cheered
them in their sorrow. Now that Charles was dead, her
place and her son’s place were with his kindred. Be-
sides, half the house now belonged to her, through
Charles’ will.
Last, the Confederacy needed every
pair of hands for sewing, knitting, bandage rolling
and nursing the wounded.
Charles’ Uncle Henry Hamilton, who lived in bach-
elor state at the Atlanta Hotel near the depot, also
talked seriously to her on this subject. Uncle Henry
was a short, pot-bellied, irascible old gentleman with
a pink face, a shock of long silver hair and an ut-
ter lack of patience with feminine timidities and va-
porings.
It was for the latter reason that he was
barely on speaking terms with his sister, Miss Pit-
typat. From childhood, they had been exact oppo-
sites in temperament and they had been further es-
tranged by his objections to the manner in which she
had reared Charles– “Making a damn sissy out of a
soldier’s son!” Years before, he had so insulted her
that now Miss Pitty never spoke of him except in
guarded whispers and with so great reticence that a
stranger would have thought the honest old lawyer
a murderer, at the least. The insult had occurred on
295


PART TWO
a day when Pitty wished to draw ﬁve hundred dol-
lars from her estate, of which he was trustee, to invest
in a non-existent gold mine. He had refused to per-
mit it and stated heatedly that she had no more sense
than a June bug and furthermore it gave him the ﬁd-
gets to be around her longer than ﬁve minutes. Since
that day, she only saw him formally, once a month,
when Uncle Peter drove her to his ofﬁce to get the
housekeeping money. After these brief visits, Pitty al-
ways took to her bed for the rest of the day with tears
and smelling salts. Melanie and Charles, who were
on excellent terms with their uncle, had frequently of-
fered to relieve her of this ordeal, but Pitty always set
her babyish mouth ﬁrmly and refused. Henry was
her cross and she must bear him. From this, Charles
and Melanie could only infer that she took a profound
pleasure in this occasional excitement, the only excite-
ment in her sheltered life.
Uncle Henry liked Scarlett immediately because, he
said, he could see that for all her silly affectations she
had a few grains of sense. He was trustee, not only of
Pitty’s and Melanie’s estates, but also of that left Scar-
lett by Charles. It came to Scarlett as a pleasant sur-
prise that she was now a well-to-do young woman,
for Charles had not only left her half of Aunt Pitty’s
house but farm lands and town property as well. And
296


PART TWO
the stores and warehouses along the railroad track
near the depot, which were part of her inheritance,
had tripled in value since the war began. It was when
Uncle Henry was giving her an account of her prop-
erty that he broached the matter of her permanent res-
idence in Atlanta.
“When Wade Hampton comes of age, he’s going to
be a rich young man,” he said. “The way Atlanta is
growing his property will be ten times more valuable
in twenty years, and it’s only right that the boy should
be raised where his property is, so he can learn to
take care of it–yes, and of Pitty’s and Melanie’s, too.
He’ll be the only man of the Hamilton name left be-
fore long, for I won’t be here forever.”
As for Uncle Peter, he took it for granted that Scar-
lett had come to stay. It was inconceivable to him that
Charles’ only son should be reared where he could
not supervise the rearing.
To all these arguments,
Scarlett smiled but said nothing, unwilling to com-
mit herself before learning how she would like At-
lanta and constant association with her in-laws. She
knew, too, that Gerald and Ellen would have to be
won over. Moreover, now that she was away from
Tara, she missed it dreadfully, missed the red ﬁelds
and the springing green cotton and the sweet twilight
297


PART TWO
silences. For the ﬁrst time, she realized dimly what
Gerald had meant when he said that the love of the
land was in her blood.
So she gracefully evaded, for the time being, a deﬁ-
nite answer as to the duration of her visit and slipped
easily into the life of the red-brick house at the quiet
end of Peachtree Street.
Living with Charles’ blood kin, seeing the home
from which he came. Scarlett could now understand
a little better the boy who had made her wife, widow
and mother in such rapid succession. It was easy to
see why he had been so shy, so unsophisticated, so
idealistic. If Charles had inherited any of the qualities
of the stern, fearless, hot-tempered soldier who had
been his father, they had been obliterated in child-
hood by the ladylike atmosphere in which he had
been reared. He had been devoted to the childlike
Pitty and closer than brothers usually are to Melanie,
and two more sweet, unworldly women could not be
found.
Aunt Pittypat had been christened Sarah Jane
Hamilton sixty years before, but since the long-past
day when her doting father had fastened his nick-
name upon her, because of her airy, restless, patter-
ing little feet, no one had called her anything else.
298


PART TWO
In the years that followed that second christening,
many changes had taken place in her that made the
pet name incongruous.
Of the swiftly scampering
child, all that now remained were two tiny feet, inad-
equate to her weight, and a tendency to prattle hap-
pily and aimlessly. She was stout, pink-cheeked and
silver-haired and always a little breathless from too
tightly laced stays. She was unable to walk more than
a block on the tiny feet which she crammed into too
small slippers. She had a heart which ﬂuttered at any
excitement and she pampered it shamelessly, fainting
at any provocation. Everyone knew that her swoons
were generally mere ladylike pretenses but they loved
her enough to refrain from saying so. Everyone loved
her, spoiled her like a child and refused to take her
seriously–everyone except her brother Henry.
She liked gossip better than anything else in the
world, even more than she liked the pleasures of the
table, and she prattled on for hours about other peo-
ple’s affairs in a harmless kindly way. She had no
memory for names, dates or places and frequently
confused the actors in one Atlanta drama with the ac-
tors in another, which misled no one for no one was
foolish enough to take seriously anything she said.
No one ever told her anything really shocking or scan-
dalous, for her spinster state must be protected even
299


PART TWO
if she was sixty years old, and her friends were in a
kindly conspiracy to keep her a sheltered and petted
old child.
Melanie was like her aunt in many ways. She had
her shyness, her sudden blushes, her modesty, but
she did have common sense–“Of a sort, I’ll admit
that,” Scarlett thought grudgingly. Like Aunt Pitty,
Melanie had the face of a sheltered child who had
never known anything but simplicity and kindness,
truth and love, a child who had never looked upon
harshness or evil and would not recognize them if
she saw them. Because she had always been happy,
she wanted everyone about her to be happy or, at
least, pleased with themselves. To this end, she al-
ways saw the best in everyone and remarked kindly
upon it. There was no servant so stupid that she did
not ﬁnd some redeeming trait of loyalty and kind-
heartedness, no girl so ugly and disagreeable that she
could not discover grace of form or nobility of charac-
ter in her, and no man so worthless or so boring that
she did not view him in the light of his possibilities
rather than his actualities.
Because of these qualities that came sincerely and
spontaneously from a generous heart,
everyone
ﬂocked about her, for who can resist the charm of
300


PART TWO
one who discovers in others admirable qualities un-
dreamed of even by himself?
She had more girl
friends than anyone in town and more men friends
too, though she had few beaux for she lacked the will-
fulness and selﬁshness that go far toward trapping
men’s hearts.
What Melanie did was no more than all Southern
girls were taught to do–to make those about them
feel at ease and pleased with themselves. It was this
happy feminine conspiracy which made Southern so-
ciety so pleasant. Women knew that a land where
men were contented, uncontradicted and safe in pos-
session of unpunctured vanity was likely to be a very
pleasant place for women to live. So, from the cra-
dle to the grave, women strove to make men pleased
with themselves, and the satisﬁed men repaid lav-
ishly with gallantry and adoration. In fact, men will-
ingly gave the ladies everything in the world except
credit for having intelligence. Scarlett exercised the
same charms as Melanie but with a studied artistry
and consummate skill.
The difference between the
two girls lay in the fact that Melanie spoke kind and
ﬂattering words from a desire to make people happy,
if only temporarily, and Scarlett never did it except to
further her own aims.
301


PART TWO
From the two he loved best, Charles had received
no toughening inﬂuences, learned nothing of harsh-
ness or reality, and the home in which he grew to
manhood was as soft as a bird’s nest. It was such
a quiet, old-fashioned, gentle home compared with
Tara. To Scarlett, this house cried out for the mas-
culine smells of brandy, tobacco and Macassar oil,
for hoarse voices and occasional curses, for guns, for
whiskers, for saddles and bridles and for hounds un-
derfoot. She missed the sounds of quarreling voices
that were always heard at Tara when Ellen’s back
was turned, Mammy quarreling with Pork, Rosa and
Teena bickering, her own acrimonious arguments
with Suellen, Gerald’s bawling threats. No wonder
Charles had been a sissy, coming from a home like
this. Here, excitement never entered in, voices were
never raised, everyone deferred gently to the opin-
ions of others, and, in the end, the black grizzled au-
tocrat in the kitchen had his way. Scarlett, who had
hoped for a freer rein when she escaped Mammy’s su-
pervision, discovered to her sorrow that Uncle Peter’s
standards of ladylike conduct, especially for Mist’
Charles’ widow, were even stricter than Mammy’s.
In such a household, Scarlett came back to herself,
and almost before she realized it her spirits rose to
normal.
She was only seventeen, she had superb
302


PART TWO
health and energy, and Charles’ people did their best
to make her happy. If they fell a little short of this,
it was not their fault, for no one could take out of
her heart the ache that throbbed whenever Ashley’s
name was mentioned. And Melanie mentioned it so
often! But Melanie and Pitty were tireless in planning
ways to soothe the sorrow under which they thought
she labored. They put their own grief into the back-
ground in order to divert her. They fussed about her
food and her hours for taking afternoon naps and for
taking carriage rides. They not only admired her ex-
travagantly, her high-spiritedness, her ﬁgure, her tiny
hands and feet, her white skin, but they said so fre-
quently, petting, hugging and kissing her to empha-
size their loving words.
Scarlett did not care for the caresses, but she basked
in the compliments. No one at Tara had ever said so
many charming things about her. In fact, Mammy
had spent her time deﬂating her conceit. Little Wade
was no longer an annoyance, for the family, black
and white, and the neighbors idolized him and there
was a never-ceasing rivalry as to whose lap he should
occupy.
Melanie especially doted on him.
Even
in his worst screaming spells, Melanie thought him
adorable and said so, adding, “Oh, you precious dar-
ling! I just wish you were mine!”
303