International Treaties in the
Chinese Domestic Legal
System*
XUE Hanqin and JIN Qian**
Abstract
China has made considerable progress in the past thirty years with respect to
implementation of international obligations in its domestic legal system.
Although China’s Constitution and its basic laws do not set forth a general pro-
vision on the status of treaties in the domestic legal system, substantive treaty
obligations undertaken by China, to a large extent, have been incorporated
into special national laws, exerting a direct impact on the economic and social
activities of the country. This article examines various forms and modalities
by which China implements its international obligations at domestic level.
There have been an increasing number of cases where courts apply treaty pro-
visions to give private parties additional legal protection. In the civil and com-
mercial areas, international treaties apply primarily to cases with foreign
elements, while in the criminal law area, China has prescribed almost all of
the international crimes as criminal offences under its national criminal law.

This study focuses on the main legal system of China and does not cover the legal practice of treaty
application in Hong Kong, Macao and Taiwan. Helpful sources regarding this topic include:
Chinese
legislation:
www.lawinfochina.com/index.asp;
Chinese
legislation
in
English:
www.chinalaw.gov.cn/indexEN.jsp; judicial statements on the interpretation and application of
law
of
the
Supreme
People’s
Court:
www.chinalaw.gov.cn/jsp/contentpub/browser/
moreinfo.jsp?page=2&id=co5022565624; ZHU Xiaoqing and HUANG Lie (eds), Relations
between International Treaties and Domestic Law, Papers of the Chinese–German Seminar on
Relations between International Treaties and Domestic Law (World Knowledge Press, Beijing,
1st edn., 2000), ISBN 7-5012-1423-9.

XUE Hanqin, Ambassador of the People’s Republic of China to ASEAN, Legal Counsel of the
Foreign Ministry, member of the International Law Commission (email: hqxue@yahoo.com).
JIN Qian, Division Chief of the Treaty and Law Department of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs
of China. The authors would like to express their deep appreciation to Mr CAO Jianming, for-
merly Vice-President of the Supreme People’s Court of China and to the Treaty Division of
the Treaty and Law Department of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of China for their kind
support in the preparation of this article. The authors are also grateful to Mr SHEN Qinmin
for his research assistance and Professor Sienho Yee for reading the manuscript and providing
helpful comments. The authors, however, take full responsibility for any error that may be
found in this article. The views expressed herein do not represent the position of the institutions
with which the authors are associated. This article was completed at the end of 2007.
# The Author 2009. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.
Advance Access publication 29 April 2009
.......................................................................................................................................
...................................................................................................................................................................
Chinese Journal of International Law (2009), Vol. 8, No. 2, 299–322
doi:10.1093/chinesejil/jmp007
oaded from https://academic.oup.com/chinesejil/article/8/2/299/310810 by Center of Books and information, School of Economic & Management, Tsinghua University user on 19 September


China implements its international obligations in good faith with the view that
effective implementation of treaty obligations will not only serve well its own
development, but also promote peace and cooperation among States.
I. Overview of the current status of treaties in the Chinese
domestic legal system
A. General introduction
1. Ever since the founding of the People’s Republic of China in 1949, implementation
of its international obligations in good faith has been not only one of China’s basic pol-
icies of foreign affairs, but also a fundamental principle of Chinese law. All international
treaties shall be concluded in accordance with the provisions of the Law of the People’s
Republic of China on the Procedure of the Conclusion of Treaties, promulgated in
1990 (hereinafter, “the Treaty Procedure Law”)1 and fulﬁl necessary domestic legal pro-
cedures. Therefore, subject to the nature of the relevant treaty and the mandate of the
contracting governmental department, international treaties to which China is a party in
principle have binding force in domestic law, except for those provisions to which China
has made reservations. Given the extensive variety of treaties both in form and in
subject, however, domestic implementation of treaties is a rather complicated issue.
Under the Treaty Procedure Law, treaties can be concluded at three levels: between
States; between governments; and between governmental departments. As is obvious,
treaties vary in terms of their status and legal effect on the domestic legal system; not
all treaties constitute part of domestic law.
2. In international law, some treaties directly provide for rights and obligations of the
contracting States, whereas others lay down rights and obligations for individuals and
legal persons. Although on the international plane the State assumes international
responsibility for meeting its treaty obligations, at the domestic level, how to implement
such obligations and realize the rights and obligations of individuals and legal persons
depends on the legal system of each contracting State and the way in which it handles the
relations between international law and domestic law. China is a unitary State. At
present, the Chinese Constitution and basic laws2 do not contain any provision on
the legal status of international treaties and their hierarchy in the domestic legal
system. Strictly speaking, international treaties, even after ratiﬁcation, accession or
approval, do not automatically become part of national law and consequently do not
automatically have domestic legal effect.
1
Before the adoption of the Treaty Procedure Law, treaty practice had not been speciﬁcally regulated
by law. The treaty-making power, however, had always been strictly limited under the general pro-
visions of the Constitution. Great importance was always attached to treaty obligations in the dom-
estic legal system.
2
The term “basic laws” in this context refers to the laws prescribed under Chapter II of the Legis-
lation Law of the People’s Republic of China.
300
Chinese JIL (2009)
oaded from https://academic.oup.com/chinesejil/article/8/2/299/310810 by Center of Books and information, School of Economic & Management, Tsinghua University user on 19 September


B. The legal status of treaties in China’s domestic law
3. According to the provisions of the Chinese Constitution and the Treaty Procedure
Law, the Standing Committee of the National People’s Congress (hereinafter “the
NPC”) shall decide on the ratiﬁcation and denunciation of treaties and important agree-
ments concluded with foreign States. Under Article 7 of the Treaty Procedure Law, the
phrase “treaties and important agreements” includes: friendship and cooperation
treaties, peace treaties and other treaties of a political nature; treaties and agreements
on territories and the delimitation of boundaries; treaties and agreements on judicial
assistance and extradition; and treaties and agreements that have provisions inconsistent
with national laws. The State Council has the power to conclude treaties and agreements
with foreign States.3 Procedurally, negotiation and conclusion of international treaties
with foreign States should be approved by the State Council, or submitted to it for
the record. In any case where amendment or revision to domestic laws is required for
a treaty purpose, the domestic legal process for ratifying or approving the treaty
should be the same as the legal procedure for the relevant domestic legislation.
4. Although the Constitution does not speciﬁcally deﬁne the relationship between
the treaty-making power and the legislative power, the relevant provisions of the
Constitution and the Treaty Procedure Law have established speciﬁc statutory limits
on the treaty-making power, both procedurally and substantively. In other words,
the nature and the subject of a treaty determine which State organ is competent to
conclude the treaty and what domestic legal procedure should be followed. Govern-
mental departments have no power to conclude treaties with foreign governments
beyond their competence and the scope of their functions, unless speciﬁcally author-
ized or approved by the State Council or the competent departments. The internal
legal procedure for the conclusion of treaties determines the status and effects of trea-
ties in domestic law. Without proper authorization, governmental departments cannot
conclude treaties on behalf of the State with foreign States. Since treaty negotiations
must be conducted in accordance with the Treaty Procedure Law and follow the
appropriate legal procedure from inception to conclusion, the treaty-making power
is strictly delimited by law.
5. The Legislation Law of the People’s Republic of China, enacted in 2000 (herein-
after, “the Legislation Law”), establishes the hierarchy of Chinese domestic law. The
Constitution ranks the highest, followed in order by laws, administrative regulations,
local regulations and so on. The Legislation Law also includes provisions governing
the legislative power and procedures of the legislative bodies, administrative organs
and agencies at different levels. Article 5, paragraph 2 of the Constitution provides
3
Under the Constitution, the State Council consists of the Premier, Vice Premiers, State Council-
lors, Ministers, Auditor-General and Secretary-General. The Premier has overall responsibility for
the State Council, whereas the Ministers have overall responsibility for the respective ministries or
commissions under their charge. For the powers and functions of the State Council, see Art. 89 of
the Chinese Constitution.
Xue and Jin, International Treaties in the Chinese Domestic Legal System
301
oaded from https://academic.oup.com/chinesejil/article/8/2/299/310810 by Center of Books and information, School of Economic & Management, Tsinghua University user on 19 September


that “no laws or administrative or local rules and regulations may contravene the
Constitution”. Although the Legislation Law does not include any reference to the
status of international treaties in the domestic legal system, it is generally accepted
that treaties concluded between governmental departments should not contravene
higher-level laws, and treaties concluded between governments or States should not con-
travene the Constitution or basic laws, unless the legislature has made appropriate
amendments to the Constitution or the relevant laws.4
6. Under Article 8 of the Legislation Law, matters relating to certain important
areas shall be governed exclusively by laws adopted by the NPC and the Standing
Committee of the NPC. Such matters include, among others: national sovereignty;
criminal offences and punishment; fundamental rights of citizens; expropriation of
non-state assets; or matters that are related to the legal systems on civil affairs,
ﬁnance, taxation, customs and trade; judicial system and arbitration. Accordingly,
any treaty that affects the above-mentioned matters shall be subject to the domestic
legal procedure of the Standing Committee of the NPC for ratiﬁcation or accession.5
Therefore, for instance, China’s ratiﬁcation of the 1966 International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the 1966 International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, which entail necessary amendments to the relevant
Chinese domestic laws, would require a decision on the part of the Standing Com-
mittee of the NPC. As will be illustrated below, substantive treaty obligations have
domestic legal effect and become applicable in domestic law only through speciﬁc
provisions of national legislation. This is quite different from cooperation agreements
concluded between governmental agencies, which are primarily executed by the
administrative departments and do not require national legislation for the purpose
of implementation.
C. The relationship between treaties and domestic law
7. The fact that the Chinese Constitution and basic laws do not contain any general
provision on the relation between treaties and domestic law does not mean that this
issue is totally ignored in China’s domestic laws and legal practice. On the contrary,
since China adopted the open policy and economic reforms at the end of 1978,
there has been a rapid development of national legislation on the legal aspects of
4
WANG Tieya, Status of Treaties in the Chinese Legal System, Zhongguo Guojifa Niankan
[Chinese Yearbook of International Law] (1994); WANG Tieya, Introduction to International
Law (Beijing University Press, 1998), 209.
5
The scope of Art. 7 of the Treaty Procedure Law and that of Art. 8 of the Legislation Law are not
identical. There is a partial overlap between these two categories. Art. 7 of the Treaty Procedure
Law determines which treaties shall require the approval of the Standing Committee of the
NPC before China undertakes binding international legal obligations. Art. 8 of the Legislation
Law determines what laws have to be adopted by the NPC. If a treaty requires possible amendment
or repeal of pre-existing domestic laws as adopted by the NPC, it has to be submitted to the Stand-
ing Committee for consideration, even if it does not fall within the categories of treaties as pre-
scribed in Art. 7 of the Treaty Procedure Law.
302
Chinese JIL (2009)
oaded from https://academic.oup.com/chinesejil/article/8/2/299/310810 by Center of Books and information, School of Economic & Management, Tsinghua University user on 19 September


subject matters with foreign elements.6 In addition to numerous bilateral treaties and
agreements concluded with foreign countries, China is now party to over 300 multi-
lateral treaties. Consequently, the issue of the status of treaty obligations in the domestic
legal system has to be tackled from time to time. At present, there are approximately
70 domestic laws with explicit provisions touching upon treaty obligations. These
provisions, ranging from procedural laws to substantive laws, from criminal and civil
laws to administrative regulations, constitute the legal basis for the application of
international treaties in the Chinese domestic legal system.7 Generally speaking, these
provisions bear the following features.
8. First, a rule of conﬂict has commonly been adopted in these legal provisions, spe-
cifying that if there is a difference between the relevant domestic law and the related
treaty to which China is a party, the treaty provision shall prevail, unless China has
made a reservation to that effect. The ﬁrst national legislation with such a clause was
the Civil Procedure Law of the People’s Republic of China, enacted in 1982 for provi-
sional implementation (hereinafter, “the 1982 Civil Procedure Law”). Article 189 of the
1982 Civil Procedure Law states that for civil proceedings in cases involving foreign
elements, “If an international treaty concluded or acceded to by the People’s Republic
of China contains provisions that differ from provisions of this Law, the provisions of
the international treaty shall apply, except for those on which China has made
reservations.”
9. The same provision is maintained in Article 238 of the Civil Procedure Law of the
People’s Republic of China, as amended in 1991. In the General Principles of the Civil
Law of the People’s Republic of China, promulgated in 1986, Chapter 8 on the Appli-
cation of Law in Civil Relations with Foreign Elements provides in Article 142 that:
The application of law in civil relations with foreign elements shall be determined
by the provisions in this chapter. If any international treaty concluded or acceded
to by the People’s Republic of China contains provisions differing from those in
the civil laws of the People’s Republic of China, the provisions of the inter-
national treaty shall apply, unless the provisions are ones on which the People’s
Republic of China has declared reservations. International practice[8] may be
applied to matters for which neither the law of the People’s Republic of China
nor any international treaty concluded or acceded to by the People’s Republic
of China has any provisions.
6
See the judicial statement on the term “foreign elements” issued by the Supreme People’s Court,
para. 10 below.
7
These domestic laws cover various areas such as economy, trade, customs, shipping, civil aviation,
intellectual property, trademark, arbitration, disarmament, nuclear energy, private international
law, judicial assistance, suppression of transnational crimes, etc.
8
The term “international practice” is taken from the English publication of the State Council. This
term has consistently been used by the courts but, as the subsequent discussion of court judgments
indicates, the term actually refers to customary rules of international trade. See below n.36.
Xue and Jin, International Treaties in the Chinese Domestic Legal System
303
oaded from https://academic.oup.com/chinesejil/article/8/2/299/310810 by Center of Books and information, School of Economic & Management, Tsinghua University user on 19 September


10. According to the judicial directive9 on the interpretation and application of law
issued by the Supreme People’s Court, the term “civil relations and cases with
foreign elements” means civil relations and cases in which (i) one party or both
parties to the dispute are foreign nationals, stateless persons, foreign enterprises or
organizations, (ii) the legal facts that establish, modify or terminate the civil legal
relations between parties arise in foreign territories, or (iii) the disputed object of the
lawsuit is located in a foreign country.10
11. In addition to the provisions contained in these two basic laws, similar rules are
also provided for in dozens of laws dealing with particular subject matters, including, for
example, the Law of Succession of 1985; the Postal Law of 1987; the Environmental
Protection Law of 1989; the Trademark Law adopted in 1982 and amended in
1993; the Patent Law adopted in 1984 and amended in 1992; the Maritime Code of
1992; and the Negotiable Instruments Law of 1995.11 By virtue of these provisions
in domestic laws, international treaties obtain domestic legal effect and prevail over con-
ﬂicting internal laws.
12. The second approach in dealing with potential or possible conﬂicts between
international treaties and domestic law is that the latter explicitly provides that a
special or speciﬁc rule in a treaty can be directly invoked so as to exclude the application
of the related domestic rule or to supplement the domestic rule. For example, Article 23
of the Provisions of the People’s Republic of China on the Use of Red Cross Signs, pro-
mulgated by a joint decree of the State Council and the Central Military Commission of
the People’s Republic of China in 1996, provides: “If there is anything concerning the
protective use of Red Cross signs not covered in these Provisions, the relevant provisions
of the Geneva Conventions and their Additional Protocols shall apply.”
13. Another example can be found in the Regulations on Security Protection in Civil
Aviation of the People’s Republic of China, promulgated by a decree of the State
Council in 1996. Article 2, paragraph 2 states: “These Regulations are also applicable
to civil aircrafts of Chinese nationality that engage in civil aviation activities outside
the territory of the People’s Republic of China, unless otherwise provided in inter-
national treaties concluded or acceded to by the People’s Republic of China.”
14. It should be pointed out, however, that despite the widespread use of these types
of provisions in Chinese law, it cannot be concluded in sweeping terms that
international law prevails over domestic law under the Chinese legal system, because
the prevailing force of treaties in domestic law is not derived from any legal provision
of the Constitution or a national law of general application but is conﬁned to those
international obligations explicitly undertaken by China. The legislative intention
9
On the term “judicial directive”, see part III of this paper.
10
Art. 304, Opinions of the Supreme People’s Court on Certain Issues in the Application of the
Civil Procedure Law of the People’s Republic of China, 1992. See the Chinese text at
www.chinalaw.gov.cn/jsp/jalor_en/disptext.jsp?recno=83&&ttlrec=291.
11
For the full titles of the laws indicated here, see www.chinalaw.gov.cn/indexEN.jsp.
304
Chinese JIL (2009)
oaded from https://academic.oup.com/chinesejil/article/8/2/299/310810 by Center of Books and information, School of Economic & Management, Tsinghua University user on 19 September


behind such a conﬂict rule as discussed above is apparently based on the fact that as a
party to the 1969 Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, China should comply with
its treaty obligations in good faith and should not use its internal law as a justiﬁcation for
evading its international obligations, as provided in Article 27 of the Convention.
15. Moreover, in the Chinese legal practice, treaties acquire prevailing force over
domestic law only when the relevant domestic law includes an explicit stipulation to
that effect. In other words, conﬂict rules operate only to the extent of the speciﬁc
laws concerned. Such legislative restriction on the implementation of treaty obligations
in domestic law is meant to maintain a reasonable balance between national legislative
power and international treaty practice and to ensure uniformity and harmonization in
the domestic legal system.
16. Finally, in most cases, the above-mentioned legal provisions giving prevailing force
to treaties fall within the scope of civil and commercial laws involving civil relations and
disputes with foreign elements. Chinese law, however, does not have any deﬁnitive pro-
visions on the application of treaties in regard to cases other than those with foreign
elements. It is anticipated that with the deepening of reforms under its open policy,
China’s legal practice in this area will continue to develop but treaty obligations, by
their nature, will remain a special domain in the national legal system.
II. Forms and modalities for the application and implementation
of treaties in China’s domestic law
17. As mentioned above, the Chinese Constitution and laws stipulate neither that
treaties are automatically incorporated into domestic law (a monistic approach) nor
that treaties have to be transformed into internal legislation before they are applicable
domestically (a dualistic approach). In practice, most executive agreements are self-
executing, in the sense that they can be implemented domestically without a require-
ment for legislative action. However, treaties with substantive obligations usually
require special internal legislation to be transformed into domestic law and applied
indirectly.
18. Generally speaking, China has adopted three forms or modalities to implement
treaty obligations, namely, execution by administrative measures, transformation of
treaty obligations and direct application of treaties under speciﬁc national legislation.12
Each of these modalities will be examined below.
12
Under Chinese law, there is no statute that explicitly regulates the forms or modalities for imple-
menting treaty provisions at the domestic level or in national courts. The issue was considered by
the NPC during the drafting of the Law on Legislation, but no speciﬁc proposal was formally
tabled before the People’s Congress, due to the complicated nature of implementing treaties.
The three forms analysed in this chapter are summarized from practice and are generally regarded
as established forms in the Chinese legal system. However, it should be noted that the dichotomy
between a monistic approach and a dualistic approach is more of a theoretical distinction, rather
than a systemic choice. In State practice, monism and dualism are often mixed and blurred,
Xue and Jin, International Treaties in the Chinese Domestic Legal System
305
oaded from https://academic.oup.com/chinesejil/article/8/2/299/310810 by Center of Books and information, School of Economic & Management, Tsinghua University user on 19 September


A. Implementation of treaty obligations through administrative measures
19. There are a large number of bilateral cooperation agreements and memoranda of
understanding (MOUs) concluded by the Chinese government or governmental depart-
ments. Under the terms of the Treaty Procedure Law, they all qualify as international
treaties. These treaties are normally executed through administrative decrees or
measures; they typically do not require any further internal legislative action.13 For
instance, MOUs on education and cultural exchanges between governments, agree-
ments on cooperation in the ﬁeld of public health and so on are directly implemented
by the administrative departments concerned. These treaties seldom give rise to legal
disputes in domestic law.
B. Transformation of treaty obligations through national legislation
20. The transformation process normally takes place in one of two ways: (i) transform-
ing treaty obligations by special national legislation; or (ii) incorporating treaty obli-
gations into domestic law through amendments to existing laws.
21. Transforming treaty obligations by special national legislation generally occurs
when the pertinent subject matter is not covered by pre-existing domestic laws. For
example, China enacted special legislation to implement treaties on diplomatic and con-
sular privileges and immunities, disarmament and nonproliferation and the law of the
sea. Given the special characteristics of treaty obligations and considerations of foreign
policy, it is often deemed necessary to adopt special national laws to put treaty obli-
gations into concrete terms for application, or to establish a national implementation
mechanism for the purposes of effective compliance and enforcement at the national
level. For example, after China became a party to the 1961 Vienna Convention on Dip-
lomatic Relations and the 1963 Vienna Convention on Consular Relations, the Stand-
ing Committee of the NPC promulgated the Regulations of the People’s Republic of
China Concerning Diplomatic Privileges and Immunities in 1986 and the Regulations
of the People’s Republic of China Concerning Consular Privileges and Immunities in
1990 (hereinafter, “the Regulations”), thereby transforming conventional provisions
into national laws. Hence, as a formal matter, courts and administrative departments
are to apply the Regulations instead of the Vienna Conventions when dealing with
depending on the subject matter or the nature of the treaty concerned. This is also true with respect
to China.
13
This category includes treaties that require governmental action to promote cooperation in a
certain ﬁeld with a foreign State. At the domestic level, however, the appropriate mechanism
for implementing the agreement—whether by adopting administrative measures or domestic
decrees or regulations—is left to each State party to decide. Even in the case of joint programmes,
there remains substantial room for national discretion for implementation. These sorts of treaties
tend to be very general in their terms and generally do not directly concern individual rights. Even
if such treaties are intended to, among other things, beneﬁt individual interests, they typically do
not provide legal grounds for individual claims if an individual does not receive the expected
beneﬁt from the relevant treaty.
306
Chinese JIL (2009)
oaded from https://academic.oup.com/chinesejil/article/8/2/299/310810 by Center of Books and information, School of Economic & Management, Tsinghua University user on 19 September


cases concerning diplomatic or consular privileges and immunities. Nevertheless, the
Regulations also provide that if there is any matter that is not covered by the Regu-
lations, the Vienna Conventions shall continue to apply. In other words, the provisions
of the Vienna Conventions are directly applicable under certain circumstances, as a sup-
plement to the Regulations.
22. As a follow-up to China’s participation in the 1982 UN Convention on the Law
of the Sea, in 1992 the Standing Committee of the NPC enacted the Law of the
People’s Republic of China on the Territorial Sea and Contiguous Zone, which, to a
large extent, incorporates the relevant provisions of the Convention. Similarly, in
1998, the Law of the People’s Republic of China on the Economic Zones and the Con-
tinental Shelf was adopted. At present, there are a series of national laws and legal
regimes regulating the preservation and uses of the maritime environment and resources.
All of them are in conformity with the provisions of the Law of the Sea Convention.
23. A further example relates to the 1992 Convention on the Prohibition of the
Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their
Destruction (hereinafter, “the CWC”),14 which entered into force for China in
1997.15 After it became a party to the convention, China adopted a series of laws for
domestic implementation: the Regulation of the People’s Republic of China on Con-
trolled Chemicals (1995); the List of Controlled Chemicals by Category (1996); the
Rules of Implementation for the Regulations of the People’s Republic of China on Con-
trolled Chemicals (1997); and the List of Items Newly Included in Category Three of
Controlled Chemicals (1998). These laws serve as the legal framework for the
implementation of the Convention, empowering the government to monitor pro-
duction, trade, use, stockpiling and import of scheduled chemicals. Moreover, the
State Council also issued the Measures for Export Control of Relevant Chemicals
and their Related Equipment and Technology (including the List of Items under
Export Control, 2002), further controlling China’s exports of relevant chemicals and
dual-use chemical equipment and technology.
24. In order to prevent acts of terrorism, including those carried out with toxic
chemicals, in December 2001 the Standing Committee of the Chinese NPC passed
Amendment No. 3 to the Criminal Law, which makes it a criminal offence to manu-
facture, transport or stockpile poisonous substances or the pathogens of infectious dis-
eases, or to release any such substances or pathogens that endanger the public safety.
Severe penalties are provided for such offences. In addition to national legislation, in
accordance with the provisions of the CWC, China has also established a National
Ofﬁce for the Implementation of the CWC, as well as implementation ofﬁces
14
The Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of
Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction, adopted on 30 November 1992, by UN
General Assembly Resolution 47/39. The treaty entered into force on 29 April 1997.
15
It was during the preparation period for the entry into force of the CWC that China, as a signatory
State, adopted the said national laws.
Xue and Jin, International Treaties in the Chinese Domestic Legal System
307
oaded from https://academic.oup.com/chinesejil/article/8/2/299/310810 by Center of Books and information, School of Economic & Management, Tsinghua University user on 19 September


around the country at the provincial level, which are responsible for supervising treaty
implementation.
25. The second type of mechanism for transforming treaty obligations is to amend or
revise pre-existing national laws to harmonize them with treaty provisions. This practice
has become the most common way for China to implement its treaty obligations.
Amendments and revisions may be made either prior to or after China’s participation
in a treaty.
26. In 1995, China adopted the Civil Aviation Law, which codiﬁed the same pro-
visions on civil aircraft rights as those provided for in the Convention on the Inter-
national Recognition of Rights in Aircraft, done at Geneva in 1948. After China
established its national registration regime for civil aircraft, enabling it to fulﬁl the rel-
evant treaty obligations, China acceded to the said Convention in 2000. Similarly, as a
member of the Hague Conference on Private International Law, China participated in
the negotiation of the 1993 Hague Convention on the Protection of Children and
Cooperation in Respect of Inter-country Adoption. Because there were different pro-
visions between the Convention and national adoption laws, China remained a non-
party for many years after the said Convention was adopted. Only after it amended
its national law on adoption did China become a party to the Convention in 2005.
27. In the area of trade law, China joined the World Trade Organization (hereinafter,
“the WTO”) in 2001. The Report of the Working Party on the Accession of China,
which constitutes part of China’s agreement with the WTO, states in paragraph 67:
The representative of China stated that China had been consistently performing
its international treaty obligations in good faith. According to the Constitution
and the Law on the Procedures of Conclusion of Treaties, the WTO Agreement
fell within the category of “important international agreements” subject to the
ratiﬁcation by the Standing Committee of the National People’s Congress.
China would ensure that its laws and regulations pertaining to or affecting
trade were in conformity with the WTO Agreement and with its commitments
so as to fully perform its international obligations. For this purpose, China had
commenced a plan to systematically revise its relevant domestic laws. Therefore,
the WTO Agreement would be implemented by China in an effective and
uniform manner through revising its existing domestic laws and enacting new
ones fully in compliance with the WTO Agreement.16
28. Pursuant to this international commitment, China has repealed, abrogated, revised,
enacted and promulgated more than 3000 domestic laws, administrative regulations and
administrative orders to ensure compliance with WTO rules. In the settlement of trade
disputes, the competent authorities provide legal remedies in accordance with the
16
WT/ACC/CHN/49, Report of the Working Party on the Accession of China, 1 October 2001,
UNPAN1.un.org/intradoc/groups/public/documents/APCITY/UNPAN002144.pdf.
308
Chinese JIL (2009)
oaded from https://academic.oup.com/chinesejil/article/8/2/299/310810 by Center of Books and information, School of Economic & Management, Tsinghua University user on 19 September


relevant national laws. If, however, domestic remedies have proved to be insufﬁcient,
WTO rules and technical standards will be applied.
29. China is a party to all the major international conventions on counter terrorism,
each of which has provisions requiring the States parties to adopt domestic legislation to
establish criminal jurisdiction over such offences and to impose severe punishment
under their national laws. To carry out its international obligations under these treaties
and to combat international terrorism, China has revised the relevant provisions of its
criminal law and criminal procedure law. In particular, China has established universal
jurisdiction over acts such as hijacking of civil aircrafts, kidnapping of hostages, terrorist
bombing and so on and proscribed them as criminal offences under Chinese criminal
law. In 2000, China enacted the Extradition Law of the People’s Republic of China.
30. Article 9 of the Criminal Law of the People’s Republic of China, as revised in 1997,
stipulates: “This law is applicable to the crimes proscribed in the international treaties
concluded or acceded to by the People’s Republic of China and over which the
People’s Republic of China exercises criminal jurisdiction in accordance with its treaty
obligations.”17 Article 11 adds: “the criminal responsibility of foreigners who enjoy
diplomatic privileges and immunities shall be resolved through diplomatic channels.”
31. In the human rights ﬁeld, international conventions on human rights do not have
direct legal force in domestic law. Regardless of whether ratiﬁcation or accession of
human rights treaties requires amendment to or revision of domestic laws, such treaties
are usually applied through domestic legislation. In 2004, the NPC amended the Con-
stitution, adding a special clause on the protection of human rights. The new provision,
Article 33, paragraph 3 of the Constitution, states that “the State respects and protects
human rights”. It thus provides a constitutional guarantee for the protection of human
rights and for the implementation of human rights treaties in Chinese domestic law.
32. China is now a party to all the core human rights treaties, except for the Inter-
national Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, which is yet to be ratiﬁed. Each of
the treaties is implemented through domestic legislation. For example, the Compulsory
Education Law of 1986, the Law on the Protection of Disabled Persons of 1990, the
Law on the Protection of Women’s Rights and Interests of 1992 and the Labor Law
of 1994 all contain clauses implementing international obligations that China has
undertaken under human rights treaties, but none of these domestic laws has any
speciﬁc reference to the treaties.18 This means that when it becomes a party to a
17
This provision ensures that when a treaty to which China has become a party establishes universal
jurisdiction over certain criminal offences, the Chinese courts can exercise criminal jurisdiction
over such crimes. Normally, there are similar offences in national criminal law, but in cases
such as terrorist bombing or terrorist ﬁnancing, Art. 9 is intended to ﬁll any possible gap in existing
national laws. If criminal offences under a treaty are entirely new, it is still expected that special
national legislation will be adopted, either before or after the ratiﬁcation of the treaty.
18
This practice can also be observed in the national implementation reports for human rights con-
ventions periodically submitted to the treaty-monitoring bodies established under each
convention.
Xue and Jin, International Treaties in the Chinese Domestic Legal System
309
oaded from https://academic.oup.com/chinesejil/article/8/2/299/310810 by Center of Books and information, School of Economic & Management, Tsinghua University user on 19 September


human rights treaty, China will ﬁrst ensure that its national laws are in conformity with
the terms of the treaty. Protection of individual human rights will thus be provided
through the national laws. In judicial proceedings, courts will directly apply the relevant
national laws to redress any infringement of individual rights.
C. Direct application of international treaties
33. Since it adopted the open policy and embarked on economic reforms in 1978,
China has ratiﬁed or acceded to more than 200 multilateral treaties; over 90% of the
treaties to which China is a party became applicable to China in the past 30 years.
With respect to treaty performance, China increasingly provides for direct application
in its domestic legal system of speciﬁc international standards and rules established
by treaties. Strictly speaking, such direct application still bears the feature of transform-
ation, rather than adoption, because it is only through speciﬁc national laws that sub-
stantive treaty rules can be applied as part of domestic law. In substance, however,
international standards and rules as such are actually adopted and applied.
34. Pursuant to Article 142 of the General Principles of the Civil Law and Article 238 of
the Civil Procedure Law, Chinese courts have directly applied a number of international
treaties in the context of adjudicating civil cases with foreign elements. For example,
Chinese courts have directly applied: the 1980 United Nations Convention on Contracts
for the International Sale of Goods; the 1929 Warsaw Convention on the Uniﬁcation of
Certain Rules Relating to International Carriage by Air (hereinafter, “the 1929 Warsaw
Convention”); the 1955 Hague Protocol to the Warsaw Convention (hereinafter, “the
1955 Hague Protocol”); the Convention Supplementary to the Warsaw Convention for
the Uniﬁcation of Certain Rules Relating to International Carriage by Air Performed by
a Person Other Than the Contracting Carrier (hereinafter, “the 1961 Guadalajara
Convention”); the 1951 Agreement Concerning International Carriage of Goods by
Rail; and the 1974 United Nations Convention on a Code of Conduct for Liner
Conferences.
35. In Shanghai Zhenhua Port Machinery Co. Ltd v. United Parcel Service of America,
Inc.,19 the Shanghai company brought a lawsuit against UPS for delay in the delivery of
documents sent by the international air carriage. The plaintiff claimed that UPS should
return the carriage fees and pay compensation for the direct economic losses it suffered
from the delayed service. The defendant disputed the amount of compensation owed.
The Jing’an District People’s Court of Shanghai stated that China is a party both to
the 1929 Warsaw Convention and to the 1955 Hague Protocol. Article 11, paragraph
2 of the 1955 Hague Protocol provides:
(a) in the carriage of registered baggage and of cargo, the liability of the carrier is
limited to a sum of two hundred and ﬁfty francs per kilogram, unless the
19
See the Judgment made by the Jing’an District People’s Court of Shanghai in 1994 (Jing Jing Chu
Zi No. 14, 1994).
310
Chinese JIL (2009)
oaded from https://academic.oup.com/chinesejil/article/8/2/299/310810 by Center of Books and information, School of Economic & Management, Tsinghua University user on 19 September


passenger or consignor has made, at the time when the package was handed over
to the carrier, a special declaration of interest in delivery at destination and has
paid a supplementary sum if the case so requires.
(b) In the case of loss, damage or delay of part of registered baggage or cargo, or of
any object contained therein, the weight to be taken into consideration in deter-
mining the amount to which the carrier’s liability is limited shall be only the
total weight of the package or packages concerned.
36. These provisions are expressly stated on the back of the airway bill prepared by the
defendant. Hence, the court determined that these provisions had been accepted both
by the plaintiff and by the defendant. The court found that there was no legal basis for
the plaintiff’s claims for refund of carriage charges and compensation for economic
losses. Instead, the court decided that the defendant should compensate the plaintiff’s
monetary loss for an amount up to the limit of the carrier’s liability prescribed in the
1955 Hague Protocol.
37. Another typical case is Abdul Waheed v. China Eastern Airlines.20 This was a
dispute concerning a contract for international air passenger transport, which was
tried by the People’s Court of Pudong New Area in Shanghai. The plaintiff, Abdul
Waheed, a Pakistani passenger, ﬁled a lawsuit against China Eastern Airlines, claiming
compensation for losses caused by the delay of the defendant’s ﬂight, which left the
plaintiff stranded at Hong Kong Airport. After the defendant failed to take the necessary
measures to help the plaintiff reach his destination, the plaintiff bought another air
ticket at his own expense to complete his journey.
38. In accordance with Article 142 of the General Principles of the Civil Law, the
court decided that the 1955 Hague Protocol and the 1961 Guadalajara Convention
should apply in this case, because China and Pakistan are parties to both treaties.
Under the treaties, when a passenger has paid in full the air transport charges by
buying a ticket, the airline carrier has a legal obligation to deliver the contracted carriage
service to the passenger. Under Article 19 of the Warsaw Convention, “the carrier is
liable for damage occasioned by delay in the carriage by air of passengers.”21Accord-
ingly, the court decided that the defendant should compensate the plaintiff for the
loss he had suffered.
39. In maritime collision cases under Article 268 of the Maritime Code, which con-
tains a treaty application clause, domestic courts directly apply the 1972 Convention on
the International Regulations for Preventing Collisions at Sea. For example, in Trade
Quicker Inc. Monrovia, Liberia v. the Golden Light Overseas Management S.A.
Panama,22 tried by the Tianjin Admiralty Court, the plaintiff pleaded that one of its
20
See the Judgment made by the People’s Court of Pudong New Area in Shanghai in 2005 (Pu Min
Yi Chu No. 12164, 2005).
21
Warsaw Convention, Art. 19.
22
See the Judgment made by the Tianjin Admiralty Court in 1990 (Jin Hai Fa Shi Zi No. 4, 1990).
Xue and Jin, International Treaties in the Chinese Domestic Legal System
311
oaded from https://academic.oup.com/chinesejil/article/8/2/299/310810 by Center of Books and information, School of Economic & Management, Tsinghua University user on 19 September


ships collided with one of the defendant’s ships. The plaintiff sought compensation for
the damage caused to its ship. The Tianjin Admiralty Court tried the case and applied
the relevant treaty. The court found that the plaintiff should bear the major responsi-
bility because its ship violated the provisions of Rule 5, Rule 8(a), Rule 15, Rule 16
and Rule 34(a) of the 1972 Convention on the International Regulations for Preventing
Collisions at Sea. The court also found that the defendant should bear minor respon-
sibility because its ship violated the provisions of Rule 5, Rule 7(b) and Rules 34(a)
and (d) of the said Convention. The court delivered a judgment regarding the
amount of compensation that assessed damages proportionate to fault.
40. Yu Xiaohong v. Goodhill Navigation, S.A., Panama23 involved a dispute over com-
pensation for personal injury of a ship’s pilot. The Ningbo Admiralty Court found that
the defendant failed to comply with the provisions of Regulation 17, Chapter V of the
1974 International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea, which regulates the use of
pilot ladders to help assure the pilot’s safety when he is boarding the ship. As a result of
the defendant’s failure to comply with the regulations, the pilot ladder was broken and
the plaintiff fell from the ladder. The plaintiff broke his spine and suffered permanent
paralysis. The defendant could not prove that there was any fault or negligence on the
part of the plaintiff. Hence, the court found that the defendant was liable for the injury.
In accordance with the treaty provisions, the court awarded the plaintiff 3 685 581.53
yuan (Chinese renminbi) as compensation. This was the largest amount of compen-
sation ever awarded by a Chinese court for personal injury at sea. The decision has
exerted a signiﬁcant impact on judicial practice in this ﬁeld.
41. In the area of intellectual property protection, the Rules for Implementation of
the Trademark Law of the People’s Republic China, as amended in 1995 by the State
Council, provide in Article 3, paragraph 3 that “applications ﬁled for international
registration shall be submitted in accordance with the Madrid Agreement Concerning
the International Registration of Marks”. The Copyright Law prescribes in Article 2,
paragraph 3 that “any work of a foreigner published outside the territory of the
People’s Republic of China which is eligible to enjoy copyright under an agreement
concluded between the country to which the foreigner belongs and China, or under
an international treaty to which both countries are parties, shall be protected in
accordance with this Law”. In addition, Article 18 of the Patent Law states that “if
a foreigner, foreign enterprise or other foreign organization having no regular resi-
dence or place of business in China ﬁles an application for a patent in China, the
application shall be handled under this Law in accordance with any agreement con-
cluded between the country to which the applicant belongs and China, or any inter-
national treaty to which both countries are parties, or on the basis of the principle of
reciprocity”.
23
See the Judgment made by the Ningbo Admiralty Court in 1999 (Yong Hai Shi Chu Zi No. 55,
1999).
312
Chinese JIL (2009)
oaded from https://academic.oup.com/chinesejil/article/8/2/299/310810 by Center of Books and information, School of Economic & Management, Tsinghua University user on 19 September


42. In Twentieth Century Fox Film Corporation v. Beijing Superstore for Cultural and
Arts Publications and AV Products Inc.,24 the plaintiff alleged that the defendant had
infringed its copyrights that were entitled to protection under China’s copyright law,
the Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of the People’s Republic
of China and the Government of the United States of America on the Protection of
Intellectual Property concluded in 17 January 1992 (hereinafter “the MOU on the
Protection of Intellectual Property”), and the Berne Convention for the Protection of
Literary and Artistic Works, which entered into force for China on 15 December
1992. Speciﬁcally, the plaintiff alleged that the defendant should be held liable
because the defendant had, without the prior permission of the plaintiff copyright
owner, recorded and distributed the plaintiff’s copyrighted movie products. The First
Intermediate People’s Court of Beijing Municipality decided that the plaintiff’s
movie products were protected under Chinese law, even if the copyrights were obtained
in the United States, because China was a party to the Berne Convention and the MOU
on the Protection of Intellectual Property. Accordingly, the court ordered the defendant
to halt its sales of copyrighted products and pay damages to the plaintiff.
43. In 1995, the Walt Disney Company instituted legal proceedings against the
Beijing Publishing House Group for copyright infringement.25 On appeal from the
lower court’s judgment, the Higher People’s Court of Beijing considered the case. In
its judgment, the court said that according to the provisions of the MOU on the Protec-
tion of Intellectual Property, “the works of USA nationals are under the protection of
Chinese laws as from March 17, 1992. Walt Disney enjoys the copyright protection for
its ﬁne arts works such as cartoon images . . . involved in this case, the commercial use of
which constitutes acts of tort.” The Court decided that the defendants should be held
liable for their tortious acts.26
44. The above three forms or modalities for treaty implementation in Chinese
domestic law have been developed primarily in the past 30 years. These three modalities
can be seen as legal responses to China’s opening process and to the challenges posed by
economic globalization. International treaties were often handled in a fragmented
way during the early stages of China’s economic reform process. However, as more
treaty provisions are incorporated into domestic law, their legal status and application
in the domestic legal system have become an issue of fundamental importance.
Consequently, the issue is a subject of ongoing legal studies in China. As legal practice
continues to develop, it is conceivable that the domestic application of treaty obligations
will be dealt with more systematically at the national level.
24
See the Judgment made by the First Intermediate People’s Court of Beijing Municipality in 1996
(Yi Zhong Zhi Chu Zi No. 62, 1996).
25
See the Judgment made by the First Intermediate People’s Court of Beijing Municipality in 1994
(Zhong Jing Zhi Chu Zi No. 141, 1994).
26
See the Judgment made by the Higher People’s Court of Beijing in 1995 (Gao zhi zhong Zi No.
23, 1995).
Xue and Jin, International Treaties in the Chinese Domestic Legal System
313
oaded from https://academic.oup.com/chinesejil/article/8/2/299/310810 by Center of Books and information, School of Economic & Management, Tsinghua University user on 19 September


III. Judicial directives on the interpretation and application of
treaty obligations and related practice
45. Under the Chinese judicial system, the Supreme People’s Court may issue circu-
lars and notices to the lower courts. Such circulars and notices serve as judicial direc-
tives on the interpretation and application of law. They are authoritative and binding
on the lower courts.27 As economic and trade relations with foreign countries rapidly
increase, civil and commercial cases with foreign elements are also on the rise. In
order to ensure general compliance with treaty obligations in the judicial process,
the Supreme People’s Court has issued several circulars and notices to the lower
courts on matters that are directly related to the interpretation and application of
treaty provisions. The Supreme People’s Court has also established a judicial review
mechanism to supervise the enforcement of international commercial arbitral
awards by the lower courts.28
A. Judicial directives on the interpretation and application of treaty
obligations issued by the Supreme People’s Court
46. The Chinese legal system is not a case law system: there is no such legal principle as
stare decisis in its judicial practice. Judicial directives given by the Supreme People’s
Court therefore play a signiﬁcant role in guiding the lower courts in the interpretation
and application of law. As noted above, under Article 142 of the General Principles of
the Civil Law, Article 238 of the Civil Procedure Law and relevant provisions of other
laws, international treaties can be directly invoked as the legal basis of judicial decisions.
However, there are often occasions when lower courts raise inquiries because they are
not certain about the exact meaning of some treaty term or the intention of the contract-
ing States parties. To help resolve such uncertainties, the Supreme People’s Court has
issued several notices of judicial directives on the interpretation and application of inter-
national treaties on civil and commercial matters.
47. Since the middle of the 1980s, China has concluded numerous extradition trea-
ties, as well as bilateral agreements on judicial assistance in civil and criminal matters.
For the implementation of these treaties in Chinese courts, in 1988 the Supreme
People’s Court issued the Circular on the Implementation of Judicial Assistance Agree-
ments Concluded between China and Other Countries. The Circular clariﬁed the
implementation procedure and the review of documents for service to the competent
national authority designated to handle requests for judicial assistance with other con-
tracting States.
27
In Chinese, such circulars and notices are termed “judicial interpretation”, but they are not such as
normally understood in other legal systems. In order to avoid any possible misunderstanding, the
authors use the present explanatory term.
28
Circular of the Supreme People’s Court on Certain Issues for the Nulliﬁcation of Arbitral Awards
with Foreign Elements by People’s Courts, promulgated on 23 April 1998; for the Chinese text,
see www.people.com.cn/zixun/ﬂfgk/item/dwjjf/falv/9/9-2-1-12.html.
314
Chinese JIL (2009)
oaded from https://academic.oup.com/chinesejil/article/8/2/299/310810 by Center of Books and information, School of Economic & Management, Tsinghua University user on 19 September


48. In 1993, the Supreme People’s Court published the Circular on some issues con-
cerning the full implementation of the Copyright Law of the People’s Republic of
China. Article 2, paragraph 2 of the Circular provides: “The people’s courts, when
dealing with copyright cases involving foreign elements, should apply the Copyright
Law of the People’s Republic of China and other related laws and regulations. Where
the domestic laws have provisions different from those of the international treaties con-
cluded or acceded to by China, the provisions of international treaties shall prevail,
except for those provisions to which China has made reservations. Given the speciﬁc
circumstances of each case, if neither domestic laws nor international treaties have
any provision on the matter concerned, international custom may be taken into
account on the basis of reciprocity.”29
49. The following year, the Supreme People’s Court issued another notice requiring
the lower courts, when hearing intellectual property cases, to “strictly apply the Trade-
mark Law of the People’s Republic of China, the Patent Law of the People’s Republic of
China, the Law of the People’s Republic of China on Technology Contract,[30] the
Copyright Law of the People’s Republic of China, the Law of the People’s Republic
of China against Unfair Competition, and other laws and regulations, as well as the
international treaties on the protection of intellectual property concluded or acceded
to by China.”31 These circulars of the Supreme People’s Court, given their binding
effects in judicial hearings, operate to ensure that the lower courts properly apply the
law by strictly adhering to treaty provisions.
B. Treaty interpretation by the executive departments in the legal proceedings
50. In addition to the above judicial directives issued solely by the Supreme People’s
Court, the Court may circulate notices jointly with the competent authorities of govern-
mental departments to provide guidance for lower courts on treaty implementation.
51. In 1987, the Supreme People’s Court, along with the Supreme People’s Procur-
atorate, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Public Security, Ministry of National
Security and Ministry of Justice, jointly issued the Provisions on Certain Questions
in Regard to Cases with Foreign Elements, providing guidance to the lower courts in
the interpretation and application of international treaties. In 1995, the Supreme
People’s Court and other authorities issued another document with similar content.32
In the 1995 Provisions, Article 3 of Chapter 1 stipulates: “in the handling of cases
with foreign elements, on the basis of the principle of reciprocity and mutual beneﬁt,
29
The English translation is provided by the authors. Circular of the Supreme People’s Court on
Certain Issues Concerning Full Implementation of the Copyright Law of the People’s Republic
of China, promulgated on 24 December 1993; for the Chinese text, see www.sipo.gov.cn/sipo/
ﬂfg/bq/sfjs/200703/t20070328_147695.htm.
30
Note by the authors: The Law of the People’s Republic of China on Technology Contract has been
incorporated into the Contract Law of 1999.
31
The text is the author’s translation.
32
This document replaces the 1987 Provisions.
Xue and Jin, International Treaties in the Chinese Domestic Legal System
315
oaded from https://academic.oup.com/chinesejil/article/8/2/299/310810 by Center of Books and information, School of Economic & Management, Tsinghua University user on 19 September


international treaty obligations undertaken by China should be strictly observed. In case
domestic laws or internal regulations are in conﬂict with China’s treaty obligations, the
relevant provisions of international treaties shall prevail, except for those provisions to
which China has made reservations. The competent authorities shall not invoke dom-
estic laws or internal regulations as a justiﬁcation for the refusal to perform treaty
obligations.”33
52. The treaties referred to above apparently mean only those concluded or acceded
to by China. The 1995 Provisions has at least two important implications. First, in
handling cases with foreign elements, the courts should give effect to treaty obligations
as provided by relevant legislation. Second, in interpreting and applying domestic laws,
the courts should give due regard to China’s international treaty obligations and con-
strue domestic laws in a way that does not conﬂict with those obligations.34
53. In 1987, the Ministry of Foreign Trade and Economic Cooperation (now the
Ministry of Commerce), which was responsible for the negotiation and conclusion of
the 1980 United Nations Convention on Contracts for the International Sale of
Goods, published an ofﬁcial document entitled “Some Issues in the Implementation
of the UN Convention on Contracts for the International Sale of Goods”. The docu-
ment contained explanations of the applicable law for contracts for international sale
of goods and identiﬁed the countries to which the Convention is applicable. The
Supreme People’s Court transmitted the document in the form of a notice to the
lower courts.
54. In 1991, China became a party to the Convention on Service Abroad of Judicial
and Extra-judicial Documents in Civil or Commercial Matters, done at The Hague in
1965 (hereinafter, “Hague Service Convention”). In 1992, to help promote effective
implementation of the Convention by the judiciary, and by Chinese diplomatic and
consular missions abroad, the Supreme People’s Court, Ministry of Foreign Affairs
and Ministry of Justice jointly issued two documents: (i) the Circular on the Relevant
Procedures to Implement the Convention on Service Abroad of Judicial and Extra-
judicial Documents in Civil or Commercial Matters; and (ii) the Measures on the
Implementation of the Hague Service Convention. The Circular speciﬁed the compe-
tent authorities and the procedures for the service of documents through diplomatic
channels and judicial channels, respectively. The Measures contained speciﬁcations,
in particular, on the time limitation for service, as well as rules for translations and
33
The English text of the Provisions is not available. The translation is done by the authors;
for the Chinese text, see www.chinalaw.gov.cn/jsp/contentpub/browser/moreinfo.jsp?page=
2&id=co5022565624.
34
In August 2002, the Supreme People’s Court issued Regulations of the Supreme People’s Court on
Several Issues in the Hearing of International Trade and Administrative Cases. Art. 9 of the Regu-
lations provides that if there are two possible interpretations of a rule or provision applicable to an
international trade or administrative case, and if one interpretation is in conformity with national
treaty obligations, such an interpretation should be adopted, www.chinalaw.gov.cn/jsp/jalor_en/
disptext.jsp?recno=2&&ttlrec=4.
316
Chinese JIL (2009)
oaded from https://academic.oup.com/chinesejil/article/8/2/299/310810 by Center of Books and information, School of Economic & Management, Tsinghua University user on 19 September


communication of documents. Since Chinese national laws do not contain any special
procedural rules for international judicial assistance, the above-mentioned notices issued
by the Supreme People’s Court help the courts to obtain proper information on the
status of treaties that China has concluded with foreign countries. The notices also
give legal guidance for the uniform implementation of the Hague Service Convention
by domestic courts.
55. With respect to treaty interpretation, courts normally interpret treaty terms as
they do domestic laws. That is, they take into account the literal meaning of the
treaty terms, the relevant context and the object and purpose of the treaty, which is
usually speciﬁed in the preambular paragraphs and the main clauses of the treaty. Gen-
erally speaking, courts do not directly refer to the relevant provisions on treaty interpret-
ation in the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties.
56. If the lower courts think the treaty terms are ambiguous, or they need further
information regarding the treaty, they may submit a request, through the Supreme
People’s Court, to obtain a legal opinion concerning treaty issues from the Treaty
and Law Department of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. The Department’s opinions
might address, for example, the meaning of certain treaty terms, the scope of treaty pro-
visions or the status of States Parties to a treaty. In response to a request from a lower
court, the Supreme People’s Court would either give its opinion on the legal issues
or refer the request to the Foreign Ministry. The Treaty and Law Department of the
Ministry, upon receiving a request, would give its legal opinion on the interpretation
and application of the treaty terms in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties. In its statement, the Department may
also include information regarding the Chinese practice and the reciprocal basis of
application with the country concerned. In practice, this mechanism is utilized primar-
ily to address issues related to diplomatic privileges and immunities and sovereign
immunities. Opinions of the Department are normally sent back to the Supreme
People’s Court for consideration. In principle, these opinions are taken by the courts
as dispositive, since they often involve foreign policy and the treaty-making power,
matters that are entrusted to the administrative department and to the State Council
under the law.
C. Recognition and enforcement of arbitral awards
57. Recognition and enforcement of arbitral awards is an important way to guarantee
the legal protection of the rights and interests of parties to arbitration proceedings. Pur-
suant to the provisions of the Civil Procedure Law and the 1995 Arbitration Law of the
People’s Republic of China (hereinafter, “the Arbitration Law”), Chinese courts have
jurisdiction to determine whether an arbitral award resulting from a commercial arbitra-
tion with foreign elements should be enforced, and to determine whether an arbitral
award rendered by a foreign commercial arbitration tribunal should be recognized
and enforced. Under Chinese law, these two types of arbitral awards are collectively
referred to as international commercial arbitral awards.
Xue and Jin, International Treaties in the Chinese Domestic Legal System
317
oaded from https://academic.oup.com/chinesejil/article/8/2/299/310810 by Center of Books and information, School of Economic & Management, Tsinghua University user on 19 September


58. According to the Arbitration Law, all the arbitral institutions established under
Chinese law are competent to deal with commercial arbitrations with foreign elements,
the awards of which are classiﬁed as arbitral awards with foreign elements. Currently,
there are 185 arbitral institutions in China. In practice, if a party applies to a court
for enforcement of an arbitral award, the court examines the award according to the pro-
visions of Article 71 of the Arbitration Law and Article 260 of the Civil Procedure Law.
To date, courts have ordered enforcement of awards in most cases; they have rarely
refused an application for enforcement.
59. In accordance with Article 269 of the Civil Procedure Law, if a Chinese court is
requested to recognize and enforce an award rendered by a foreign arbitration tribunal,
the party seeking enforcement shall apply to the intermediate people’s court in the place
where the party against whom the award is to be enforced has his domicile, or where his
property is located. The court shall resolve the matter in accordance with the inter-
national treaties concluded or acceded to by the People’s Republic of China, or on
the basis of reciprocity.
60. In 1987, China became a party to the 1958 United Nations Convention on the
Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards (hereinafter, “the New York
Convention”). Under Article V of the Convention, a Chinese court may review appli-
cations for recognition and enforcement of arbitral awards delivered by a tribunal in
another contracting State. With a view to implementing the New York Convention,
in 1987 the Supreme People’s Court issued the Circular on the Implementation of
the Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards to
Which China is a Party. The Circular speciﬁed that, subject to the reservations made
by China, the Convention applies only to disputes arising from contractual and non-
contractual commercial legal relations, as deﬁned under Chinese law. The Circular
explained the meaning of the term “contractual and non-contractual commercial
legal relations,” speciﬁed which courts have jurisdiction to review foreign arbitral
awards and clariﬁed the legal basis of judicial review. In practice, Chinese courts gener-
ally recognize and enforce awards ordered by the International Court of Arbitration of
the International Chamber of Commerce, the Arbitration Institute of the Stockholm
Chamber of Commerce, the Korean Commercial Arbitration Board and the Sugar
Association of London.
61. In addition to the New York Convention, China has concluded agreements on
judicial assistance in civil and commercial matters with more than 30 countries.
Many of these agreements include clauses on mutual recognition and enforcement of
arbitral awards. Most of the agreements specify that the New York Convention serves
as the legal basis for cooperation. Moreover, under Article 269 of the Civil Procedure
Law, courts also have the authority to review, on the basis of reciprocity, applications
for recognition and enforcement of arbitral awards delivered in non-contracting
States. In reality, however, as of this writing, there has been no such legal case.
62. In practice, Chinese courts review only the procedural aspects of international
commercial arbitral awards; they do not review the substance of such awards. To
318
Chinese JIL (2009)
oaded from https://academic.oup.com/chinesejil/article/8/2/299/310810 by Center of Books and information, School of Economic & Management, Tsinghua University user on 19 September


date, the courts have generally been quite cautious in invoking public policy or public
order as a ground to refuse recognition or enforcement.
63. The Supreme People’s Court established a special reporting mechanism in 1995
for the purpose of supervising the enforcement of arbitral awards with foreign elements
and the recognition and enforcement of foreign arbitral awards in the lower courts.
Speciﬁcally, the Court issued a Circular on Issues Related to the Handling by the
People’s Courts of Arbitration with Foreign Elements and Foreign Arbitration. The
Circular provides:
In cases where one party applies to the people’s court for enforcement of an arbi-
tral award with foreign elements ordered by a Chinese arbitral institution, or for
recognition and enforcement of an arbitral award ordered by a foreign arbitration
tribunal, . . . before the court decides to refuse an application for enforcement or
for recognition and enforcement, such a decision shall ﬁrst be reported to the
High People’s Court for review. If the High People’s Court conﬁrms the decision
to refuse enforcement, or to refuse recognition and enforcement, that decision
shall be subject to further review by the Supreme People’s Court. A decision to
refuse enforcement shall not be ﬁnal until after conﬁrmation by the Supreme
People’s Court.35
64. Thus, the Circular clariﬁes that a lower court’s decision refusing enforcement of an
arbitral award with foreign elements, or refusing recognition and enforcement of a
foreign arbitral award, can be effective only after conﬁrmation by the Supreme
People’s Court. This mechanism may seem quite strict, and extraordinary, but in
Chinese economic and commercial activities, commercial arbitration is one of the
major forms of legal recourse for the settlement of disputes. Recognition and enforce-
ment of arbitral awards has a direct bearing on the legal protection of the rights and
obligations of natural and legal persons, and particularly of foreign persons, and thus
on China’s effort to secure a stable economic order and promote smooth economic
relations with foreign countries. The supervision by the Supreme People’s Court has
served to prevent local protectionism and ensure that legal rules are applied uniformly
and consistently throughout the country.
D. The application of international trade custom
65. Article 142, paragraph 3 of the General Principles of the Civil Law provides that
“international practice”36 may be applied to resolve issues that are not speciﬁcally
addressed either by Chinese law or by any international treaty to which China is a
35
Translated by the authors.
36
As stated previously, the English term “international practice” is used by the State Council. The
term guo ji xi guan in Chinese, if literally translated into English, is “international usage” or “inter-
national customary practice”, but in the present context, the term refers to a “customary rule of
international trade” or “international trade custom”.
Xue and Jin, International Treaties in the Chinese Domestic Legal System
319
oaded from https://academic.oup.com/chinesejil/article/8/2/299/310810 by Center of Books and information, School of Economic & Management, Tsinghua University user on 19 September


party. Furthermore, Article 145, paragraph 1 of the General Principles of the Civil Law
and Article 126, paragraph 1 of the Contract Law of the People’s Republic China also
provide that the parties to a contract with foreign elements may choose the applicable
law for the settlement of disputes arising from the contract. If the parties choose a cus-
tomary rule of international trade as the applicable law, the court will apply that rule
under the terms speciﬁed in Article 142, paragraph 3.
66. Chinese courts have frequently invoked the Uniform Customs and Practices for
Documentary Credits 1993 (UCP 500), adopted by the International Chamber of
Commerce and endorsed by the United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law (UNCITRAL),37 to settle disputes concerning letters of credit. In 2005, in
order to provide legal guidance to the lower courts for the adjudication of disputes
involving letters of credit, the Supreme People’s Court issued a notice entitled “The Pro-
visions of the Supreme People’s Court on Some Issues Concerning the Trial of Cases
Involving Disputes over Letters of Credit.” The notice explicitly directs courts to
apply the UCP 500 as a customary rule of international trade for the settlement of dis-
putes related to letters of credit. Article 2 of the Provisions states:
When the people’s court hears a case involving a dispute related to a letter of
credit, if the parties have chosen an international customary rule or other pro-
visions as the applicable law, their choice of law will govern; if the parties have
made no choice on the applicable law, the Uniform Customs and Practice for
Documentary Credits of the International Chamber of Commerce and other rel-
evant international practices shall apply.38
67. In both Liaoning Textiles Import and Export Corp. v. San Paolo IMI Bank of Italy39
and Shenzhen Gaofurui Cereal, Oil and Food Co. Ltd v. Deutsche Bank,40 the courts
referred to the UCP 500 as the applicable law in deciding the rights and obligations
of the parties, on the ground that the UCP 500 has been widely accepted by banks
throughout the world as a customary rule of international trade governing the rights
and obligations of parties in relation to letters of credit. The courts ruled that since
Chinese law does not have any provision governing letters of credit, in accordance
with the General Principles of the Civil Law, the UCP 500 should be used as the appli-
cable law for the resolution of the case. In the case of Shenzhen Gaofurui Cereal, Oil and
Food Co. Ltd v. Deutsche Bank, the defendant moved to apply the law of the country
where payment was effected, i.e. German law. However, the court denied the motion
37
www.uncitral.org/uncitral/en/other_organizations_texts.html.
38
www.fdi.gov.cn/pub/FDI_EN/Laws/GeneralLawsandRegulations/JudicialInterpretation/
t20060620_51263.jsp.
39
See the Judgment made by the Second Intermediate People’s Court of Beijing Municipality in
1999 (Er Zhong Jing Chu Zi No. 1636, 1999).
40
See the Judgment made by the Second Intermediate People’s Court of Beijing Municipality in
1996 (Er Zhong Jing Chu Zi No. 471, 1996).
320
Chinese JIL (2009)
oaded from https://academic.oup.com/chinesejil/article/8/2/299/310810 by Center of Books and information, School of Economic & Management, Tsinghua University user on 19 September


for the reason that the defendant failed to provide the court with the relevant German
laws.
68. In deciding maritime disputes, the courts have also applied the Hague–Visby
Rules
as
international
trade
custom.
In
Shanghai
E&T
Intl
Trans.
Co.,
Ltd v. Sea-Land Orient (China) Ltd.,41 the plaintiff consigned the goods to the defen-
dant for carriage by sea, as speciﬁed in the sale contract. The “primary clause” written on
the back of the Bill of Lading provided that the Bill of Lading should be subject to the
provisions of the Carriage of Goods by Sea Act of 1936 (hereinafter, “COGSA”42) and
the Hague–Visby Rules. On 4 January 1996, the plaintiff ﬁled the lawsuit against the
defendant in the Shanghai Admiralty Court, alleging that the defendant released the
goods without being presented with the Bill of Lading. The court found that, although
both parties to the dispute were legal persons under Chinese law, the destination port for
the carriage of goods in this case was a foreign port. Thus, the contractual relations
between the two parties for the carriage of goods by sea are properly classiﬁed as
“legal relations with foreign elements”. Article 269 of the 1992 Maritime Code of
the People’s Republic of China provides that “the parties to a contract may choose
the law applicable to such contract, unless the law provides otherwise”. The court
acknowledged that the parties’ choice of COGSA as the applicable law was a valid
choice. However, Section 1312 of COGSA clearly states: “This chapter shall apply to
all contracts for carriage of goods by sea to or from ports of the United States.”43
Since the goods carried by the defendant in this case sailed from a departure port in
Shanghai, China, not in the United States, the court ruled that the shipment was not
“from a port of the United States” within the meaning of COGSA, and therefore
COGSA was not applicable in this case.
69. The parties also chose the Hague–Visby Rules as the applicable law in their Bill
of Lading. The court declared: “As China is not a party to (them), the Hague–Visby
Rules as an international treaty are not binding on China. However, since they have
been accepted on a world-wide basis, they can be applied as international trade
custom to the case.”44 The court ﬁnally decided that according to Article 269 of the
Maritime Code of the People’s Republic of China, the Hague–Visby Rules and
the agreement on the Bill of Lading between the parties, the defendant should pay
the plaintiff the damages it had suffered, including loss of goods, and the interest
accrued thereon. The fact that the Shanghai Admiralty Court accepted the Hague–
Visby Rules as the applicable law in this case may not be taken as evidence that the
Court recognized them as international treaty law or international trade custom.
41
See the Judgment made by the Shanghai Maritime Court in 1996 (Hu Hai Fa Shang Zi No. 6,
1996).
42
www.access.gpo.gov/uscode/title46a/46a_22_.html.
43
46 USC Appendix, § 1312.
44
Judgment made by the Shanghai Maritime Court in 1996 (Hu Hai Fa Shang Zi No. 6, 1996).
Xue and Jin, International Treaties in the Chinese Domestic Legal System
321
oaded from https://academic.oup.com/chinesejil/article/8/2/299/310810 by Center of Books and information, School of Economic & Management, Tsinghua University user on 19 September


Article 269 of the Maritime Code of the People’s Republic of China authorized the
parties to choose the applicable law, and the parties chose the Hague–Visby Rules.
IV. Conclusion
70. In conclusion, China has made considerable progress in the past 30 years with
respect to the implementation of international obligations in its domestic legal
system. To a large extent, substantive treaty obligations undertaken by China have
been incorporated into special national laws, exerting a direct impact on the economic
and social activities of the country. Although there is no such maxim as “ubi jus, ibi
remedium” (where there is a right, there is a remedy) in the Chinese legal system,
there has been a rapid increase in the number of individuals and other legal persons
who resort to the courts for the protection of their rights and interests. In appropriate
cases, the courts apply treaty provisions that have been incorporated into domestic law to
give private parties additional legal protection.
71. In the civil and commercial areas, international treaties apply primarily to cases
with foreign elements in accordance with the relevant provisions of the General Prin-
ciples of Civil Law and the Civil Procedure Law and judicial interpretations of those
laws. Since China joined the WTO, civil and commercial interactions with the
outside world have developed very rapidly. Consequently, rules established by inter-
national treaties are attracting more attention in the domestic legal system.
72. With respect to criminal law, China has prescribed almost all the international
crimes as criminal offences under its national criminal law. In accordance with its inter-
national obligations, China has established criminal jurisdiction over such offences.
Except for persons who enjoy jurisdictional immunities under international law, any
person suspected of violating international criminal law and who is found in China
will be brought to justice. Under Chinese law, a criminal suspect is entitled to all the
legal rights and protections provided by law, including those incorporated into
Chinese law from the human rights treaties to which China is a party.
73. Given the fact that treaties are usually the outcome of diplomatic negotiations and
compromises between States parties, treaty terms tend to be vague and general in many
cases. Therefore, substantive treaty obligations often need to be speciﬁed or transformed
for the purpose of effective implementation at the national level. Under Chinese law and
practice, generally speaking, except for those administrative agreements that can be
directly executed, treaties can be applied in domestic law only after the adoption of legis-
lation transforming a treaty into domestic law or authorizing direct application of the
treaty. Although the Chinese Constitution and laws do not set forth a general provision
on the status of treaties in the domestic legal system, China implements its international
obligations in good faith with the view that effective implementation of treaty obli-
gations will not only serve well its own development, but also promote peace and
cooperation among States.
322
Chinese JIL (2009)