INVESTMENT
TOOLKITS
FAO
INVESTMENT 
CENTRE
HOW TO INVEST IN FARMERS?
A GUIDE FOR AGRICULTURE HUMAN 
CAPITAL INVESTMENT PROJECTS


Investment Toolkits
Number 5
HOW TO INVEST IN FARMERS? 
A GUIDE FOR AGRICULTURE HUMAN  
CAPITAL INVESTMENT PROJECTS
Johanna Gammelgaard  IFPRI CONSULTANT
Steven Franzel  IFPRI CONSULTANT
Rodrigo Salcedo Du Bois  FAO 
Ashok Kumar  TRANSFORMING RURAL INDIA FOUNDATION 
Kristin Davis  IFPRI
John Preissing  FAO
Katarzyna Pankowska  FAO
Published by 
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 
and 
the International Food Policy Research Institute
Rome, 2023


   III
Contents	
Foreword	
VII
Acknowledgements	
VIII
Abbreviations and acronyms 	
IX
INTRODUCTION	
1
MODULE 1	
	
	
Agriculture human capital investment: what it is and how to use it	
5	
MODULE 2	
	
	
Defining agriculture human capital investment	
13	
	
MODULE 3
	
Building agriculture human capital through investment	
21
	
MODULE 4
	
Agriculture human capital investment development methods	
47
	
MODULE 5
	
A deep dive into two agriculture human capital investment cases	
95
	
Case 1: The Jharkhand Opportunities for Harnessing Rural Growth 
	
project in India case study	
97	
	
	
Case 2: The Haku Wiñay/Noa Jayatai case study	
111
	
MODULE 6
	
Appraising agriculture human capital investments in the context of economic  
	
and financial analysis	
125
	
MODULE 7
	
Key messages and recommendations on investing in AHCI	
141
	
REFERENCES	
151
	
	
GLOSSARY	
160
	
 
	
ANNEX	
163
	
	


	
	 Tables, figures, and boxes
	
	
Tables
	
1.1	
Current focal areas for agriculture human capital investment	
10
	
2.1	
Three fields of agriculture human capital and some examples	
16
	
4.1	
Potential for methods to improve human capital, and changes sought	
85
	
4.2	
Performance of human capital development methods across selected  
	
	
assessment criteria	
87
	
4.3	
Usefulness of methods in developing human capital	
88
	
5.1	
Main stakeholders in the JOHAR project	
101
	
6.1	
Comparative costs for two distinct approaches to training	
138
	
A.1	
Expected incremental costs and benefits for each type of subproject and activity	 164
	
A.2	
Technology adoption rates from the participants’ survey	
165
	
A.3	
EFA indicators: overall project 	
166
	
A.4	
EFA indicators: capacity-building component 	
166
	
	
Figures
	
2.1 	
An investment model in agriculture human capital and its components	
15
	
2.2 	
Typology of human capital development methods in agriculture	
17
	
3.1 	
Agriculture human capital in a theory of change	
22
	
3.2 	
Three building blocks in augmenting agriculture human capital investments	
23
	
3.3 	
Content, objectives and key activities of three building blocks	
24
	
3.4 	
Example of aspirational building block informed by framing building block	
34
	
3.5 	
Information flows between building blocks pre-implementation	
42
	
3.6 	
Information flows between building blocks during implementation	
43
	
4.1 	
Human capital development methods useful for supplementing technical  
	
	
training and education to achieve self- and wage-employment	
92
	
5.1 	
Funding flow system of JOHAR	
100
 	
5.2 	
Theory of change in JOHAR	
103
	
5.3 	
Layering and phasing of JOHAR project activities	
107
	
5.4 	
Implementation structure of JOHAR	
108
	
5.5 	
Summary of aspirational building blocks of Haku Winay/Noa Jayatai	
114
	
5.6 	
Summary of components and processes developed by Haku Wiñay/Noa Jayatai	
120
IV   


	
6.1 	
Integrated investment appraisal methodology	
130
	
7.1 	
Key recommendations for investing in farmers	
142
	
	
 
	
	
Boxes
	
1.1	
Description of five types of capital	
6
	
1.2	
Definitions of agriculture human capital	
7
	
1.3	
Development of technical, social and managerial skills under Jharkhand  
	
	
Opportunities for Harnessing Rural Growth Project (JOHAR) in India	
8
	
3.1	
Environmental and social safeguard considerations for agriculture human  
	
	
capital projects	
41
	
4.1	
Extension and advisory services and human capital development methods	
50
	
6.1	
Differences between financial and economic parts of the EFA in investment  
	
	
projects	
126
	
6.2	
Peru’s Agriculture Innovation Project and AHCI EFA	
127
	
6.3 	
Without project (WOP), with project (WP) and incremental scenarios	
128
	
6.4 	
Steps in valuing intangible benefits and costs	
133
	
6.5 	
Financial and economic discount rate	
134
	
6.6 	
Sensitivity analysis	
135
	
6.7 	
Additional useful EFA modelling remarks	
136
	
7.1 	
The need for more agriculture human capital research	
147
   V


©FAO/Alberto Conti
© FAO/Atul Loke
©CIFOR/Kate Evans


Foreword
Sustainable agricultural productivity, food and nutrition security and poverty 
reduction remain top goals of governments and development institutions 
around the world. Yet, progress is under threat from a variety of crises, 
including climate change and public health emergencies and their associated 
economic and environmental shocks. 
	
The transformation to more sustainable, secure and equable agrifood 
systems needs investments in agriculture, rural infrastructure, natural  
resource management and climate resilience. However, agricultural invest-
ments often prioritize the physical or natural capital of farming communities.
	
Investing in farmers’ education, knowledge, habits, experiences and 
attributes – or agriculture human capital – is crucial to drive innovation, boost 
productivity, strengthen farm management and empower smallholders. 
Building agriculture human capital is fundamental to developing equable, 
secure, resilient and sustainable farming communities. It is key to successful 
agriculture and rural development policies.
	
Beginning in early 2020, the FAO Investment Centre partnered with the 
International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI), with support from the 
CGIAR Research Program on Policies, Institutions, and Markets (PIM) and the 
FAO Research and Extension Unit, to examine agriculture human capital 
investments globally. The goal was to understand how farmers developed 
their human capital through a variety of initiatives. 
	
The study shows that investments in developing the human capital of 
smallholder producers resulted in new technical and business skills and 
empowered farmers. This led to increased incomes, improved yields and the 
inclusion of marginalised groups.
	
As global agrifood systems face ongoing disruptions, challenges and 
opportunities, agriculture human capital must keep pace. We need more  
and better investments in innovative and cost-effective programmes to 
strengthen and measure human capital development. 
	
This toolkit supports investors – including policymakers, government 
officials, international and national development banks and the private sector 
–  to make sounder investment decisions on projects, programmes, and 
policies to strengthen farmers’ capacities. 
	
We believe this toolkit makes a unique contribution to the agriculture 
investment landscape. We invite you to use the evidence, strategies, good 
practices, guidance and recommendations it contains on how to best invest 
in farmers.
Mohamed Manssouri
Director 
FAO Investment Centre
Suresh Babu
Head, Capacity Strengthening 
IFPRI
   VII


Acknowledgements
This toolkit was written as part of the Agriculture Human Capital Investment 
Study funded by the Investment Centre of the Food and Agriculture 
Organization of the United Nations (FAO) with the support of the International 
Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI), the CGIAR Research Program  
on Policies, Institutions, and Markets (PIM) and the FAO Research and 
Extension Unit.
	
The following individuals from FAO Investment Centre participated in 
the preparation of this report: Hubert Boirard, Dennis Escudero, Alessandra 
Gage, Michael Morris, Luis Dias Peirera, and Kundan Singh.    
	
The authors would like to express their appreciation to Mohamed 
Manssouri (FAO Investment Centre) for his support. They also thank 
Delgermaa Chuluunbaatar (FAO), Deborah Duveskog (FAO), Marie-Aude 
Even (International Fund for Agricultural Development), Priti Kumar (World 
Bank), Jaap van de Pol (FAO Investment Centre), Kundan Singh (FAO) and 
Francisca da Silva Torrealba del Pilar (independent consultant) for reviewing 
the toolkit.
VIII   



Abbreviations and acronyms
AHC	
agriculture human capital
AHCI	
agriculture human capital investment
APS	
Ajivika Pashu Sakhis (livestock friends)
BMMU	
Block Mission Management Unit
CBA	
cost-benefit analysis
CEA	
cost effectiveness analysis
CF	
conversion factor
CIC	
Community Implementation Committee
CSP	
community service providers
DMMU	
District Mission Management Unit
EA	
economic analysis
EAS	
extension and advisory services
EFA	
economic and financial analysis 
ENPV	
economic net present value
EOCK	
economic opportunity cost of capital
FA	
financial analysis
FAO	
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
FFS	
farmer field schools
FIRR	
financial internal rate of return
FNPV	
financial net present value
FTC	
farmer training centre
FTFE	
farmer-to-farmer extension
GFRAS   	
Global Forum for Rural Advisory Services
GPS	
global positioning systems
ICT       	
information and communication technology
IFAD      	
International Fund for Agriculture Development
IFPRI      	
International Food Policy Research Institute
IIA	
integrated investment appraisal
INIA	
Instituto Nacional de Innovación Agropecuaria  
	
	
(National Institute of Agriculture Innovation)
IPA	
Innovations in Poverty Action
IRR	
internal rate of return
JOHAR   	
Jharkhand Opportunities for Harnessing Rural Growth
JSLPS	
Jharkhand State Livelihoods Promotion Society
MAFF	
management advice for family farms
M&E	
monitoring and evaluation
MT	
master trainers
NGO	
non-governmental organization
NPV	
net present value
   IX


NRLM    	
National Rural Livelihoods Mission
PDO       	
project development objective
PG          	
producer group
PO          	
producer organization
RCT	
randomized controlled trial
SMMU  	
State Mission Management Unit
SNIA	
Sistema Nacional de Innovación Agropecuaria  
	
	
(National System of Agriculture Innovation)
SWOT	
strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats
ToC	
theory of change
TSA       	
technical support agencies
VO         	
village organization
WOP	
without project scenario
WP	
with project scenario
X   
HOW TO INVEST IN FARMERS? A GUIDE FOR AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT PROJECTS


Introduction
	
	 WHY THIS TOOLKIT
The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO)’s 
investment toolkits are designed to provide agricultural investment 
practitioners and technicians with innovative and proven approaches, tools 
and best practices. This Agriculture Human Capital Investment (AHCI) toolkit 
has exactly this purpose in mind, with a focus on helping our target audience 
(investors such as policymakers, government officials, international and 
national development banks and the private sector) make sounder 
investment  decisions on projects, programmes, and policies that strengthen 
farmers’ capacities.  We believe that this toolkit makes a unique contribution 
to the investment landscape by focusing on effective and proven tools and 
processes in human capital, an area that has suffered from underinvestment 
and attention from government officials, development finance institutions 
and other actors. 
	
The 2021 United Nations Food System Summit pointed out that to 
reach the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), agrifood systems must 
transform to be more inclusive and sustainable and provide safe and 
nutritious food for all (United Nations, 2021). The climate change crisis, 
COVID-19 pandemic, war in Ukraine and a disruption in global supply chains 
have further highlighted the importance of resilient agrifood systems.  At the 
same time, digital and precision agriculture technologies, nature-based food 
and agriculture solutions, and global and national food quality and safety 
standards provide opportunities to improve the resilience of our agrifood 
systems and the quality of our foods. At the farm level, this demands that 
smallholder producers have greater access to information, the ability to 
adapt and to adopt, and become more empowered to make production, 
market, natural resource and overall farm decisions. Climate-smart and 
resilient agriculture requires smart and resilient farmers.
	
Many actors invest in agriculture but none more than farmers 
themselves, the greatest source of on-farm investments, including in  
human capital (FAO, 2012). In fact, farmers invest more than four times the 
amount of governments in capital stock (including human capital) in their 
farms than government programmes (FAO, 2021). Additionally, governments, 
international financial institutions, the private sector, producer organizations 
and non-governmental organizations (NGOs) contribute to the formation of 
agriculture human capital  through the investments and policies they pursue. 
	
Over the past two decades, trends indicate that limited resources are 
dedicated to improving farmers’ capacities through public and private 
investments, which is ironic given the increasing innovation and adaptation 
demands and opportunities in the sector (FAO, 2022a). Many government 
programmes and investment loans prioritize “hard” investments in physical 
infrastructure over “soft” investments in human and social capital.  
Agriculture human capital investments are also at times hidden under 
broader programme themes, so not always fully accounted for in policies, 
programmes, and projects as well as private sector decision-making. This 
means that not only the benefits, but also the costs are not fully accounted. 
The purpose of this toolkit is to provide the means to effectively plan and 
advocate for more and better investments in farmers’ capacities. Specifically, 
   1


we want these investors to be able to explain what agriculture human capital 
is, give examples of agriculture human capital investment projects, be able  
to integrate agriculture human capital into a project theory of change, and 
select appropriate  agriculture human capital development methods  based 
on project goals.
	
	 HOW THE TOOLKIT WAS DEVELOPED 
The FAO Investment Centre along with its partner the International Food Policy 
Research Institute (IFPRI) embarked on an analysis of AHCI over two years 
ago. This involved a thorough review of secondary data on AHCI trends and 
evidence, conducting key informant interviews, undertaking primary research 
globally on a range of best practices and lessons learned. The analysis 
showcased other relevant cases as box stories, reviewed the use of economic 
analysis in AHCI, developed thematic investment briefs and hosted eight 
global or regional webinars to share findings and gather feedback on the topic. 
From this body of work, nine case studies, four investment briefs, and a global 
synthesis report were published, forming the basis of this toolkit. The authors 
also drew on other findings around investments in agriculture human capital 
for use in the toolkit.  
	
This toolkit adds to the study synthesis Investing in farmers: agriculture 
human capital investment strategies (Davis et al., 2021). This set out to better 
understand investment in human capital to deal with challenges facing our 
global agrifood systems, from sustainably feeding the world’s growing 
population with safe, healthy and nutritious food to finding innovative 
solutions for more resilient and climate-smart agriculture.
	
This toolkit seeks to address the challenges and opportunities 
mentioned by providing investment strategies, evidence, good practices, and 
recommendations for improving the quality and quantity of investments in 
agriculture human capital – to improve investments in farmers.  
	
	 HOW TO USE THE TOOLKIT 
Throughout the toolkit, there are a number of learning aids. Each module has 
a learning objective, stated at the outset. These are in the form of competen-
cies, something the user should be able to do or perform as a result of reading 
the module. Boxes throughout the toolkit provide more in-depth insights into 
terms or issues. Each word highlighted in green is defined in the glossary. 
	
The toolkit comprises seven modules. Module 1 discusses what human 
capital is, compares it to other types of capital, and provides concrete 
examples of human capital investment. Module 2 defines agriculture human 
capital in greater depth and shares a theory of change for human capital 
development. Module 3 provides building blocks to consider when designing 
projects that invest in agriculture human capital. Module 4 contains a series 
of  agriculture human capital development methods, with information about 
principles, reach, sustainability, ease of implementation and much more. 
Module 5 comprises two deep-dive case studies into two human capital 
development projects from India and Peru. Module 6 focuses on economic 
and financial analysis methods of agriculture human capital investments, 
providing specific examples. Module 7 provides a set of key messages and 
recommendations.  
2   
HOW TO INVEST IN FARMERS? A GUIDE FOR AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT PROJECTS


© Pep Bonet/NOOR for FAO
©Shutterstock




	
	 WHAT IS AGRICULTURE HUMAN CAPITAL? 
Human capital includes "the  skills, knowledge, ability  to labour and good 
health that together enable people to pursue different livelihood strategies 
and achieve their livelihood objectives” (DFID, 1999). From an economic 
perspective, this refers to assets that improve individual productivity and 
produce economic value (Goldin, 2014). Human capital goes beyond individuals 
to benefit others and society, across generations (World Bank, 2019). 
Agriculture human capital applies these concepts to the agriculture and rural 
development space. 
	
Human capital is one of the five livelihood assets in the sustainable 
livelihood framework developed by the United Kingdom Department for 
International Development (DFID, 1999). These assets include natural, physical, 
financial, social and human capital (Box 1.1). 
Module 1 
Agriculture human 
capital investment: what 
it is and how to use it
Learning objective 
To be able to explain what human capital is and how  
it differs from other types of capital. At the end of the module 
you should be able to give examples of investments 
in agriculture human capital and discuss different ways  
that actors invest in it. 
!
   5


DESCRIPTION OF FIVE TYPES OF CAPITAL
The five types include:
1.	 human – health, education, knowledge, skills; 
2.	 natural – land, water, soils, livestock, trees; 
3.	 financial – cash or other financial assets like pensions; 
4.	physical – planned infrastructure, tools;
5.	 social – network of relationships, group membership.
Human capital is inextricably linked to the other kinds of capital. It is needed to  
better manage natural and financial capital, to use physical capital, and to build social 
capital. Strengthening human capital thus adds value to other types, leading to  
better livelihood outcomes. The close connection between an empowering learning 
process and enhanced well-being indicates that improving human resources among 
poor farmers is an important element in broader rural development (Friis-Hansen  
and Duveskog, 2012). 
BOX 1.1 
SOURCE: 
DFID. 
1999. 
Sustainable 
livelihoods 
guidance 
sheets. 
London, 
DFID.
This toolkit focuses on human capital in agriculture (including livestock 
farmers, fisheries and forestry). We define agriculture human capital as the 
skills and capabilities of agricultural producers to successfully manage 
agricultural enterprises – the toolkit focuses on small-scale producers. 
Agricultural producers here include farmers, pastoralists, foresters and fisher 
folk and are mainly referred to as farmers or producers interchangeably 
throughout the toolkit.  Capability, according to economist and philosopher 
Amartya Sen, is the ability to perform certain basic functions in life. Agriculture 
human capital also includes more abstract aspects relating to livelihoods in a 
broader sense, such as self-esteem, empowerment, creativity, increased 
awareness and attitudes or mindsets. Agriculture human capital thus can be 
developed or improved. Throughout the toolkit we use synonyms such as 
capacity, skills development, education and farmer learning for agriculture 
human capital development. We define key terms in Box 1.2.
6   
HOW TO INVEST IN FARMERS? A GUIDE FOR AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT PROJECTS


DEFINITIONS OF AGRICULTURE HUMAN CAPITAL
There are many terms for human capital, covered in more depth in Module 4. 
•	 Knowledge: The theoretical or practical understanding of a subject through an  
	 active learning process.  
•	 Skills: Expertise which is often occupation-based and focused on competencies  
	 for economic value. The expertise may be technical, functional or business related.  
•	 Education: Expertise in a discipline by undergoing systematic instruction and  
	 learning, especially at a school or university. 
•	 Empowerment: A process that increases the capacity of people to make choices  
	 and to influence collective decisions towards desired actions (Danida, 2004).   
BOX 1.2 
Social capital can be an important link to human capital, as in the case of 
capacity development initiatives in Cameroon and Côte d’Ivoire (Gordon, 
2021). The toolkit focuses on individual human capital, however, and 
specifically, that of agricultural producers. 
 	
Agriculture human capital investment involves putting finances, time 
and other resources into strengthening the skills and capabilities of 
agricultural producers. The most important investor in agriculture human 
capital are farmers themselves who invest in many ways; however, many other 
actors play key roles.  Governments, international financial institutions, farmer 
organizations, the private sector and civil society all invest in human capital 
development for different reasons. Some projects and programmes seek 
economic returns such as higher productivity or increased incomes. Others 
aim to empower or increase the agency of small-scale producers. Human 
capital development initiatives often contribute to larger project goals. For 
instance, a project intending to expand farmers’ market linkages may invest 
in human capital by  training  farmers in market analysis. Other investors focus 
entirely on human capital development. For instance, the Government of 
Ethiopia invested heavily in farmer training centres in the 2000s (Wordofa and 
Sassi, 2018). Government investment in basic education is an important 
means of improving producers' human capital and also improves producers' 
capacity to benefit from other interventions, such as training in market 
analysis and farmer training centres. 
	
Human capital development goes beyond just developing technical 
skills. Box 1.3 shows skills developed through a project highlighted in  
Module 5. 
SOURCE: 
Authors; 
Danida. 
2004. 
Farmer 
empowerment: 
Experiences, 
lessons 
learned 
and 
ways 
forward. 
Copenhagen: 
Technical 
Advisory 
Services 
Danida.
   7
AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT: WHAT IT IS AND HOW TO USE IT


DEVELOPMENT OF TECHNICAL, SOCIAL AND MANAGERIAL SKILLS UNDER 
JHARKHAND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HARNESSING RURAL GROWTH PROJECT 
(JOHAR) IN INDIA 
The master trainers (MT) working in the JOHAR project are women smallholder  
farmers aged 28–34 with 10–15 years of formal education. MTs train community  
service providers and farmers in livestock management. MTs receive 34 days of training 
 
under JOHAR. One of these is a six-day residential training session covering adult 
learning and human values. They also learn about livestock rearing practices, financial 
practices and facilitation skills. MTs must pass certification exams set by the  
Agriculture Skills Council of India.  
 
The human capital gained provides opportunities for women to improve their  
livelihoods. One MT successfully started a poultry enterprise, and with the enhanced 
earnings and knowledge she is now the major decision-maker in her house. MT  
self-esteem and confidence were also enhanced. Many reported improved abilities  
to speak publicly, as well as better listening skills and empathy.
BOX 1.3
SOURCE: 
Kumar 
et 
al. 
2021. 
Investing 
in 
women 
livestock 
advisers 
and 
farmers 
– 
Jharkhand 
 
Opportunities 
for 
Harnessing 
Rural 
Growth 
Programme 
in 
India. 
Rome, 
FAO 
and 
IFPRI. 
 
https://doi.org/10.4060/cb7116en
“I am an educated person, but I could not use my education 
in the village; now I read a lot about animal rearing and 
treatments, keeping an account of income and expenses, 
training the [community animal health service providers] 
and operating laptops” declares one MT
.
“
© Transforming Rural India Foundation/Ashok Kumar
8   
HOW TO INVEST IN FARMERS? A GUIDE FOR AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT PROJECTS


	
 	 EXTERNAL INVESTMENT IN AGRICULTURE HUMAN CAPITAL 
Less than 0.2 percent of total international development finance between 
2015 and 2018 specifically targeted agriculture education, training and 
extension (Davis et al., 2021 based on OECD data and Atteridge et al., 2019). 
However, it is difficult to know the exact amounts since human capital goes by 
many terms and the proportion of funding that specifically targets human 
capital elements is often not explicit. It is similarly difficult to understand 
exactly how much is invested domestically through national or sub-national 
government budgets.
	
There are different types of human capital investment approaches. 
Typical or traditional projects are financed, at least in part, through an 
international financial institution with an implementing partner such as the 
government or a non-governmental organization (NGO). These projects 
typically have a set, relatively short time frame of three to five years. 
	
Usually, human capital is a sub-component of a larger project, such as 
the World Bank’s Maharashtra Project on Climate Resilient Agriculture. The 
project’s aim was to enhance climate resilience and the profitability of 
smallholder farming systems. One component focused on strengthening the 
adaptive capacity of smallholders to adjust and modify their production 
systems to moderate potential future impacts from climate events. 
	
Some projects, however, are standalone human capital investments in 
agriculture as the main goal. For instance, the International Fund for 
Agricultural Development (IFAD)  Rural Youth Vocational Training, Employment 
and Entrepreneurship Support Project in Mali  supported vocational training 
and microenterprise development for young people, especially women. 
	
Government programmes often institutionalize human capital 
development over a much longer period such as decades, as in the case of 
Haku Winay in Peru (Salcedo du Bois and Zimmerman, 2021), Cameroon’s 
Professional Training Programme in the Agropastoral and Fisheries Sectors 
(Takamgang and Lhoste, 2021) or Twigiri Muhinzi in Rwanda (Neza et al., 2021). 
Many countries have agricultural universities, colleges and training centres 
that are critical for strengthening human capital in agriculture. In the late 
1990sthe Government of India and the World Bank implemented the 
Agricultural Technology Management Agency model to facilitate and coor-
dinate farmer-led extension activities (Reddy and Swanson, 2006). 
	
NGOs and the private sector also provide extension services that 
develop human capital. Catholic Relief Services (CRS) has a curriculum called 
Skills for Marketing and Rural Transformation (SMART Skills)  that provides an 
integrated and sequential approach to strengthening farmer capacity to link 
up with markets and manage their resources.
	
In Indonesia, the private company Mars has been training Cocoa Doctor 
entrepreneurs through a network of Cocoa Development Centres in South 
Sulawesi. These entrepreneurs provide advice and coaching to 12 000 farmers 
directly in their villages. Mars also works with eight vocational schools and has 
established a cocoa curriculum to encourage young people to become 
involved in cocoa farming and related businesses.
   9
AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT: WHAT IT IS AND HOW TO USE IT


Other examples of human capital investment projects include investment in 
nutrition projects by the World Bank (2020) and IFAD; focusing human capital 
development on youth in Trinidad and Tobago or Indigenous Peoples in Brazil 
and Kenya (Davis et al., 2021; Mwangi et al., 2021). Human capital development 
can be through informal coaching as with the Mondelēz international 
sustainability programme Cocoa Life or formal as with the  school-on-air radio 
certification programme supported by IFAD (Davis et al., 2021).
Current agriculture human capital investment 
Agriculture human capital investment focus areas have changed over time. 
These changes include the methods or approaches, target groups, and overall 
themes and related skillsets. For instance, in 1980s there was more focus on 
home economics for women on farms and on productivity-enhancing skills. 
Today, farmer field schools and digital approaches are common. Skillsets for 
today have greater focus on climate change and entrepreneurship and go 
beyond a focus on production. Table 1.1 provides a snapshot of investment 
topics today within agriculture human capital. 
There are many different ways to invest in human capital in agriculture. Human 
capital development can and should be part of any investment project, given 
its linkages to other types of capital (Box 1.1). It strengthens other types of 
capital and thus investments. However, human capital is difficult to measure 
adequately in terms of benefits and costs, thus challenging decision-makers 
and investors to pitch the case for investment (see economic and financial 
assessment considerations in Module 6). 
	
Whatever the form or the theme of agriculture human capital develop-
ment, it needs to be thoughtfully defined, designed, implemented, monitored 
and evaluated. The next sections provide more information about how to  
do this. 
Table 1.1	
 
Current focal areas for agriculture human capital investment
Methods and approaches
Target groups
Themes and skillsets
	
· Various forms of farmer field schools 
	
· Digital approaches, information and 	
	 communication technologies
	
· Community extensionists and lead 	
	 farmer approaches
	
· Small-scale agricultural producers
	
· Women
	
· Youth
	
· Landless
	
· Indigenous Peoples
	
· Other actors in the value chain 	 	
	 besides producers (transporters, 	
	 advisers) 
	
· Climate change
	
· Resilience
	
· Agroecology
	
· Nature-positive solutions
	
· Nutrition 
	
· Business and marketing skills
	
· Entrepreneurship 
	
· Digital tools 
SOURCES: 
Authors’ 
own 
elaboration.
10   
HOW TO INVEST IN FARMERS? A GUIDE FOR AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT PROJECTS


© Juan Carlos Huayllapuma/CIFOR
©FAO/Max Valencia




Module 2 presents a set of definitions and categories that can be helpful in 
conceptualizing agriculture human capital investments (AHCI). This way, we 
also operationally define concepts that are used later in the toolkit.
Module 2 
Defining agriculture 
human capital 
investment
Learning objective 
To be able to define and discuss investment  
in agriculture human capital.
!
   13


	
	 AGRICULTURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT AS A MODEL AND ITS  
	
	 SIX COMPONENTS
Building investments in agriculture human capital requires more than choice 
or design of development methods. Broadly, it requires the employment of six 
different, but potentially overlapping, components to form what we call a 
model  of AHCI.  These components are: 1) the target group; 2) individual skills 
providers; 3) development methods; 4) an objective for development in the 
field of human capital; 5) implementer(s); and 6) funder(s). Figure 2.1 gives an 
overview.
	
	 DEFINING SUCCESS CRITERIA
As this toolkit aims to provide approaches, tools and best practices for design, 
implementation, monitoring and evaluation of successful investments in 
agriculture human capital, we need to first clarify success criteria. We define 
successful investment in agriculture human capital as:
Therefore, for AHCI to be successful, human capital should be developed and 
strengthened and should enable producers to achieve their desired outcomes 
and impacts.
a form of intervention that achieves heightened or improved 
human capital among agricultural producers which is deemed: 
a) desired; b) appropriate; c) timely; and d) useful in enabling 
the pursuit of livelihood strategies and eventually desired 
livelihood outcomes and impacts within agriculture. 
14   
HOW TO INVEST IN FARMERS? A GUIDE FOR AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT PROJECTS


Figure 
2.1
An 
investment 
model 
in 
agriculture 
human 
capital 
and 
its 
components
SOURCE: 
Adapted 
from 
Davis 
et 
al. 
2021. 
Investing 
in 
Farmers: 
Agriculture 
Human 
Capital 
Investment 
Strategies. 
Rome, 
FAO 
and 
IFPRI. 
https://doi.org/10.4060/cb7134en
A model has one, often multiple, 
defined target groups whose human 
capital a AHCI model is designed to 
enhance. This target group could be 
farmers from a geographic area, or 
specific types of farmers (e.g., 
horticulture, livestock farmers)
A model has a more or less defined 
objective as to which field(s) of  
human capital should be developed 
among the target group
The implementer of an AHCI model  
is the given organization(s)  
or government(s) behind and  
responsible for overall implementation, 
for instance a national programme  
or project activity
A model has  
one or more funders
The target group is reached 
through direct contact  
with individual skills providers.  
These providers facilitate and support 
the learning process by teaching, 
advising or demonstrating  
different skills
The human capital development  
method is how and where learning  
takes place. These can include 
demonstration plots, farmer field  
schools or on-the-job training
T
arget groups
Implementers
Individual skills 
providers
Human capital 
type
• 
 
Small-scale 
farmers
• 
 
Agro-pastoralists
• 
 
Youth, 
women, 
etc. 
• 
 
Civil 
society
• 
 
Public 
sector
• 
 
Private 
sector
• 
 
Extension 
staff
• 
 
Lead 
farmers
• 
 
Community 
advisers
• 
 
Technical 
 
agricultural 

skills
• 
 
Functional 
and 
 
social 

skills
• 
 
Managerial 
and 

 
business 
skills
Delivery  
method
• 
 
Formal
• 
 
Non-formal
• 
 
Informal
Funders
• 
 
Development 
banks
• 
 
International 
 
financial
 
institutions
• 
 
Governments
   15
DEFINING AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT


	
	 THREE FIELDS OF AGRICULTURE HUMAN CAPITAL 
Agriculture human capital implies skills and capabilities within more than just 
the field of agricultural techniques and practices. Specifically, three different 
fields are used here, namely: 1) technical agricultural skills;  2) functional 
skills; and 3)  business skills  (Davis et al., 2021). Table 2.1 gives an introduction, 
with concrete examples from case studies in 2020.
Table 2.1	
 
Three fields of agriculture human capital and some examples
AHC field Focus in the field of AHC
Examples of acquired agriculture human capital within given field
Technical agricultural skills
Often focus on good agricultural 
practices, i.e. the use of good 
management principles  
for agricultural production that  
do not harm the environment  
or human health.
Cocoa farmers in Indonesia gained knowledge around agronomy, phytosanitary 
control, harvest and post-harvest as well as skills in the fields of seeding, grafting, 
pruning, composting and harvesting.
Young learner in Cameroon: “The training has changed us, I respect the 
dimensions [for sowing] and the yields are very, very different.” 
Women livestock rearers in India learned about timely vaccination, deworming, 
castration, animal cleanliness, and provision of feed supplements and clean 
drinking water for their livestock.
Functional skills
Often relate to skills in 
communication, leadership, public 
speaking, negotiation, conflict 
resolution, networking, critical 
thinking and decision-making.  Also 
include heightened agency and 
self-confidence. All of these are 
important for livelihoods dependent 
on agricultural production.
Learner in the United States of America: “I definitely learned a lot of my soft skills... 
how to speak in front of people, professionalism, how to network, just all-around 
people skills... how to talk to different people with different backgrounds than me 
and try to relate to them and not leave anybody out.”
Indian master trainers learned responsibility, participation, teaching and 
communication. They were responsible for: training community service providers; 
preparing venues; planning training content and sub-group activities, tests, 
feedback forms, and field assignments; logistics, and handling urgent needs of 
participants. Moreover, due to heightened expertise and self-reliance, they  
gained higher self-esteem and confidence. 
Women in Kenya were empowered in their household roles. After training in  
family budgets and gender awareness, many women said that awareness led to a 
new division of labour that reduced their heavy workload in the home. 
“After training, he changed. When I am sweeping, he takes the bicycle and fetches 
water. I realized I had been suffering, working the whole day without resting.” 
Business skills
Often includes managerial, market, 
financial and record-keeping skills, 
but can also entail a shift in mindset 
to perceiving farming as a business, 
and the opportunities that brings 
with it.
In Chile, participants gained management and planning skills, and the ability to 
follow protocols for monitoring productive activity by keeping registers. One male 
farmer stated: “sometimes we are a bit reluctant to keep records but we have had 
to learn to keep a register when, for example, a calf dies”. 
Indian female livestock producers gained skills in using markets and value chains, 
savings and credit, and market analysis. Financial awareness and understanding 
the economic importance of livestock increased significantly among community 
livestock service providers. Producers realised that livestock rearing was 
economically rewarding and less labour intensive than other local opportunities.
In Kenya, a participant stated: “I have learnt how to make a budget; initially  
I used to plant without one. Now I use the budget to track how much fertilizer I have 
used and through the records I can see my profits or losses. Like a planting 
calendar, I did not know anything about it at all. A problem map and the problems 
you are likely to meet when farming, on the roads or at the market and how to 
resolve them. So, I was able to learn that, when you have these problems, you can 
solve them”.
SOURCES: 
Authors, 
with 
edited 
quotations 
from 
Davis 
et 
al. 
2021. 
Investing 
in 
Farmers: 
Agriculture 
Human 
Capital 
Investment 
Strategies. 
Rome, 
FAO 
and 
IFPRI. 
https://doi.org/10.4060/cb7134en
16   
HOW TO INVEST IN FARMERS? A GUIDE FOR AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT PROJECTS


While these are the three overarching fields within which to develop human 
capital in agriculture they should not be seen as rigid categories. These skills 
and capabilities can often overlap or be interdependent. For instance, 
gaining technical knowledge on production can lead to greater self-esteem, 
which can provide incentives to take on leadership roles and increase 
functional skills. These should not be seen as entirely separate forms of 
human capital however, these categories can be useful in discovering: 1) 
which skills are most needed for a desired impact; and 2) how best to develop 
those skills. Module 4 addresses this. 
	
	 THE MANY METHODS OF INVESTING IN AGRICULTURE HUMAN 	
	
	 CAPITAL – A TYPOLOGY
Knowing the specifics of how to develop agriculture human capital within one 
or several of the fields is useful when investing in AHC. We define an AHC 
development method as systematically applied procedures and techniques 
to provide information, advice, skills, training, education and other services 
to producers and to facilitate problem-solving and learning (adapted from 
David and Cofini, 2017). Examples of common development methods could 
be farmer field schools or community promoters. 
	
Choosing and designing the best suited development methods is 
arguably where most of the crucial decision-making occurs when investing 
in agriculture human capital. Generally, the myriad of existing methods can 
be divided into three categories depending on their levels of formality (Davis 
et al., 2021). Figure 2.2 gives an overview of the typology which Module 4 also 
addresses.
Figure 
2.2
Typology 
of 
human 
capital 
development 
methods 
in 
agriculture
SOURCE: 
Davis 
et 
al. 
2021. 
Investing 
in 
Farmers: 
Agriculture 
Human 
Capital 
Investment 
Strategies. 
Rome, 
FAO 
and 
IFPRI. 
https://doi.org/10.4060/cb7134en
Adult and youth learners
Formal
Informal
Non-formal
Agricultural 
education system
Extension  
programmes
• Farmer training centres
• Vocational education
• Agricultural colleges or universities
• Certification
 
Certification
Coaching
On-the-
job 
training,
apprenticeships
•  Farmer field schools
•  Farmer study circles
•  Dimitra clubs
• Master trainers
• Farmer training centres
• Youth development
Individual
Groups
Experience
Media, meetings, 
markets
Farmer to farmer
   17
DEFINING AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT




©CIFOR/Rifky
©Unsplash/Trevor Vannoy




Module 3 
Building agriculture 
human capital through 
investment
	
	 INTEGRATING AGRICULTURE HUMAN CAPITAL IN A THEORY OF CHANGE
Writing up a theory of change can be useful for any project or initiative. This 
also applies when investing in agriculture human capital (AHC). A difference 
here, however, is that AHC is in many cases not the end goal in itself, but a 
means to reach it. When farmers learn new skills, the hope is that those skills 
will help solve problems or improve certain conditions which eventually will 
achieve the wider impacts that are the aims of the project. Therefore, in a theory 
of change, human capital itself can be seen as an output, rather than the final 
impact  (see Figure 3.1, in yellow).
Learning objective 
To be able to use the building blocks of agriculture  
human capital investment and elements of each  
in programme or project design, analysis, or evaluation. 
!
   21


Input
Output
Outcome
Impact
Actions  
and behaviours 
adopted by 
farmers due  
to new human
capital 
Changes  
resulting from 
adopted  
actions and 
behavours
Agriculture 
human capital
developed
Implementation  
of human capital 
development 
method(s)
The key to successfully achieving the desired impact through investments in 
AHC is then twofold: first, understand how human capital in agriculture is best 
developed  input -> output;  and second, understand how and which kinds of 
skills and capabilities help farmers to adopt new practices which can 
eventually lead to the desired impacts  output -> outcome -> impact. 
	
	 THREE BUILDING BLOCKS TO INFORM PRACTICES AND DECISIONS
Building an agriculture human capital investment through programmes or 
projects requires three building blocks:	   
1.	 Understand how and which types of skills and capabilities have the  
	
best potential to lead to desired impacts is what we call the aspirational 	
	
building block, because as in a theory of change, these are changes  
	
you aspire to make. 
2.	 Understand how human capital in agriculture is best developed;  
	
that is, which  development methods  to apply, how to organize, and create  
	
incentives for learning. This we call the design building block. 
3.	The third and equally crucial part is to understand how contextual  
	
factors 	set the frames which make human capital development methods 	
	
possible and also how they influence outputs, outcomes and impacts.  
	
This we call the framing building block. Figure 3.2 summarizes these 	
	
	
three building blocks.
Figure 
3.1
Agriculture 
human 
capital 
in 
a 
theory 
of 
change
SOURCE: 
Authors, 
adapted 
from 
Davis 
et 
al. 
2021. 
Investing 
in 
Farmers: 
Agriculture 
Human 
Capital 
Investment 
Strategies. 
Rome, 
FAO 
and 
IFPRI. 
https://doi.org/10.4060/cb7134en
22   
HOW TO INVEST IN FARMERS? A GUIDE FOR AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT PROJECTS


Input
Implementation  
of human capital 
development 
method(s)
Design  
building block
Aspirational building block
Framing building block
Inform design
Influence output, outcomes and impact
Contextual factors that
Impact
Changes  
resulting from 
adopted  
actions and 
behavours
Outcome
Actions  
and behaviours 
adopted by 
farmers due  
to new human
capital 
Output
Agriculture 
human capital
developed
Key questions for the aspirational building block:
•	 What role does farmers’ human capital play in bringing about  
	 desired impacts? Is it fundamental, such as empowerment,  
	 or supportive, such as better technical or decision-making skills? 
Key question for the design building block:
•	 How can implementing human capital development methods develop 	
	 	this human capital?
Key question for the framing building block:
•	 How do contextual factors affect how human capital can  
	 be developed and how successfully it leads to outcomes and  
	 eventually impacts?
 
 
While we divide the process of building an agriculture human capital 
investment into these three blocks, they are not three distinct phases to  
be undertaken in a prescriptive order. Rather, they represent information 
gathering, goal-setting and decision-making activities that are ongoing, and 
interdependent. 
Figure 
3.2
Three 
building 
blocks 
in 
augmenting 
agriculture 
human 
capital 
investments
SOURCE: 
Authors' 
own 
elaboration.
!
   23
BUILDING AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL THROUGH INVESTMENT


Design  
building block
Aspirational  
building block
Framing  
building block
H  Impacts
I  Outcomes
J  Output
K 	
Targeting
L 	
Methods
M 	
Organizing
N  Scaling and 	
	
 
sustaining
O  Keep improving
A 	
Farmers
B 	
Institutions
C 	
Environment
D 	
Providers
E 	
Implementer
F 	
Partner(s)
G 	
Financing/ 
	
funding
Objective
Creating a thorough 
understanding of contextual 
factors that inform 
aspirational and design 
building blocks.
 
 
Key activities
Needs assessment, 
interviews, mini surveys, 
stakeholder analysis, analysis 
of institutional, regulatory, 
cultural and social factors, 
review of past projects  
and monitoring and 
evaluation results.
Objective
Identifying feasible and 
desirable human capital 
targets J , outcomes I   
and impacts H , informed  
by framing and design 
building blocks.
 
Key activities
Conversations with  
farmers, partners, and 
stakeholders, gather 
information from existing 
literature.
Objective
Creating a human capital 
development design that 
ensures best ways to achieve 
human capital targets J , 
outcomes I  and impacts H  
to be reached, informed by 
framing and aspirational 
building blocks. 
Key activities
Strategic decision-making  
on design, convening with 
partners, farmers and 
stakeholders, review of past 
projects and monitoring and 
evaluation results, creating 
monitoring, evaluation and 
learning procedures.
	
	 THREE BUILDING BLOCKS – OBJECTIVES AND KEY ACTIVITIES
We now discuss each of the three building blocks. Figure 3.3 presents them 
and the elements of each one as well as their main objectives and activities. In 
total there are 15 elements ( A – O ) across three building blocks. Each of these 
elements has its own objectives and activities and is described in the text. In 
each building block, farmers as well as partners play a pivotal role and there 
is a need for their active participation at each stage. See Module 5 for two 
cases exemplifying the three building blocks.
Figure 
3.3
Content, 
objectives 
and 
key 
activities 
of 
three 
building 
blocks
SOURCE: 
Authors' 
own 
elaboration.
24   
HOW TO INVEST IN FARMERS? A GUIDE FOR AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT PROJECTS


As with the development of any project goal, developing human capital in 
agriculture is highly sensitive to its context, and is particularly dependent on 
the people who are set to learn new skills and acquire new capacities. Investing 
in AHC is only fruitful when learners find it relevant, appropriate, timely and 
useful. The framing building block is therefore very focused on the mindset of 
learners, or farmers, but also other factors presented in the following 
elements.
The main elements of the framing building block are A – G  in Figure 3.3. 
However, these, as well as key information about them, will vary from project 
to project and place to place, and the descriptions and topics highlighted 
below are not exclusive nor exhaustive. They may or may not overlap by their 
very nature.
A  Farmers: socioeconomic and cultural conditions
Framing building block
Objectives and key activities
DESCRIPTION 
KEY ACTIVITIES
Farmers, pastoralists, fishers, foresters, and other small-scale 
producers (here referred to simply as farmers) make up the main 
target group for agriculture human capital investments under 
discussion. These learners stand to gain new capacities, learn 
new skills or gain new knowledge. Therefore, it is essential to 
understand what they consider an improvement to their 
livelihoods and what they need to attain it, as well as aspects of 
their way of life and socioeconomic conditions that may 
influence the learning process, such as customs, existing or 
traditional knowledge, culture, preferences, and desires. 
Identify the geographical scope of the project and potential 
target group(s). Conduct needs assessments via semi-
structured interviews, minisurveys, focus group discussions and 
participatory consultations with potential target group(s) and if 
relevant, other key informants with deep knowledge of the living 
and socio-economic conditions of the target group. Depending 
on the geographical scope of the project, be sure to consult  
with farmers representing different agro-ecological zones, 
Indigenous Peoples, gender and age groups and, production 
and livelihood systems (FAO, 2011).
Main objective 
Creating a thorough understanding of contextual factors to 
inform aspirational and design building blocks.
!
   25
BUILDING AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL THROUGH INVESTMENT


EXAMPLES OF 
AGRICUL
TURE /
LIVELIHOOD 
SYSTEMS
The main areas we need to understand from conversations with 
farmers include:
1.	 What are the current  agriculture / livelihood systems  among 	
	
the target group? 
2.	 What are the main challenges or struggles that farmers face?
3.	 What are farmers’ needs and aspirations to better their  
	
livelihoods? 
4.	What are the opportunities for changes in actions and 	
	
	
behaviour to alleviate those struggles or fulfil those needs and 	
	
aspirations? And which of these do farmers consider desirable, 	
	
appropriate, timely and useful?
5.	 Which support services are available to farmers such as 		
	
financial, informational and marketing?
6.	 Which skills and capabilities will be useful to farmers to adopt 	
	
those actions and behaviours?
7.	 Which relevant skills and capabilities do farmers already have 	
	
which they can further develop to facilitate learning new skills? 	
	
This can include Indigenous Peoples’ traditional knowledge and 	
	
local farmers' ancestral knowledge. 
8.	Which new skills and capabilities will complement existing skills 
	
	
and capabilities?
9.	 Which challenges and opportunities for learning and 	
	
	
developing human capital do farmers identify?
•	 Socioeconomic conditions: Social status, disabilities, 
financial assets, opportunity costs, size and status of land 
(leasing or owning), relationships, levels of education  
and literacy. 
•	 Logistics: Where are farmers in relation to the place  
of learning? Is transport available, , easy and affordable?  
Is there access to learning materials including digital 
resources such as smartphones, internet access and radio, 
farmers’ calendars? Do farmers have access to a suitable 
place for onsite learning, e.g. a demonstration plot?
•	 Farmer segments: Recognize the differences among 
farmers regarding levels of interest and opportunities and 
barriers to engagement, as well as understanding the  
root causes of any potential disengagement.
Livestock rearing, cash crop and tree cultivation, home gardens, 
agroforestry, orchards, aquaculture, apiculture, fishing, as well 
as off-farm enterprises. Often systems are holistic and many 
overlap for an individual farmer. Investments in AHC are often 
embedded in one or several such systems, focusing on skills 
and capabilities directly applicable to that system.
26   
HOW TO INVEST IN FARMERS? A GUIDE FOR AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT PROJECTS


Element A  is a process rather than a one-off checklist. It is important to 
collect this information consistently while setting a theory of change 
(aspirational building block) and designing project implementation (design 
building block), and likewise to ensure farmer participation in all three building 
blocks, not just the framing building block. This is to avoid setting top-down 
priorities or implementation that is unsuitable for farmers.
!
B  Institutions: institutional, political, legal and  
	   
organizational conditions
DESCRIPTION 
KEY ACTIVITIES
Institutions are any official or unofficial policies, norms, or 
organizations that affect the project. Official institutions can 
include national, district and local government agencies, 
para-governmental entities, policies and legal frameworks, 
for-profit enterprises, NGOs, associations and established 
community organizations. Unofficial (or one could call them 
intangible) institutions include markets, norms, customs, 
networks, and more loosely structured organizing patterns  
and activities, such as trading habits and migration. 
Collect information through interviews with farmers, relevant 
stakeholders such as local authorities, district commissioners, 
spokespeople, local/national organizations/NGOs and 
governmental agencies. Conduct analysis on the legal landscape 
 
in the given district/country. Carry out market and/or value chain 
analysis relevant to the project (certain crops, local/district/
international chains). Collect secondary data via national policy 
documents and stakeholder mapping. Review past human 
capital development projects in the area and the lessons 
learned.
The main areas we need to understand regarding institutions 
include:
1.	 Are community organizations present in the target group(s) and 	
	
if so, what are their motivations, aims, activities, membership 	
	
and level of influence? If there are a lot, how do they differ from 	
	
each other, and interact?
2.	 Are there any other types of organizations in the community, 	
	
such as NGOs, companies, associations that could affect the 	
	
project, and in what way?
3.	 Which types of district and/or national organizations such as 	
	
NGOs, companies, associations, could affect the project, and in 	
	
what way?
4.	Which local government agencies or forms of community 	
	
governance are present, such as traditional/local authorities, 	
	
chiefs, elders, mayors, and if so, what are their motivations, 	
	
aims, activities and level of influence? 
   27
BUILDING AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL THROUGH INVESTMENT


DESCRIPTION 
KEY ACTIVITIES
Environment here refers to the physical and natural environment 
where the project takes place. This includes the climate, soil,  
water, precipitation and wind conditions in which farmers 
undertake agriculture, fishing, or pastoralism. This can imply 
risks from natural or human-made events such as flooding, 
droughts, earthquakes, sea water rise, pests, pollution, new 
large-scale development projects like dams or highways. Lastly, 
it also includes the infrastructure necessary for farming, as well 
as for extension and service providers, such as roads, public 
transport, storage facilities and mills. 
Collect information on the physical and natural environment 
through observations and interviews with farmers, extension 
staff (if any) and local stakeholders. Collect quantitative 
information, if available, in the form of weather and climate 
statistics for the area.1
The main areas we need to understand regarding environment 
include:
1.	 Is the necessary infrastructure in place for planned project 	
	
activities?  
Keep in mind that activities from A  and B  can overlap, since farmers 
themselves make up local communities and therefore play active roles in local 
institutions, with varying levels of involvement. This is to avoid setting top-
down priorities or implementation that is unsuitable for farmers.
!
C  Environment: physical and natural conditions
1	
For a good example of data collection tools for challenging environments, 
 
	
see KoBoToolbox. 2022. [online]. www.kobototoolbox.org    
5.	 Which sub-national and/or national governmental institutions 	
	
could be involved with the project and in what way?
6.	 What is the legal framework or set of policies that affect the 	
	
project?
7.	 Are there any risks of future changes in policies/legal 	
	
	
framework that could affect the project?
8.	What are the defining customs, norms, patterns, markets,  
	
value chains and other intra-community organizations in place 	
	
that could affect the project?
9.	 What are the defining inter-community or national organizing 	
	
patterns, value chains or migration patterns?
28   
HOW TO INVEST IN FARMERS? A GUIDE FOR AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT PROJECTS


DESCRIPTION 
KEY ACTIVITIES
2.	 What are agro-climatic conditions like?
•	 Do conditions suit some crops over others?
•	 How healthy is the soil?
•	 Is precipitation reliable?
•	 Are groundwater levels reliable and adequate for irrigation? 
Are pumps and power sources available?
•	 What are year-round weather patterns like? Are there risks 
of droughts or flash flooding? 
3.	 Do the surrounding areas pose other types of risks, such as sea 	
	
water rise, pests, air/water/soil pollution?
4.	Are there any large-scale infrastructure and/or development 	
	
projects affecting farmers’ land or access to resources?  
	
Are any such developments planned and if so, how might they 	
	
potentially affect farmers and farming activities?
A provider is anyone who facilitates any human capital 
development programming among farmers in pre-project 
implementation. This could be public extension staff assigned  
to the area of the potential target group or private businesses in 
communities providing agro-advisory services. If no providers 
are present, disregard this section. 
Collect information through interviews with existing providers  
and farmers.
The main areas we need to understand regarding providers 
include:
1.	 If providers are in the given area, what are their current 	 	
	
functions/roles/tasks/activities with the target group? What are 	
	
their methods and approaches to human capital development?
2.	 What are their current capacities?
3.	 What is their standing with the target group? Are they trusted/	
	
recognized, and what is the general satisfaction level among 	
	
clients?
4.	Within which fields and institutions do they facilitate human 	
	
capital development: technical, functional or business? 
5.	 What role could current providers and their services play in  
	
the project? 
6.	 Are there any constraints that deter providers from fulfilling 	
	
their mandate?
7.	 How could their capacities fit or be developed for the purposes 	
	
of the project, for sustained institutional capacity?
D  Providers: existing human capital development conditions
   29
BUILDING AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL THROUGH INVESTMENT


DESCRIPTION 
KEY ACTIVITIES
The implementer or co-implementers refer to the organiza-
tion(s) or entity(-ies) who bear the main responsibility for 
project design and implementation. These two tasks may  
be divided between two or more implementers or delegated 
to other persons or organizations who implement activities 
on the ground. The entities who implement sub-components 
are referred to as partners. They are responsible for specific 
portions but not the entire project (see F ).
Conduct assessments of existing capacities and areas of 
potential capacity development within the implementing 
institution(s). Identify skilled staff and/or departments best 
suited for project design and implementation. 
The main areas we need to understand regarding the 
implementer include:
1.	 Which capacities are beneficial or necessary for the project 	
	
implementer?
2.	 To what extent are those capacities present within the 	 	
	
organization?
3.	 Which staff/departments are most able to complete the 		
	
project tasks?
4.	Which areas or capacities could be strengthened or 	
	
	
developed?
5.	 Given the capacity assessment, which tasks are suitable  
	
for the implementer to do in-house and which are better 		
	
through collaboration with or outsourced to partners?  
	
(See F  for partner capacities.)
6.	 What is the nature of the AHCI project, i.e. is it a stand-alone 	
	
project or a component in a larger programme, and what 	
	
does that mean for collaboration as an implementer?
7.	 What are the general mandate, approach and organizational 	
	
structure of the implementer, and how do they relate to the 	
	
implementation process?
E  Implementer: intra-organizational and capacity conditions
While this toolkit focuses on individual capacities, it is important to note there 
are three levels: individual, organizational, and systems (or enabling 
environment) capacities. Most farmers are part of social systems and farmer 
groups or cooperatives, which also need organizational level capacity. Links 
between organizational capacities are shown in the case on professionalizing 
farmer organizations through private sector-led models (Gordon, 2021). 
Individuals and organizations can function better when there is system-level 
capacity, the ability to shape and implement policies and regulations for the 
benefit of agrifood actors.
!
30   
HOW TO INVEST IN FARMERS? A GUIDE FOR AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT PROJECTS


DESCRIPTION 
KEY ACTIVITIES
DESCRIPTION 
KEY ACTIVITIES
Partners can be any organization(s) or person(s) with  
whom the implementer is collaborating on project design and/or 
implementation and who contribute resources.  
These can be actors functioning at national, district or local level, 
or all three. 
Conduct analysis and/or strengths, weaknesses, opportunities 
and threats (SWOT) at local, district and national level for any 
stakeholders with capacities and insights relevant to the project. 
Hold initial talks and discussions with potential partner(s) to 
estimate organizational fit.
1.	 Which actors with capacities and insights relevant to the  
	
project are present? 
2.	 Which capacities or other resources could they contribute  
	
in project design and/or implementation?
3.	 Is a partnership feasible or desirable? If so, what form of 		
	
	
partnership should it be?
4.	Could there be risks entering into a partnership? If so, what  
	
are they?
5.	 If partnership is feasible and desirable, how are tasks to be 	
	
	
delegated and good communication ensured?
These comprise the resources available for project design, 
implementation, monitoring and evaluation for the lifespan of the 
project or programme. 
Create a clear overview of budgeted resource flows. Conduct a 
risk assessment depending on the source of resources.
The main areas we need to understand regarding funding include:
1.	 Which resources are available for project implementation,  
	
and what does that mean for the general scope of the project?
2.	 Where are resources coming from?
3.	 What is the timing of resource flow(s) throughout the lifespan  
	
of the project?
4.	Are there any risks to future flow of resources and its reliability 	 	
	
depending on source(s)?
5.	 What are the capacities of implementer(s) and/or partner(s)  
	
to handle and report on funding? (These are part of the 	 	
	
	
assessments in E  and F ) 
6.	 What funding or resources exist to continue the project 	 	
	
	
activities in a sustainable way at the same location and to upscale 	
	
to other locations? 
F  Partner(s): collaboration opportunities and conditions
G  Financing and/or funding: resource and financial conditions
   31
BUILDING AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL THROUGH INVESTMENT


H  Impacts: the long-term desired effects of the project
Aspiration building block
Objectives and key activities
Main objective 
Select feasible and desirable  
human capital J , outcomes I  and impacts H ,  
informed by framing and design building blocks.
Setting a theory of change for a project and incorporating AHC can be 
challenging. We suggest doing so based on a thorough understanding of 
relevant contextual factors, which is based on information gathered in the 
framing building block (elements A – G ).
KEY ACTIVITIES
OBJECTIVE
EXAMPLES  
OF IMPACTS
Analyse accumulated information/data from framing building 
block activities ( A – G ). Source existing knowledge from impact 
assessments and evaluation of other projects or programmes. 
Identify feasible and desirable human capital, outcomes and 
impact in participation with farmers.
Identify desired impacts of the project based on needs and 
aspirations of farmers. What is the long-term, measurable change 
that you want to see? Identify feasible and desirable human  
capital, outcomes and impact in participation with farmers.
Main questions to consider:
1.	 Based on conversations with farmers ( A ) on needs and 		
	
	
aspirations, which are the main challenges within the given 	
	
	
agricultural/livelihood systems that the project aims to 	 	
	
	
address?
2.	 Which opportunities exist to overcome those challenges? 
3.	 Which opportunities could farmers pursue by changing actions 	 	
	
and behaviours?
Is each opportunity feasible, measurable, timely and 	
	
	
	
appropriate, given information from the framing building block 	 	
	
(elements A – G )?
Increased incomes, increased resilience of agricultural/livelihood 
systems facing certain disruptions, increased empowerment of 
marginalised groups in agricultural/livelihood systems, improved 
health and nutrition.
32   
HOW TO INVEST IN FARMERS? A GUIDE FOR AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT PROJECTS


OBJECTIVE 
EXAMPLES  
OF OUTCOMES
OBJECTIVE 
EXAMPLES  
OF OUTPUTS
Identify changes in actions and behaviours (outcomes) that can 
lead to the desired impact.
The main questions to consider include:
1.	 Based on accumulated information from A – G , which changes 	 	
	
in actions, activities and behaviours are most likely to lead to the  
	
desired impact?
2.	 Which of those changes can best be facilitated or are most 	
	
	
likely to follow from developing new skills and capabilities 	
	
	
among farmers?
3.	 Based on accumulated information from A – G , which  
	
actions and behaviours are measurable, feasible, timely and 	
	
	
appropriate?
These include adoption of technical agricultural practices, such  
as integrated pest management, pruning, harvesting, irrigation 
systems and storage, changes in behaviour such as taking up new 
leadership or entrepreneurship roles, changes in division of 
labour between household members, changes in strategies to 
reach markets or secure fair prices.
Identify agriculture human capital that can lead to desired 
outcomes.
The main questions we need to consider include:
1.	 Based on accumulated information from A – G , which type  
	
of AHC is most likely to lead to the desired outcomes?
•	 Which type of AHC: knowledge, skills, education, 	
	
empowerment, networking and/or social capital?
•	 Which field or combination of fields of AHC: technical 
agriculture, functional and/or business skills? 
2.	 Based on accumulated information from A – G , is the 	
	
	
	
development of those new skills and capabilities feasible, 	
	
	
measurable, timely and appropriate?
Skills, knowledge, capabilities, greater self-esteem, positive 
attitude, confidence within fields of agricultural techniques and 
practices, social interactions and business practices as  
well as other areas relevant to the given agriculture/livelihood 
system or general well-being. It can also include changed 
mindsets, attitudes, and judgements.
I  Outcomes: changes in actions and behaviours
J  Outputs: agriculture human capital
Make sure to set the goals of H , I  and J  in consultation with targeted 
farmers. See Figure 3.4 for an example.
!
   33
BUILDING AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL THROUGH INVESTMENT


Aspirational building block
Framing building block
Example
Female farmers testify 
that they are excluded 
from certain agricultural 
decisions and practices, 
which lowers their income 
and social standing ( A )
Example
In the community, a 
network of women’s groups 
are present, giving 
potential and space for 
developing new actions, 
behaviours and roles by 
women ( B )
Example
Female farmers find  
that learning livestock 
rearing skills is well 
suited to their current 
livelihoods ( A ) 
Output
Figure 
3.4
Example 
of 
aspirational 
building 
block 
informed 
by 
framing 
building 
block
SOURCE: 
Authors' 
own 
elaboration.
Example of  
desired impact: 
Female farmers are 
empowered in agricultural 
decisions and practices, 
and improves incomes 
and social standing
Outcome
Impact
Example of actions 
and behaviours:
Female farmers are 
enabled to take up 
leadership and entrepre-
neurship roles; providing 
advisory services to 
community members
Example of  
agriculture human 
capital target: 
 
Expert knowledge and 
skills in livestock rearing, 
and increased self- 
esteem among female 
farmers
34   
HOW TO INVEST IN FARMERS? A GUIDE FOR AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT PROJECTS


OBJECTIVE 
KEY ACTIVITIES
Through a participatory process, select target group(s) that: a) are 
interested in partaking in the project; b) have potential to acquire 
new human capital and benefit from it; and c) testify to various 
needs and aspirations aligned with the project. 
1.	 Within the geographical scope set in A , develop clear criteria 	
	
	
for selecting the geographical areas of the project. This will 	
	
	
depend on:
•	 logistical scope and resource availability of the project 
(revert back to G );
•	 government priorities ( B );
•	 location-specific challenges the project aims to address ( H ), 
e.g. poverty, unemployment, food safety, climate change 
adaption, market access; 
•	 location-specific know-how and heritage of knowledge in 
relation to agrifood systems; 
•	 location-specific opportunities the project aims to take 
K  Targeting
Design building block
Objectives and key actions
Main objective 
Create a project design that ensures the likelihood of  
reaching human capital targets J , outcomes I  and impact 
H , informed by framing and aspirational building blocks.
The following elements within the design building block are meant as a tool to 
incorporate thinking and considerations on AHC within the project design, 
and not as a new set of project design guidelines, many of which exist.2
!
2	
For useful project design guidance, see FAO Investment Learning Platform: 
 
	
www.fao.org/investment-learning-platform/investment-cycle-phases/en/;  
	
World 
Bank 
Project 
Cycle: 
https://projects.worldbank.org/en/projects-operations/ 
	
products-and-ser-vic-es/brief/projectcycle#:~:text=Once%20all%20project%20	
	
details%20are%20negotiated%20and%20accepted,and%20the%20legal%20documents%20	
	
are%20accepted%20and%20; IFAD Project design and Management: www.ifad.org/en/	
	
project-design-and-management 
   35
BUILDING AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL THROUGH INVESTMENT


advantage of: agroclimatic conditions allowing for different 
agricultural/livelihood systems ( C ); for example: suitable 
conditions for grazing, tree cover, growing certain crops, or 
developing aquaculture; existing capacities of local 
organizations ( B );
•	 other ongoing projects or programmes in the area;
•	 possibilities for collaboration with partners in the area. 
2.	 Based on new consultations with farmers on geographical scope 	
	
through, for instance, participatory needs assessments, 	
	
	
	
minisurveys, focus group discussions or other formats, discover:
•	 Which farmers have the potential or are already involved in 
agricultural/livelihood systems connected with the project? 
•	 Which farmers have expressed interest in acquiring new 
human capital related to a given agricultural/livelihood 
system?
•	 Which farmers are willing to invest time, effort and potentially 
resources in learning new skills and acquiring new 
capabilities? 
•	 Which farmers express needs and aspirations aligned with 
the project? 
3.	 Drawing on these consultations as well as assessments 		
	
	
conducted as part of A , B  and C , select the target group(s) of 	 	
	
the project whose human capital you want to further develop.
4.	Create an inclusion strategy ensuring all target group segments 		
	
can participate.
•	 Identify the barriers to participation or engagement each 
segment or target group faces, e.g. lack of transport or other 
resources (financial, digital tools, land), lack of social 
acceptance in relation to gender or LGTBQIA+ norms, social 
standing or lack of physical abilities. This can also include 
understanding why some farmers are not interested in 
participating.
•	 Devise a strategy to ensure participation for each target 
group segment given their socioeconomic barriers and 
available resources.
•	 Use this strategy when selecting development methods  
and designing the implementation activities in L .
Be sure to provide reliable and attainable incentives for learning rooted in the 
needs and aspirations of farmers (data from A ). If incentives such as higher 
value or productivity of crops, greater well-being remain out of reach despite 
acquiring skills and capacities, farmers may see no reason to invest time and 
effort in learning (Davis et al., 2021; McNamara, 2020). 
!
36   
HOW TO INVEST IN FARMERS? A GUIDE FOR AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT PROJECTS


OBJECTIVE AND
KEY ACTIVITIES
EXAMPLES OF 
DEVELOPMENT 
METHODS
OBJECTIVE 
KEY ACTIVITIES 
Select agriculture human capital development method(s) 
and design implementation activities best suited for AHC 
development. 
Module 5 is dedicated to decision-making around selecting  
and designing the best method to develop human capital in 
agriculture based on conditions and goals. 
Farmer field schools (FAO, 2016), certified community promoters, 
farmer training centres.
Design an organizational and management structure to 
implement human capital development that outlines the division 
of tasks, responsibilities and decision-making processes. 
1.	 Who does what, and how should they do it? Based on 	
	
	
	
assessments from A , B , D , E , F , in consultation with 	
	
	
	
respective actors the roles, outline responsibilities and  
	
decision-making processes for the actors that have significance 		
	
for the development of human capital:
•	 farmers ( A );
•	 other stakeholders involved ( B );
•	 providers of human capital on the ground ( D );
•	 implementer or co-implementers ( E );
•	 partner(s) ( F ). 
2.	 Define the ways in which these roles relate to:
•	 How you plan to form governance bodies for decision-
making, oversight, budgeting and financial decisions (e.g. a 
steering committee). Consider the degree of decentralisation 
in decision-making, such as the design or financial decisions 
farmers themselves should make to support ownership of 
learning processes.
•	 Develop human capital directly. Which tasks relate to  
each activity in implementing agriculture human capital 
development methods L ? Consider existing local 
institutional systems/customs/responsibilities and define 
roles that complement them.  Local farmer groups and 
community members could well take on certain tasks.
•	 Set up new institutions to work within the organizational 
structure such as community-level commissions, boards or 
councils with defined roles and responsibilities. 
L  Method: how to develop agriculture human capital
M  Organizing: how to organize and manage implementation
   37
BUILDING AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL THROUGH INVESTMENT


OBJECTIVE 
KEY ACTIVITIES 
Create a strategy that maintains the desired continuity and allows 
for replication and scaling of human capital development prior to 
implementation.
1.	 Assess which aspect(s) to sustain in the long run plus required 	 	
	
scaling, actions and strategies.
•	 For the project itself developing human capital, consider 
what it requires to ensure continuity, or its different 
components, beyond the initial time limit. Will the funding 
continue or are there alternative sources, partnerships, 
implementer(s), and capacity building from relevant 
institutions? Also, what would it require to scale up the 
project, and is there funding available for that?
•	 Are there any successful approaches from the project 
implementation? Discuss with relevant stakeholders how to 
continue, scale up or integrate these approaches into other 
programmes or into new ones. Provide ample evidence and 
documentation with information.
•	 Is there developed human capital among farmers and is it 
possible to ensure continuous farmer support? Will farmer 
coaching and advisory services or other supports be 
available after the project ends? Can they be scaled up 
beyond the project?
•	 What are the outcomes and impacts of the project? This may 
need a more holistic approach to identify a wider set of 
factors that support certain actions, behaviours and wider 
impacts. Consider how to sustain certain relationships, 
market channels, networks and other factors post project 
and how to scale up.  
N  Scaling and sustaining
3.	 Monitoring, evaluation and learning tasks ( O ) Establish capacity 	
	
strengthening within identified areas or institutions of need 	
	
	
(revert back to identified institutional skills needed under E ).
4.	Establish communication and reporting channels and procedures 
 
	
throughout implementation.
AHCIs are often components of a larger programme investing in other areas 
simultaneously. Having a clear outline of intra-organizational roles and 
responsibilities as the implementer is key to facilitate development of human 
capital.
!
38   
HOW TO INVEST IN FARMERS? A GUIDE FOR AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT PROJECTS


OBJECTIVE 
KEY ACTIVITIES 
INDICATORS FOR 
AGRICUL
TURE 
HUMAN CAPITAL
2.	 Take step one in consultation and collaboration with partners and 
	
	
other stakeholders, potentially reaching out to new stakeholders, 	
	
governments, ministries and companies that are relevant in 	
	
	
terms of continuity, replication or scaling up.
Create a clear strategy for monitoring, evaluating and learning to 
keep improving the project design once implementation starts.
1.	 Pre-implementation: Establish monitoring, evaluation and 	
	
	
learning mechanisms.
•	 Collect baseline data on existing skills and capabilities 
through surveys, interviews and focus group discussions 
prior to implementation.
•	 Set up channels for grievance, feedback and information 
sharing that are easily accessible for farmers, providers and 
staff working on the project, to learn from success or barriers 
to human capital development.
•	 Establish clear procedures on handling complaints, 
grievances and other feedback that are integrated into the 
organization ( M ) of the project.
•	 Ensure transparency of practices for all of the above to 
promote awareness among all involved, including 
communication channels. 
During implementation: Collect results on progress towards set 	
	
	
human capital indicators through surveys, interviews, focus 	
	
	
group discussions and compare with baseline data as well as 	
	
	
human capital targets ( J ). Consider mid-term reviews.
2.	During implementation: Collect data from feedback and 		
	
	
grievances and follow established procedures. Ensure that 	
	
	
feedback is used to improve project performance.
3.	 Consider methods such as log frames, randomized control trials, 	
	
participation, reflection workshops, minisurveys, interviews.
There is no one way to determine indicators for AHCI when 
collecting baseline data and subsequently monitoring and 
evaluating progress. One could choose indicators of output, that 
is: What human capital have farmers gained? This can be difficult 
to measure but could rely on qualitative data from farmers, 
through surveys, interviews, focus group discussions. Progress 
indicators on outcomes, that is: To what extent are farmers 
adopting new actions and behaviours? Likewise rely on qualitative 
data from farmers but could be supplemented with observational 
O  Keep improving
   39
BUILDING AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL THROUGH INVESTMENT


data. Finally, assess indicators on impact, that is: To what extent 
has the project delivered the desired goal(s)? This depends  
on the nature of the goal(s). If the project aimed for quantifiable 
goals such as increases in productivity or incomes, there are  
ways to measure impact through quantitative data, although there 
are significant challenges in determining cause and effect. If the 
project aimed for goals that are difficult to quantify such as 
well-being and empowerment, monitoring and evaluation is again 
based on qualitative data collection. For a deeper understanding 
of impact evaluation of AHC investments, see Module 4 and other 
useful resources (FAO, 2022a; FAO, 2022b).
Often, strategies for N  and O  are not fully formed until the project is ongoing. 
We suggest rather that all elements of the design building block are thoroughly 
planned fully prior to implementation. This includes developing an exit 
strategy as one of the first steps of the design process.
!
40   
HOW TO INVEST IN FARMERS? A GUIDE FOR AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT PROJECTS


ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARD CONSIDERATIONS FOR  
AGRICULTURE HUMAN CAPITAL PROJECTS
All AHCI projects occur within a bigger picture: building human capital  (output)   
such that behaviours and actions are changed  (outcome)  and lead to larger project/
programme goals  (impact)  within a given area (geographical and societal). It can  
be difficult to imagine that an AHC project could have negative environmental and/or 
social impacts, however this can happen if the context within which the project works  
is not adequately assessed beforehand. Negative social impacts could be in the form  
of social conflict between those who receive the training and those who do not or 
discord over cultural sensitivity of the human capital targeted (e.g. does the project 
conflict with existing cultural norms or traditional knowledge?). The building of human 
capital can also, if not accompanied by specific safeguards or incentives to reduce 
these risks, prompt “brain drain”, where newly trained participants acquire skills that 
encourage them to leave their area because of the absence of local opportunities  
or compensation. 
By assessing the social context within which the project is planned, project designers 
can avoid, reduce, or mitigate these potential risks and negative impacts. It is important 
to consider inclusiveness when targeting participants, as some who are already well  
off, in terms of literacy or access to information, might be overrepresented compared  
to those more in need. In some cases, it is likewise essential to create a “safe space”  
for capacity development for the individual, as it is sometimes discouraged by religious 
beliefs, tradition, gender roles, norms and policies. A coaching approach to personal 
learning could remove any potential harm in these situations. With regards to wider 
conflicts, FAO provides guidance on conflict sensitive programming that can prove 
useful (FAO, 2020).
Likewise, on the environmental side, the human capital intervention (and the  
larger outcome or impact to which it contributes must be assessed in relation to 
environmental sustainability. An example of a well-intentioned human capital idea gone 
awry is the case of training farmers in some countries with water shortages and poor 
connectivity to irrigation systems in the use of solar irrigation pumps. In theory, the idea 
seems wonderful: farmers have access to water, agricultural productivity increases, they 
acquire skills in on-farm water management using renewable energy. In reality, the 
result is far from ideal. In countries without groundwater monitoring or legislation and 
enforcement on its use, many of these solar powered irrigation pumps are depleting 
groundwater resources without any replenishment and have developed into a problem 
of their own. The lesson learned is that without assessing the related output, outcome 
and impact of a project against the wider environmental, legal, social and political 
context a good idea can turn out to be disastrous
BOX 3.1
SOURCE: 
Authors’ 
own 
elaboration; 
FAO. 
2020. 
The 
programme 
clinic 
designing 
conflict- 
sensitive 
interventions: 
approaches 
to 
working 
in 
fragile 
and 
conflict-affected 
contexts. 
Rome, 
FAO. 
www.fao.org/3/ca7494en/ca7494en.pdf
   41
BUILDING AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL THROUGH INVESTMENT


	
	 INFORMATION FLOW BETWEEN BUILDING BLOCKS: A KEY PRINCIPLE 	
	
	 OF DESIGN AND “ O  KEEP IMPROVING” 
As is evident above, the flow of information between the three building blocks 
is key. This is the case in the pre-implementation or design phase (Figure 3.5) 
as well as during implementation (see Figure 3.6). In the latter, the  aspirational 
building block becomes an evidence building block, where data on actual 
outputs, outcomes and impact move from being aspirations to guidance for 
continuous improvement in the design building block, and is therefore the 
primary principle of O  Keep improving.
Design  
building block
K 	
Targeting
L 	
Methods
M 	
Organizing
N  Scaling & 	 	
	
sustaining
O  Keep improving
Figure 
3.5
Information 
flows 
between 
building 
blocks 
pre-implementation
SOURCE: 
Authors' 
own 
elaboration.
A 	
Farmers
B 	
Institutions
C 	
Environment
D 	
Providers
E 	
Implementer
F 	
Partner(s)
G 	
Financing/ 
	
funding
Framing  
building block
Aspirational  
building block
H  Impact
I  Outcome
J  Output
Data 2
What do contextual factors tell 
us about the best design 
strategies? 
 
Example: Most farmers own 
smartphones ( A ). Digital tools 
could therefore make part of a 
method ( L ), but should also 
inform on a targeting strategy  
( K ) that ensures inclusion of 
farmers without smartphones.
Data 1
What do contextual factors tell 
us about which types of human 
capital is important, and how 
they lead to desired impact? 
 
Example: Soil quality ( C ) is low 
and farmers testify of low yields 
( A ). An important type of 
human capital would be skills to 
improve soils.
Data 3
What do the elements of the 
theory of change tell us about 
the best design strategies? 
 
Example: Leadership skills and 
improved empowerment ( J ) 
among women are desired. A 
method that involves targeted 
women directly in decision-
making could therefore be 
relevant.
42   
HOW TO INVEST IN FARMERS? A GUIDE FOR AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT PROJECTS


Design  
building block
K 	
Targeting
L 	
Methods
M 	
Organizing
N  Scaling & 	 	
	
sustaining
O  Keep improving
Figure 
3.6
Information 
flows 
between 
building 
blocks 
implementation
SOURCE: 
Authors' 
own 
elaboration.
A 	
Farmers
B 	
Institutions
C 	
Environment
D 	
Providers
E 	
Implementer
F 	
Partner(s)
G 	
Financing/ 
	
funding
Framing  
building block
Evidence  
building block
H  Impact
I  Outcome
J  Output
Data 5
Data 5: What is the feedback 
from farmers, providers, & 
partners re. K - O , what are the 
changes in contextual factors  
(if any); and what can be learned 
for improving design? 
 
Example: Providers testify that 
teaching conditions are not 
ideal for given circumstances  
reassess L .
Data 4
What is the feedback from 
farmers, providers & partners 
re. the specific skills and 
capacities, the specific actions 
and behaviours and how those 
help lead to the desired impact? 
 
Example: Farmers testify that 
certain skillsets are not useful in 
order to undertake the required 
actions for change  reassess 
J , I , possibly H .
Data 6
What is the evidence of 
achieved outputs, outcomes 
and impacts and what can be 
learned for improving design? 
This can be documented under 
set indicators 
 
Example: Indicators of 
developed agriculture human 
capital are low.  reassess K , 
L , M  and collect data 5 to 
facilitate/improve an uptake in 
human capital developed.
   43
BUILDING AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL THROUGH INVESTMENT




©CIFOR/Faizal Abdul Aziz
©FAO/Luis Tato




Module 4 
Agriculture human 
capital investment 
development methods
	
	 INTRODUCTION
Having discussed what AHC is, theories of change using human capital, and 
the different components of project design, we now turn to  AHC development 
methods. We omit the word “agriculture” in this module on the basis the term 
“human capital” refers to human capital in agriculture. This module lists  human 
capital development methods, presents indicators and criteria for assessing 
them and describes selected methods. Next, the module presents tables to 
help select which methods to use and discusses principles for deciding how 
to combine methods. 
Learning objective 
To be able to list different types of methods to develop  
human capital. You can then select appropriate human  
capital development methods based on your context, 
resources and goals. 
!
   47


GROUP
INDIVIDUAL
GROUP
	
	 LIST OF AGRICULTURE HUMAN CAPITAL DEVELOPMENT METHODS
Many human capacity development methods have developed for different 
purposes, target groups and conditions. As shown in Figure 2.2 in Module 2, 
human capital development methods may be categorized as: 
•	 formal, involving the agricultural education system; 
•	 non-formal, including extension and advisory services and training  
	 for specific purposes and skills; and
•	 informal,  where learning is more ad hoc as when farmers learn from 	
	 	each other or other informal sources such as input supply shops. 	
 
Human capital development methods may also be categorized according to 
their target, that is, individuals (e.g. call centres), groups (e.g. farmer field 
schools) or the public at large (e.g. radio). 
	
The list below is not exhaustive but includes most of the methods that 
have been documented, such as JICA (2008), Hoffman et al. (2009), David and 
Cofini (2017) and Davis et al. (2018). Methods are listed by type (formal, non-
formal and informal) and then within each type, depending on whether the 
method targets individuals, groups, or the public at large. The 16 starred 
methods are described in more detail in the next section followed by discussion 
of the criteria.
	
	 FORMAL
•	 Agricultural universities 
•	 Agricultural vocational schools* 
•	 Certification programmes from government, educational institutions, 	
	
	 private sector (e.g. community promoters)* 
•	 Farmer training centres* 
	
	 NON-FORMAL
	
	 Extension and advisory methods
•	 Benchmarking for farm business analysis
•	 Agricultural call centres*
•	 Extension agent advising individual farmers
•	 Management advice for family farms*	
•	 Plant health clinics
•	 Village agents* 
•	 Demonstrations 
•	 Enablers of rural innovation
•	 Extension agent advising groups
•	 Farmer field schools*	
	
•	 Farmer study circles
•	 Farmer-to-farmer extension (e.g. lead farmers, community promoters)*
•	 Household methodologies 
•	 Innovation platforms 
•	 Learning events/workshops 
•	 Service provision by cooperatives 
•	 Study tours*
•	 Videos*
48   
HOW TO INVEST IN FARMERS? A GUIDE FOR AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT PROJECTS


INDIVIDUAL
PUBLIC  
AT LARGE
PUBLIC AT LARGE
•	 Edutainment television*
•	 Extension campaigns
•	 Fairs and shows*
•	 Mobile phone extension with basic features for text messages and 	
	
	 interactive voice response
•	 Radio*
•	 Smartphones/computers/laptops with internet for:
•	 Digital portals, knowledge banks and platforms
•	 e-learning platforms
•	 Mobile apps
•	 WhatsApp, Telegram and other social media discussion groups*
•	 Tele/video conference
	
	 On the job training
•	 Internships/apprenticeships*
•	 Coaching/mentoring*
	
	  
	
	 INFORMAL
•	 Coaching/mentoring
•	 Experience
•	 Farmers advising each other in absence of a programme
•	 Markets/input suppliers
•	 Meetings 
 
 
 
	
* Described in more detail in the next section
Human capital development methods may also be categorized according to 
their target, that is, individuals (e.g. call centres), groups (e.g. farmer field 
schools) or the public at large (e.g. radio). 
	
The list below is not exhaustive but includes most of the methods that 
have been documented, such as JICA (2008), Hoffman et al. (2009), David and 
Cofini (2017) and Davis et al. (2018). Methods are listed by type (formal, non-
formal and informal) and then within each type, depending on whether the 
method targets individuals, groups, or the public at large. The 16 starred 
methods are described in more detail in the next section followed by discussion 
of the criteria.
   49
AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT DEVELOPMENT METHODS


EXTENSION AND ADVISORY SERVICES AND HUMAN CAPITAL  
DEVELOPMENT METHODS
Extension and advisory services (EAS) are the activities from different sectors  
that facilitate farmers’ access to knowledge, information and technologies; their 
interaction with markets, research and education, and the development of technical, 
organizational and management skills and practices” (Davis and Sulaiman, 2018).  
EAS account for most of the human capital development methods available to farmers 
in the South. Other methods include educational institutions, on-the-job training such 
as internships and apprenticeships and informal methods such as farmers’ 
interactions with each other.
BOX 4.1 
SOURCE: 
Authors 
and 
Davis, 
K. 
and 
Sulaiman, 
R. 
2018. 
Overview 
of 
extension 
philos-
ophies 
and 
methods. 
In: 
Davis, 
K., 
Bohn, 
A., 
Franzel, 
S., 
Blum, 
M., 
Rieckmann, 
U., 
Raj, 
S., 
Hussein, 
K. 
& 
Ernst, 
N. 
eds. 
2018. 
What 
works 
in 
rural 
advisory 
services? 
Global 
Good 
Practice 
Notes. 
Lausanne, 
Switzerland: 
GFRAS, 
pp. 
3-6.
	
	 FIELDS AND TYPES OF HUMAN CAPITAL DEVELOPED, CHANGES IN 	
	
	
	 HUMAN CAPITAL SOUGHT AND CRITERIA FOR ASSESSMENT
The descriptions of the methods include fields and types of human capital 
developed, changes in human capital sought and criteria and indicators used 
for assessing the methods. These three sets of descriptors are defined below.
Fields of human capital developed
Here we look at fields of human capital as defined in Module 2 that the method 
can develop easily.
	
Changes in types of human capital sought that may increase or 
improve these types, as defined in Box 1.2.
Criteria for assessing human capital development methods
Five of the seven criteria are adapted from David and Cofini (2017) and compare 
methods in tables presented in the section "Principles for selecting which 
methods to use" (pp 80–84).
50   
HOW TO INVEST IN FARMERS? A GUIDE FOR AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT PROJECTS


1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Other criteria could be included in the above list, such as scalability, ease of 
accessing a method, and suitability for working with other target groups, such 
as disabled or Indigenous Peoples. Some such as ease of access are highly 
nuanced and depend on the context, such as the target population’s education 
level and the proportion with access to smartphones or the internet. Others, 
such as suitability for Indigenous Peoples, may be relevant only in some 
instances. Planners can include additional criteria as needed. 
The number of people who can participate in or use a 
particular method. This could be the number of persons 
trained or the numbers listening to a radio broadcast. 
Categories used for this toolkit include wide, moderate 
and limited.
This assesses the level of difficulty in applying a method, 
including content development, recruiting and training. 
The categories are easy, moderate or difficult.	
 
The cost of implementing a method includes staff sala-
ries, transport and equipment. The categories are low, 
medium and high.	
 
Cost per user or per trainee is the total cost divided by 
the number of persons participating in or using the 
method. Note that the cost of a method such as a tele-
vision show may be high while the cost per viewer may 
be low. The categories are low, medium and high.
This assesses the level of difficulty in applying a method, 
including content development, recruiting and training. 
The categories are easy, moderate or difficult.	
 
This is the extent to which the method can accommodate 
constraints faced by women (such as lack of time due to 
domestic work, childcare needs, cultural taboos on 
mixing with men) or by youth (such as constraints on 
speaking when elders are present). The categories are 
high, medium and low.  	
 
This assesses feasibility for national and local institutions 
to continue financing the method once external support 
ends. The categories are high (highly feasible), medium 
and low.
REACH
SUITABILITY FOR 
LOW LITERACY 
POPULATIONS
SUITABILITY  
FOR WORKING 
WITH WOMEN 
AND YOUTH
FINANCIAL 
SUSTAINABILITY
EASE OF 
IMPLEMENTATION
COST
COST PER USER
	
	 DESCRIPTION OF SELECTED HUMAN CAPITAL DEVELOPMENT 	
	
	
	 METHODS
The selected human capital development methods are described below in 
alphabetical order within the three main development categories (formal, non-
formal, and informal). The descriptions of methods draw upon Davis et al. 
(2018), David and Cofini (2017) and other references, specific to each method.
   51
AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT DEVELOPMENT METHODS


IMPLEMENTATION
An information hub that people call to receive timely and 
relevant information and advice.  Call centres also help link 
farmers to services such as input suppliers, produce 
marketers or credit providers. 
The information and advice provided by a call centre need 
to be accurate, up-to-date, accessible, relevant and timely. 
Farmers need to trust their call centre. This trust can be 
more easily developed if farmers already trust the institution 
connected to the call centre. For example, i-shamba (farm), 
a farmer information service in Kenya is associated with the 
popular agricultural television show Shamba Shape Up (see 
method on edutainment television) and operates an 
agricultural call centre that farmers can subscribe to free 
of charge.	
 
To understand farmers’ needs, preferences and capabili-
ties requires a comprehensive needs assessment. Key 
operational decisions include: 
•	 which languages to use; 
•	 whether to answer calls directly or use interactive  
voice response (automated replies with the caller  
selecting different options); 
•	 which hardware and software to use;
•	 how to develop the call centre application, that is,  
the repository of knowledge that call agents access  
to reply to callers’ questions;
•	 whether calls can be linked to locations via global  
positioning systems (GPS) so that information given  
is adapted to the caller’s precise location; 
•	 which data to capture from the call and how  
to use the data to manage knowledge and improve  
performance.
Particular attention needs to be given to recruiting and 
training call agents as the direct point of contact for callers. 
DEFINITION
PRINCIPLES
Agricultural  
call centres
52   
HOW TO INVEST IN FARMERS? A GUIDE FOR AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT PROJECTS


FIELDS OF 
HUMAN CAPITAL 
DEVELOPED
CHANGES IN 
HUMAN CAPITAL 
SOUGHT
REACH
EASE OF 
IMPLEMENTATION
CAPACITIES 
REQUIRED  
AND COST
SUITABILITY FOR 
WORKING WITH 
LOW LITERACY 
POPULATIONS
SUITABILITY  
FOR WORKING 
WITH WOMEN 
AND YOUTH
Technical agriculture
Increased knowledge, networks
Moderate, often limited to paid subscribers or members of 
particular organizations.	  
Difficult, requires considerable expertise in agriculture, call 
handling procedures, customer relations and call centre 
hardware and software.	  
Required expertise includes call centre management, 
 
technical agriculture, operations and call centre agents with 
agricultural background and good communication skills. 
Costs are high but cost per beneficiary may be low to 
 
moderate if the number of users is high.	
 
High, as long as they have access to phones.	
 
Moderate to high, services may attract more youth and 
women if they are represented among the call agents.	
Moderate. Key aspects are building trust among users and 
assuring them they can get relevant, accurate and timely 
information at low cost. Cost recovery is a challenge and 
may involve subsidies or direct payments from users.
Strengths include two-way communication, location spec-
ificity (particularly when calls are GPS-located), and the 
ability to answer farmers’ specific questions. Challenges 
include gaining the trust of the audience and managing the 
complex set of agricultural information, customer relations 
and call centre hardware and software. 
FINANCIAL 
SUSTAINABILITY
STRENGTHS AND 
CHALLENGES
   53
AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT DEVELOPMENT METHODS


CHANGES IN 
HUMAN CAPITAL 
SOUGHT
REACH
EASE OF 
IMPLEMENTATION
FIELDS OF 
HUMAN CAPITAL 
DEVELOPED
Trade fairs, trade shows 	  
Agricultural fairs and shows are public events with displays 
and exhibits to provide farmers with information on 
technologies and practices.	
 
Fairs may be organized by government agencies, NGOs, 
farmer organizations or private companies. They may deal 
with farming in general or focus on a particular sector such 
as livestock or seeds. They may be national in scale or focus 
on a particular region or district. Input suppliers and other 
service and equipment providers seek to increase their 
sales by showcasing their products and services for farmers 
and other stakeholders.	  
Some common features of many fairs include: displays 
where participants view produce, livestock and technologies; 
exhibition areas where input suppliers and service providers 
showcase their products and services; forums where 
exhibitors make presentations to participants; training 
sessions where farmers can learn new skills and techniques; 
and business-to-business forums where farmer 
organizations and other businesses can meet, strengthen 
networks and conduct business. Many shows award prizes 
and feature music and other forms of entertainment.  Some 
NGOs organize fairs with a particular objective in mind, as 
when Catholic Relief Services manages seed and voucher 
fairs across 11 African and Asian countries to help poor 
farmers access seed and promote local seed businesses 
(CRS, 2017).	
 
Technical agriculture, business	
 
Increased knowledge, networks	  
Moderate 
Difficult, requires a great deal of planning and 
administration
SYNONYMS/
SUB-CATEGORIES
DEFINITION
Agricultural  
fairs and shows
IMPLEMENTATION
PRINCIPLES
54   
HOW TO INVEST IN FARMERS? A GUIDE FOR AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT PROJECTS


CAPACITIES 
REQUIRED  
AND COST
Costs of putting on a fair are high but costs per attendee 
may be low to moderate, depending on the numbers 
attending. Costs of attending may be high if great distances 
are involved. Considerable skills in planning, administration 
and logistics are required. Costs include renting venue and 
facilities, publicity, marketing, engaging exhibitors, 
organizing contests, and transporting farmers. 
High	
 
Low to moderate for women as they may face difficulties 
travelling away from home and responsibilities such as 
childcare and domestic work, with gender taboos against 
travelling. High suitability for youth.	
 
Low to medium, depending on the willingness of local 
governments or trade associations to take responsibility 
for organizing shows. Some costs can be recovered through 
company subscriptions and charging exhibitors.	
 
The strengths are that farmers can learn about a wide range 
of products and services in a short period of time in one 
location and companies can market their products and 
services to many farmers and businesses and obtain 
feedback on them. Farmers can build networks with other 
farmers, input suppliers and service providers. Challenges 
include high costs, complexity of planning and logistics, 
and difficulty in assessing their impact.
SUITABILITY FOR 
WORKING WITH 
LOW LITERACY 
POPULATIONS
SUITABILITY  
FOR WORKING 
WITH WOMEN 
AND YOUTH
STRENGTHS AND 
CHALLENGES
FINANCIAL 
SUSTAINABILITY
   55
AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT DEVELOPMENT METHODS


Agricultural  
vocational schools
CHANGES IN 
HUMAN CAPITAL 
SOUGHT
REACH
EASE OF 
IMPLEMENTATION
FIELDS OF 
HUMAN CAPITAL 
DEVELOPED
Agricultural colleges	
 
Agricultural vocational schools offer students two- to 
three-year study programmes, often in two tiers, one 
beginning after completion of primary school and the other 
after high school. Training objectives are either to prepare 
for employment in the public or private sectors or to 
improve the farming skills of persons expecting to work in 
or manage a farm after graduation. 	
 
Vocational schools design programmes based on careful 
assessment of the training needs of the labour market, 
including both the public and private sector and policies 
ensure that women have access. In Cameroon, Agropastoral 
Training Institutes aim for at least 40 percent of their 
students to be women (Takamgang and Lhoste, 2021). 	
Curricula provide more practical than theoretical training; 
a 70:30 ratio is considered a benchmark. Strong linkages 
with the private sector are important; these include its 
participation in training and supporting internships. Strong 
linkages with agricultural universities are important, 
particularly for research.  	
 
Technical agriculture, functional, business	 
Increased knowledge, skills, education, networks, social 
capital	
 
Limited to moderate 	
 
Difficult, especially given the lack of resources devoted by 
many governments to agricultural vocational training. 
MSc and BSc level trainers and administrators are required. 
Costs include land, infrastructure, staff salaries, training 
 
and operations. Total costs and costs per trainee are high. 
 
In Cameroon, agropastoral schools charge students 
 
USD 358–448 per year for their two-year course while the 
total cost of training, including charges and costs the school 
covers, is USD 5770 per year (Takamgang and Lhoste, 2021).
SYNONYMS/
SUB-CATEGORIES
DEFINITION
IMPLEMENTATION
CAPACITIES 
REQUIRED  
AND COST
PRINCIPLES
56   
HOW TO INVEST IN FARMERS? A GUIDE FOR AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT PROJECTS


Low. Some recognise the low quality of primary education 
and offer foundational training in literacy and numeracy. 
 
High for youth as nearly all vocational schools target youth. 
Moderate for women, many make special efforts to recruit 
women. 	
 
Strengths include low costs relative to universities and 
flexibility in programming and provision of relevant skills, 
to respond to labour market demand. Many also have 
strong internship programmes benefitting both students 
and their hosts. Challenges are that graduates lack the 
means to start businesses and schools often lack linkages 
to policymakers, the private sector and other educational 
institutions. Another problem is that the schools are 
sometimes viewed as second class or inferior, compared 
to universities. 	
 
Strengths include low costs relative to universities and 
flexibility in programming and provision of relevant skills, to 
respond to labour market demand. Many also have strong 
internship programmes benefitting both students and their 
hosts. Challenges are that graduates lack the means to start 
businesses and schools often lack linkages to policymakers, 
the private sector and other educational institutions. 
Another problem is that the schools are sometimes viewed 
as second class or inferior, compared to universities.
SUITABILITY FOR 
WORKING WITH 
LOW LITERACY 
POPULATIONS
SUITABILITY  
FOR WORKING 
WITH WOMEN 
AND YOUTH
STRENGTHS AND 
CHALLENGES
FINANCIAL 
SUSTAINABILITY
   57
AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT DEVELOPMENT METHODS


Certified community 
promoters
CHANGES IN 
HUMAN CAPITAL 
SOUGHT
REACH
EASE OF 
IMPLEMENTATION
FIELDS OF 
HUMAN CAPITAL 
DEVELOPED
Certified farmer trainers	  
These are farmer trainers or community promoters (see 
farmer-to-farmer extension) who are accredited and have 
successfully completed a professional programme that 
meets the prescribed standard for an occupation.   	
Certification is the process whereby a professional society 
or other private or governmental body attests to the 
professional qualification of an individual. Certification 
provides a credible, third party assessment of a person’s 
skills and knowledge. Individuals earn certification in an 
occupation by meeting the minimum standards of 
education or experience. 	
 
 	
In some places, such as Jharkhand State, India, certified 
master trainers and community promoters work in animal 
health, whereas in Ghana and Indonesia, certified cocoa 
doctors advise farmers on improved cocoa management 
practices. In India, the trainers and promoters earn income 
selling products to farmers (such as medicine) whereas in 
other cases, such as cocoa doctors, they are volunteers. 
Private companies like Mars Inc. operate certification 
programmes, cocoa doctors, whereas the certification of 
animal health workers in Jharkhand is managed by the 
Agriculture Skills Council of India, a governmental body 
(Amanah et al., 2021; Kumar et al., 2021).   	  
Technical agriculture, business	
 
Increased knowledge, skills	
 
	
 
Moderate 	
 
Moderate to difficult. Certification programmes managed 
by professional bodies or government are generally more 
difficult to implement than those run by private companies. 
SYNONYMS/
SUB-CATEGORIES
DEFINITION
IMPLEMENTATION
PRINCIPLES
58   
HOW TO INVEST IN FARMERS? A GUIDE FOR AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT PROJECTS


Total costs and costs per beneficiary are low to moderate 
for certification programmes run by private companies but 
moderate to high for those run by professional or 
governmental bodies. They need kills in human resource 
management. The cost to train a certified community 
promoter in livestock management in India is USD 975 for 
a 30 day course and equipping the promoter with a 
smartphone and kit costs USD 156 (Kumar et al., 2021).	
High, as community promoters have knowledge of local 
culture, practices and the local language.
Moderate. Can be high, particularly when women and youth 
are encouraged to become community promoters or when 
promoters are sought for enterprises with women in the 
majority. In the example from Jharkhand State, India, raising 
small ruminants is traditionally women’s work and over 95 
percent of certified animal health workers are women. 
 
Certification of community promoters is particularly 
appropriate for high risk and very technical innovations 
where the cost of an error may be high (e.g. treatment of 
livestock diseases) or decisions are essentially permanent 
(location of water control structures). 	
 
Medium. Companies managing certification systems may 
cover most or all certification costs making the process 
more sustainable. Sustainability is more challenging where 
professional or governmental bodies operate certification. 
These may require promoters to pay some of the costs 
through licensing or membership fees.	
 
Certification has the potential to increase the community 
promotor’s credibility, earning power and respect from 
customers and peers. It also helps improve a person’s 
confidence, reputation and status. The major challenge is 
the high cost of a certification programme, including 
setting standards, managing a testing or accreditation 
system, registering certified persons and maintaining 
certification over time, such as requiring attendance at 
refresher courses. 
SUITABILITY FOR 
WORKING WITH 
LOW LITERACY 
POPULATIONS
SUITABILITY  
FOR WORKING 
WITH WOMEN 
AND YOUTH
STRENGTHS AND 
CHALLENGES
FINANCIAL 
SUSTAINABILITY
OTHER 
SUITABILITY 
CONSIDERATIONS
CAPACITIES 
REQUIRED  
AND COST
   59
AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT DEVELOPMENT METHODS


Coaching
CHANGES IN 
HUMAN CAPITAL 
SOUGHT
REACH
EASE OF 
IMPLEMENTATION
FIELDS OF 
HUMAN CAPITAL 
DEVELOPED
Coaching is a professional, collaborative and outcomes-
driven method of learning that seeks to help individuals 
achieve specific goals and improve performance.  	
A coach’s task is to help the client think through situations, 
so they can solve problems themselves. Trust, commitment 
and active involvement are key aspects of the relationship 
between a coach and a client. Coaches help clients to 
achieve personal growth, such as improved self-esteem 
and confidence, and to improve their business skills and 
performance. A coach needs to have strong listening and 
questioning skills.  Coaches also help clients to access new 
business contacts and networks (van Coller-Peter, 2020).    	
Mondelêz International uses full time coaches in its Cocoa 
Life programme to assist cocoa farmers in Côte d’Ivoire, 
Ghana and Indonesia to improve production. Coaches and 
farmers together draw up a farm development plan and 
coaches carry out up to four follow-up visits over the 
following year to help clients implement the plan (Mondelêz 
International, 2017). Coaches are either private or public 
agents who are trained in their role. Enterprise Uganda, a 
public-private partnership, trains small-scale agro-
entrepreneurs in their villages and then assigns coaches 
to visit them periodically.      	
 
 	
Technical agriculture, functional, business	 
Increased knowledge, skills, education, empowerment, 
networks 	
 
Limited, because face-to-face, one-on-one interaction is 
required.  	
 
Identifying suitable coaches may be difficult. 	
 
	
 
Human resource management skills are needed to identify, 
train and supervise coaches. Total costs and costs per client 
are high as coaches are often highly paid, need to be trained 
in coaching and work one-on-one with clients.
DEFINITION
IMPLEMENTATION
CAPACITIES 
REQUIRED  
AND COST
PRINCIPLES
60   
HOW TO INVEST IN FARMERS? A GUIDE FOR AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT PROJECTS


High as interaction is face-to-face or by phone.	
 
High, particularly if female and young clients are matched 
to female and young coaches. 	
 
	
 
While it is useful for a coach to have experience in the 
enterprise of their clients, it is not necessary. There are 
many examples of coaches without such experience 
successfully assisting their clients. 	
 
Low, given its high cost and the fact that clients are often 
unable to pay the costs.	  
A strength of the coaching method is that coaches work 
with clients on personal issues, such as building confidence 
and self-esteem, as well as technical and business issues. 
Because they visit their clients at their workplace, they can 
engage them in depth and offer customised advice. 
Challenges of the method are its high cost and that it may 
be difficult to find suitable coaches for some clients. 
SUITABILITY FOR 
WORKING WITH 
LOW LITERACY 
POPULATIONS
SUITABILITY  
FOR WORKING 
WITH WOMEN 
AND YOUTH
STRENGTHS AND 
CHALLENGES
FINANCIAL 
SUSTAINABILITY
OTHER 
SUITABILITY 
CONSIDERATIONS
   61
AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT DEVELOPMENT METHODS


Edutainment  
television (TV)
CHANGES IN 
HUMAN CAPITAL 
SOUGHT
REACH
EASE OF 
IMPLEMENTATION
FIELDS OF 
HUMAN CAPITAL 
DEVELOPED
Educational talk shows, contests and dramas. 	
 
Entertaining TV programmes intended primarily for 
educational purposes.	
 
    	
Edutainment TV in agriculture seeks to change attitudes 
about farming, increase people’s knowledge about 
agricultural practices, help them make informed decisions, 
link farmers to support services and stimulate social action. 
TV is an important audiovisual aid. The uptake in improved 
agricultural practices is increased by showing their use in 
real life, familiar settings. Messages need to be short and 
simple to sustain viewer interest.       	
 
 	
Key steps include research and planning, development, 
production (filming and editing), broadcasting and 
evaluation/feedback.  
Technical agriculture, business 	
 
Increased knowledge, skills, networks	
 
	
 
Wide, where shows are broadcast on national TV networks 
and TV access is high. Social media such as YouTube can 
further increase reach. 	 	
 
Difficult, due to the specialized skills required	
 
Capacities are required for directing, producing, researching, 
scriptwriting and editing. Skills in publicity, campaigning, 
fundraising and partnership building are also useful. 
Production costs are high but those per viewer are often 
low. Engaging the show Shamba (farm) Shape Up in Kenya 
to produce five six-minute segments for one broadcast cost 
USD 50 000 in 2016 but with an audience of 3.5 million 
households the cost per viewing household was only 
 
USD 0.014.
DEFINITION
IMPLEMENTATION
CAPACITIES 
REQUIRED  
AND COST
SYNONYMS/
SUB-CATEGORIES
PRINCIPLES
62   
HOW TO INVEST IN FARMERS? A GUIDE FOR AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT PROJECTS


High, if they have access to TV and a good understanding 
of the language that the show is broadcast in.  	
 
High, but content should be relevant to both. Factors to 
consider in producing the shows include topics selected, 
characters appearing and being interviewed and that the 
air time of the shows is convenient for women and youth. 
 
Edutainment TV is most appropriate for relatively simple 
practices or those with which farmers are familiar. For more 
complex practices or topics, edutainment TV serves mainly 
to raise awareness and guide viewers towards other 
information sources to learn more about the practices.  	
Low to medium. Financial sustainability is a major challenge 
but can be overcome by selling company advertisements 
during the show.	  
Strengths include edutainment TV’s wide reach, its appeal 
to youth and urban dwellers (many of whom farm or have 
strong rural links), that it is entertaining as well as 
educational 
and 
can 
be 
integrated 
with 
other 
complementary 
methods such as a call centre to respond to viewers’ 
questions. Challenges include the method’s high cost, the 
low penetration of TV in many areas and the difficulty in 
translating programmes into different languages.  
SUITABILITY FOR 
WORKING WITH 
LOW LITERACY 
POPULATIONS
SUITABILITY  
FOR WORKING 
WITH WOMEN 
AND YOUTH
STRENGTHS AND 
CHALLENGES
FINANCIAL 
SUSTAINABILITY
OTHER 
SUITABILITY 
CONSIDERATIONS
   63
AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT DEVELOPMENT METHODS


Farmer field schools
CHANGES IN 
HUMAN CAPITAL 
SOUGHT
REACH
FIELDS OF 
HUMAN CAPITAL 
DEVELOPED
Junior farmer field and life schools, farm business schools, 
field schools	
 
A participatory education approach that brings together a 
group of small-scale producers to solve agricultural 
problems and increasingly, other types of problems such 
as reducing gender inequality or improving non-farm 
income generating activities like handicrafts.  The approach 
involves hands-on group learning and improving skills for 
observation, critical analysis and decision-making.	 
    	
Farmer field schools (FFS) emphasise learning by doing, 
that is, through experience rather than passive listening. 
The farmer group decides what the FFS should address and 
meets regularly with a facilitator, observing, discussing, 
asking questions and learning together. Farmers examine 
different options and make decisions based on agro-
ecosystem analysis, a thorough analysis of an agricultural 
environment considering aspects from ecology, sociology 
and economics. Whereas past focus has been on solving 
agricultural problems, FFS has expanded to include such 
topics as water management, climate change and house-
hold livelihood security. Empowerment objectives and 
learning how to solve problems are often as important as 
improving crop or livestock yields.  	
 
      	
 	
A typical FFS working on crop issues meets regularly at a 
field or elsewhere for hands on training and experimentation 
throughout the cropping season. The group typically 
numbers between 20 and 30 and sessions are led by a 
facilitator, often an extension worker who has undergone 
training in the FFS approach. Facilitators are in turn 
backstopped by FFS master trainers. 	
 
Technical agriculture, functional, business 	
 
Increased knowledge, skills, empowerment, networks, 
social capital	
 
	
	
 
Limited to moderate as face-to-face interaction with 
facilitators is required. 	
	
DEFINITION
IMPLEMENTATION
SYNONYMS/
SUB-CATEGORIES
PRINCIPLES
64   
HOW TO INVEST IN FARMERS? A GUIDE FOR AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT PROJECTS


Moderate to difficult 	
 
Master trainers (MT), who train the FFS facilitators, are 
often MSc or BSc level and facilitators often BSc level. In 
some places, farmers from the communities are trained to 
become facilitators. Total costs are high and costs per 
farmer are moderate to high. Costs vary by subject matter, 
course length and educational level of facilitators. Costs 
include needs assessment, curriculum development, 
trainers, operations, supervision and follow-up. Costs of 
training FFS facilitators are USD 1000–2000 per facilitator. 
Costs per trainee are USD 20–40 per cropping season 
(Waddington and White, 2014).	
 
Moderate to high; to fully benefit, participants should have 
basic skills in reading, writing and numeracy, though 
studies have shown good results for low literacy populations, 
likely due to the hands on nature (Davis et al., 2012).   	
Moderate to high. Women may face constraints concerning 
timing of sessions and childcare. Both women and youth 
may be constrained by social norms from participating in 
mixed groups. Participation in FFSs can improve gender 
equity and empowerment of women (Friis-Hansen and 
Duveskog, 2012).	  
Moderate to low. Sustainable funding is challenging 
because of the high costs and skills required. Modalities to 
increase sustainability include the use of community based 
farmer facilitators and helping them establish federations 
to market their services, as was done in Rwanda (Khisa, 
2003; Neza et al., 2021).   	 
Their focus on problem solving and decision-making make 
them relevant to a wide range of objectives and topics. They 
can help build self-confidence and strengthen social 
capital. Main challenges are the relatively high costs of 
training facilitators to provide the high quality of training 
required.
SUITABILITY FOR 
WORKING WITH 
LOW LITERACY 
POPULATIONS
SUITABILITY  
FOR WORKING 
WITH WOMEN 
AND YOUTH
STRENGTHS AND 
CHALLENGES
FINANCIAL 
SUSTAINABILITY
EASE OF 
IMPLEMENTATION
CAPACITIES 
REQUIRED  
AND COST
   65
AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT DEVELOPMENT METHODS


Farmer-to-farmer 
extension
CHANGES IN 
HUMAN CAPITAL 
SOUGHT
REACH
FIELDS OF 
HUMAN CAPITAL 
DEVELOPED
Farmer trainers, lead farmers, farmer promoters, farmer 
advisers, community promoters 	  
Farmer-to-farmer extension (FTFE) provides training to 
farmers by farmers, often by creating a structure of farmer-
trainers (not formally certified). 	
 
    	
FTFE can help build effective, farmer-centred extension 
systems and empower farmers as change agents in their 
communities. Farmers and their organizations should 
 
play a key role in selecting, monitoring and evaluating 
farmer-trainers. Farmer trainers need strong support from 
extension systems for training and backstopping and 
complement existing extension systems, rather than being 
a substitute for them. Farmer trainers may work for farmer 
organizations, NGOs, governments or private companies.        	
 	
Roles and responsibilities vary but often include training, 
following up, advising, conducting demonstrations, orga-
nizing meetings and acting as a liaison between farmers 
and development agents. Farmer trainers often serve a 
farmer group to which they belong. In some places they 
receive a salary (e.g. Yachachiq community promoters in 
Peru) whereas in others, (farmer promoters in the Twigiri 
Muhenzi programme in Rwanda) they are volunteers 
(Salcedo du Bois and Zimmerman, 2021; Neza et al., 2021). 
Their main motivations in such cases are access to 
knowledge, social recognition and altruism (Kiptot et al., 
2016). 	
 
Technical agriculture	
 
Increased knowledge, skills	
 
	
 
Moderate 
Moderate	
DEFINITION
IMPLEMENTATION
SYNONYMS/
SUB-CATEGORIES
EASE OF 
IMPLEMENTATION
PRINCIPLES
66   
HOW TO INVEST IN FARMERS? A GUIDE FOR AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT PROJECTS


Total costs and costs per beneficiary are low to moderate. 
Farmer trainers need training in communication as well as 
technical skills. Most organizations start with several days 
of residential training. Refresher and on-the-job training 
are also common. Costs of training and incentives to 
motivate farmer trainers (e.g. t-shirts and badges) in Africa 
have been estimated at USD 100–260 per farmer trainer (or 
USD 4 –10 per trainee) per year (Wellard et al., 2013; Franzel 
et al., 2019). 	
 
High, as farmer trainers have knowledge of local culture, 
practices and language.   	
 
	
 
	
Moderate to high, particularly when a high proportion of 
women and youth are farmer trainers.	
 
	
 
FTFE may not be appropriate for very technical enterprises 
(e.g. certain crop spraying operations) or where the cost of 
an error may be high (e.g. treatment of livestock diseases). 
 
Medium. As the approach is low cost, it is often sustainable, 
particularly when farmer trainers are based in local 
institutions and receive backstopping and training from 
government or other organizations.	
 
The approach is relatively low-cost, helps advisory services 
expand their reach and may improve accountability in the 
community, helps strengthen communities to access 
information and improve uptake of new practices. A main 
challenge is that farmer trainers may perform poorly 
without adequate training and backstopping. Other 
challenges may include expectations of financial benefits, 
high drop-out rates and conflicts between extension 
agents and farmer trainers. 
SUITABILITY FOR 
WORKING WITH 
LOW LITERACY 
POPULATIONS
SUITABILITY  
FOR WORKING 
WITH WOMEN 
AND YOUTH
STRENGTHS AND 
CHALLENGES
FINANCIAL 
SUSTAINABILITY
OTHER 
SUITABILITY 
CONDITIONS
CAPACITIES 
REQUIRED  
AND COST
   67
AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT DEVELOPMENT METHODS


Farmer training 
centres 
CHANGES IN 
HUMAN CAPITAL 
SOUGHT
REACH
FIELDS OF 
HUMAN CAPITAL 
DEVELOPED
Agricultural training centres, rural resource centres, 
pastoralist training centres	
 
Training and demonstration hubs that create opportunities 
for farmers to: 
•	 obtain technical advice, training and services; 
•	 link to value chain actors such as input suppliers and 
processors; 
•	 share experiences; and 
•	 access inputs such as seeds and seedlings. 
Farmer training centres (FTCs) may train farmers on a 
broad range of enterprises (such as in Ethiopia) or have a 
particular focus such as agroforestry (Rural Resource 
Centres in West Africa) or entrepreneurship (Songhai 
Training Centre in Benin). They may be run by public sector 
extension agencies, NGOs, farmer organizations or public-
private partnerships. Some have a narrow focus on training 
whereas others have additional objectives: conducting 
field research trials, promoting networking among farmers 
and other value chain actors or earning income to help 
cover training costs.       	  
  	
 	
FTCs may have trial and demonstration plots, tree nurseries, 
a training hall, a small library and office space. Some also 
have processing units and provide accommodation and 
catering services for training sessions. Training may be 
conducted through formal courses, fieldwork or through 
informal visits by farmer groups. 	  
Technical agriculture, functional, business 	
 
Increased knowledge, skills, networks, strengthened social 
capital 
Moderate 
Moderate to difficult	
	
DEFINITION
IMPLEMENTATION
SYNONYMS/
SUB-CATEGORIES
EASE OF 
IMPLEMENTATION
PRINCIPLES
68   
HOW TO INVEST IN FARMERS? A GUIDE FOR AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT PROJECTS


BSc level trainers and administrators are often required. 
Costs include land, infrastructure, staff salaries, training 
and operations. Total cost and cost per trainee are high. 
Cost recovery is possible through sale of products and 
training services.	 
High	
 
	
 
	
Low to moderate. Women and youth may face financial 
constraints preventing them from travel to FTCs. Women 
may not have the time to travel to attend courses or they 
may face cultural restrictions on travel. 	
 
FTCs are particularly relevant for training in technologies 
that are complex (high costs, high risk or involve decisions 
that cannot easily be changed) or that take a long time to 
generate benefits. 	
 
Low. Sustainability is challenging due to the high cost of 
operations. Some costs can be recovered by selling inputs 
and services but there is a risk that preoccupation with 
these tasks can reduce the effectiveness of training and 
other objectives.	  
FTCs have proved effective in many countries for providing 
knowledge, training, inputs and services to a broad range 
of different types of farmers, including women and youth. 
FTCs managed by local organizations, such as the Rural 
Resource Centres in West Africa, have been particularly 
strong in responding to local needs and gaining the 
confidence of local stakeholders. Challenges include the 
high costs of establishing FTCs, reaching out to farmers 
further away from the FTCs and the importance of strong 
and effective leadership and partnerships. 
SUITABILITY FOR 
WORKING WITH 
LOW LITERACY 
POPULATIONS
SUITABILITY  
FOR WORKING 
WITH WOMEN 
AND YOUTH
STRENGTHS AND 
CHALLENGES
FINANCIAL 
SUSTAINABILITY
OTHER 
SUITABILITY 
CONDITIONS
CAPACITIES 
REQUIRED  
AND COST
   69
AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT DEVELOPMENT METHODS


Internships and  
apprenticeships
CHANGES IN 
HUMAN CAPITAL 
SOUGHT
REACH
FIELDS OF 
HUMAN CAPITAL 
DEVELOPED
Internships are positions taken by students or trainees who 
work in an organization, often without pay, to gain work 
experience or satisfy requirements for a qualification. 
Apprenticeships are similar but are paid experiences that 
may lead to full-time employment.	
 
Internships and apprenticeships offer benefits to both 
young interns and employers in the agricultural sector. 
Interns and apprentices can gain valuable work experience. 
Employers can evaluate prospective new hires and leverage 
lower labour costs. Most programmes target students or 
graduates of universities or vocational schools. Many 
interns work directly with farmers, either on farms or as 
extension agents, sales or buying agents, or providers of 
services such as credit, crop or livestock insurance. 
Whereas most interns in the agricultural sector are probably 
not farmers, many are, such as those in the Agropastoral 
Training Programme in Cameroon (Takamgang and Lhoste, 
2021).       	
 
  	
 	
Many private companies, NGOs and government agencies 
working in agriculture host interns without any assistance 
from outside organizations. Some government agencies or 
initiatives, such as the Agropastoral Training Programme 
in Cameroon and the Rwanda Development Board have 
internships for tertiary students or graduates, placing them 
on farms, in private companies or government agencies. 
Donor agencies also sometimes help strengthen internship 
and apprenticeship programmes. For example, the United 
States Agency for International Development’s Private 
Sector Driven Agricultural Growth Project added value to 
the Rwanda Development Board’s programme, increasing 
the number of interns, providing orientation training and 
extending the internship from six months to one year. 	
Technical agriculture, functional, business 	
 
Increased knowledge, skills, empowerment, networking 
Limited, as available positions on farms and in firms and 
organizations are limited by the availability of funding and 
supervisors.
DEFINITION
PRINCIPLES
IMPLEMENTATION
70   
HOW TO INVEST IN FARMERS? A GUIDE FOR AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT PROJECTS


Moderate 
Many organizations and programmes only take on interns 
with university or tertiary degrees. Costs and costs per 
intern or apprentice are low when a company takes on an 
intern or apprentice. Organizing a programme matching 
students or graduates with companies and organizations 
may involve moderate costs and costs per intern or 
apprentice. Human resources management and networking 
skills are required.  	
	
 
	
Low 	
 
High 
	
 
High, as both private and public sectors are often willing 
and able to take on the costs of recruiting and hosting 
interns and apprentices.	  
Internships and apprenticeships offer an effective way for 
youth to expand skills, gain experience, develop profess-
ional networks and enhance their self-employment and job 
prospects. They also help youth realise that there are 
fulfilling careers in farming and agribusiness. Interns 
benefit their host companies because they are low-cost, 
often highly motivated and may bring cutting-edge ideas 
and technology from academia. Internships also help 
companies streamline their recruitment process, because 
firms often hire them after they complete their service. 
 
Occasional problems arise when interns are not adequately 
supervised, they are not given work to do or are unable to 
work due to a limitation (e.g. lack of transport). Internships 
may also have negative effects if interns are used as a 
substitute for employing people. 
SUITABILITY FOR 
WORKING WITH 
LOW LITERACY 
POPULATIONS
SUITABILITY  
FOR WORKING 
WITH WOMEN 
AND YOUTH
STRENGTHS AND 
CHALLENGES
FINANCIAL 
SUSTAINABILITY
CAPACITIES 
REQUIRED  
AND COST
EASE OF 
IMPLEMENTATION
   71
AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT DEVELOPMENT METHODS


Management advice  
for family farms 
CHANGES IN 
HUMAN CAPITAL 
SOUGHT
REACH
FIELDS OF 
HUMAN CAPITAL 
DEVELOPED
This is a participatory approach that uses principles from 
management science to help farmers strengthen their 
capacities to manage farm and non-farm resources. 	
In management advice for family farms (MAFF), farmers 
use the phases of the management cycle, analysis, planning, 
monitoring, adjustment and evaluation, to assess their 
farm and non-farm activities and their economic and social 
environment. Record keeping is critical and farmers use 
decision support tools to gain an in-depth understanding 
of their farming systems.       	
 
  	
 	
There is no standard model as tools and methods need to 
be adapted to situations. Approaches often involve a needs 
assessment, group training on agricultural practices based 
on farmers’ needs, management training including record 
keeping and analysis tools, farm visits, and technical and 
economic analysis. Farmers plan for the following season 
based on results of the analysis. The learning process 
involves exchanges of experiences, self-analysis of farmers’ 
production and economic situation, field visits, on-farm 
trials and group training. In Benin, the Ministry of Agri-
culture’s MAFF advisors work with 7 to 9 groups (10 to 30 
farmers per group) (Faure et al., 2018). A farmer facilitator 
is selected and trained from each group and takes on 
certain advisory functions.    	
 
Technical agriculture, functional, business 	
 
Increased knowledge, skills, empowerment, networking 
Limited 
Moderate to difficult	
 
The main costs are for MAFF managers and advisers, 
training costs and backstopping activities. Costs and costs/
beneficiary are high, ranging from USD 20–80/beneficiary/
year for programmes in Africa. Once farmer facilitators take 
on more functions, costs are lower, USD 2–20 per beneficiary/
year (Faure et al., 2015).
DEFINITION
PRINCIPLES
IMPLEMENTATION
EASE OF 
IMPLEMENTATION
CAPACITIES 
REQUIRED  
AND COST
72   
HOW TO INVEST IN FARMERS? A GUIDE FOR AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT PROJECTS


Low to moderate. Assessments are based on record 
keeping, requiring literacy. MAFF has developed tools for 
illiterate farmers to use.	  
Low to moderate. Women and youth may not benefit 
because the approach focuses on a single member per 
household who is usually the male household head.   	
	
 
	
MAFF is best suited to farmers who are literate and active 
in markets. 	
 
Low. Sustainability is a major challenge as MAFF is highly 
dependent on international aid. There may be some scope 
for funding from public sector extension agencies or 
downstream, private-sector value chain actors marketing 
high value products.	
 
MAFF’s holistic approach considers all household enter-
prises not just agricultural ones. MAFF’s analysis methods 
empower farmers to make sound decisions concerning 
their enterprises and practices. Farm-level data can be 
assembled to improve decision-making at the producer 
organization level as well. Main challenges are MAFF’s 
relatively high costs, the need for highly qualified advisers 
to implement it and challenges servicing resource-poor 
farmers, particularly those with low literacy levels. 
SUITABILITY FOR 
WORKING WITH 
LOW LITERACY 
POPULATIONS
SUITABILITY  
FOR WORKING 
WITH WOMEN 
AND YOUTH
STRENGTHS AND 
CHALLENGES
FINANCIAL 
SUSTAINABILITY
OTHER 
SUITABILITY  
CONSIDERATIONS
   73
AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT DEVELOPMENT METHODS


Radio
CHANGES IN 
HUMAN CAPITAL 
SOUGHT
REACH
FIELDS OF 
HUMAN CAPITAL 
DEVELOPED
Radio is one of the most popular information sources on 
agriculture, mainly due to its accessibility, affordability and 
availability in many different languages. Whereas tradi-
tionally it was a one way communication tool, it can be 
integrated with other ICTs, such as mobile phones and SMS, 
for two way communication. Radio provides platforms for 
dialogue and discussions and for producing entertaining 
and interactive programmes such as dramas and talk 
shows. Participatory, demand-driven radio, such as that 
promoted by Farm Radio International, can elicit farmers’ 
preferences and opinions, raise awareness about services 
and events, host agricultural campaigns, link farmers to 
service providers, disseminate information and facilitate 
discussion. 
 	
Conducting a needs assessment of potential audiences is 
an important starting point and can help guide decisions 
on timing, formats, content and knowledge brokers (e.g. 
from research, private companies and educational insti-
tutions). Skilled broadcasters can help extension and other 
agricultural specialists to package information into 
programmes that attract and engage listeners. Monitoring 
and evaluation of programming including audience surveys 
are essential for assessing impact and guiding improve-
ments.       	
 
  	
 	
Technical agriculture, business 	
 
Increased knowledge, networking	
 
	
 
Moderate to wide, depending on the station(s) coverage 
Preparation of programmes and content may be easy for a 
simple interview but difficult for other formats, such as a 
drama. 	
PRINCIPLES
IMPLEMENTATION
EASE OF 
IMPLEMENTATION
74   
HOW TO INVEST IN FARMERS? A GUIDE FOR AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT PROJECTS


Costs range from low to high, depending on the production 
costs of a show (high for a drama, low for an interview). But 
even if costs are high, cost per listener is often low. An 
important prerequisite is that a radio station has the interest 
and ability to cover agricultural topics. 	
 
High, particularly when programming is available in local 
languages. 
	
 
	
High, particularly when programmes address topics and 
enterprises of importance to women and youth. It is 
important to ensure that programming times suit the target 
audience. Where many women lack access to a radio, the 
formation of women’s listening groups has proved an 
effective means of increasing access, as with the IFAD Her 
Radio Project in Ethiopia, United Republic of Tanzania, 
Malawi and Uganda (IFAD, 2022a). 	
 
Programmes can be localized using community stations 
for locally available information or presented via regional 
or national level stations in cases where the topic is relevant 
across larger areas. 	
 
Medium. Low costs and the possibility of recuperating 
costs through advertising during broadcasts contribute to 
the sustainability of radio programming, as does training 
radio broadcasters to produce agricultural shows.	  
Radio is inclusive, accessible, affordable and has a high 
potential to reach marginalized groups including the poor 
and those in remote areas. However, some radio stations 
lack the capacity to work in agriculture. Radio’s lack of a 
visual feature means that it should often be complemented 
by visual approaches (face-to-face extension, videos or 
television). 
SUITABILITY FOR 
WORKING WITH 
LOW LITERACY 
POPULATIONS
SUITABILITY  
FOR WORKING 
WITH WOMEN 
AND YOUTH
STRENGTHS AND 
CHALLENGES
FINANCIAL 
SUSTAINABILITY
OTHER 
SUITABILITY  
CONSIDERATIONS
CAPACITIES 
REQUIRED  
AND COST
   75
AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT DEVELOPMENT METHODS


Study tours and farmer 
exchange visits
CHANGES IN 
HUMAN CAPITAL 
SOUGHT
REACH
FIELDS OF 
HUMAN CAPITAL 
DEVELOPED
Study tours involve visits by farmers to other farmers or 
agricultural sites, such as research stations, processing 
plants or training centres. Farmer exchange visits, a 
subcategory of study tours, are visits by farmers to other 
farmers outside their location to observe their farming 
practices and exchange views and experiences. 	
 
 	
The participants, both those visiting and those hosting, 
need to be involved in planning, implementing and eval-
uating the visit. Planners need to be explicit about how 
farmers will benefit from the visit, avoiding the problem, for 
example, of visiting a wealthy farmer who is implementing 
practices that the visitors cannot afford.  Attention also 
needs to be given to practical logistics and the principles 
of adult learning and participatory development, to ensure 
effective peer-to-peer interaction leading to behavioural 
change.       	
 
  	
 	
Study tours and exchange visits need to be carefully 
planned to achieve the greatest impact. Before the visit, the 
first step is to define objectives and select participants. 
Next is to define roles and responsibilities, location, timing 
and duration of the visit, financial organization, materials 
required and preparation of visit content. During the visit, 
it is critical to ensure that all participants have the 
opportunity to listen, communicate, observe and interact 
with the hosts. Documenting the process (notes, photos, 
video) helps ensure that highlights of the visit can be shared 
with those who could not attend. Feedback meetings 
 
and impact assessments (e.g. determining if behaviours 
changed) help assess the value of study tours and how to 
improve them.	
 
Technical agriculture, business 	
 
Increased knowledge, skills, networking, social capital	
	
 
Limited 
Easy to moderate. In some instances, farmers and their 
organizations plan and pay for such visits without outside 
assistance.	
DEFINITION
PRINCIPLES
IMPLEMENTATION
EASE OF 
IMPLEMENTATION
76   
HOW TO INVEST IN FARMERS? A GUIDE FOR AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT PROJECTS


Costs and costs per participant are low to moderate. Costs 
include transport, meals and accommodation. In some 
countries such as Kenya, farmers share or pay for all the 
costs (Wambugu et al., 2001).  	
 
High, as literacy is not usually needed	
 
	
 
	
Moderate. Efforts must be made to ensure that women and 
youth can participate (e.g. specifically inviting them and, for 
women, providing childcare and overcoming cultural 
barriers on travel).  	
 
High, as it is common for farmers and farmer organizations 
in many countries to organize and finance their own study 
tours and exchange visits.  Further, a visit does not imply 
ongoing costs but can be organized each time there is 
interest.	
 
Strengths are the opportunities to see how others manage 
their farms and interact with them discussing their problems 
and achievements. The tours and visits also allow farmers 
to discuss their work and the services they provide with 
other agricultural sector and value chain actors. Tours and 
visits help farmers and their hosts to strengthen social 
networks. Challenges include ensuring that logistics are 
smooth, that interaction and discussion are sufficient, and 
that results and experiences are shared with those who 
could not attend.
SUITABILITY FOR 
WORKING WITH 
LOW LITERACY 
POPULATIONS
SUITABILITY  
FOR WORKING 
WITH WOMEN 
AND YOUTH
STRENGTHS AND 
CHALLENGES
SUSTAINABILITY
CAPACITIES 
REQUIRED  
AND COST
   77
AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT DEVELOPMENT METHODS


Videos
CHANGES IN 
HUMAN CAPITAL 
SOUGHT
REACH
FIELDS OF 
HUMAN CAPITAL 
DEVELOPED
Digital or videotape recordings provide an audiovisual 
medium for disseminating information, knowledge and 
practices. Different types of videos include documentaries, 
instructional videos, farmer learning videos and partici-
patory videos made by farmers. 	  
 	
Video content should be based on farmers’ needs and 
scientific and good practice principles. The more farmers 
are involved in producing the video and are depicted in it, 
the more relevant it will be to viewers. Video producers 
need to include a range of different types of people in the 
video, representing various groups in the community. To 
engage viewers, a video must have high quality audio and 
visual, a relevant message and a compelling story.        	
  	
 	
There are six basic steps: choosing a topic, planning, 
producing the video, validating, distributing, and monitor-
ing/evaluation. Videos can be just a few minutes long and 
should not be longer than 20 minutes. Videos can be 
distributed directly to farmers or through extension 
services, television, smart phones, social media, value 
chain actors and farmer organizations. Some agencies use 
a structured approach for video-based training with 
farmers organized in video viewing clubs with support from 
facilitators. The Government of Ethiopia, with support from 
Digital Green, operates such a video-based extension 
programme (Bernard et al., 2016). 	
 
Technical agriculture, business 	
 
Increased knowledge, skills, networking	
 
	
 
Wide, if farmers have the means to view them.	
 
Easy to moderate, depending on the quality and degree of 
structure desired. 	
DEFINITION
PRINCIPLES
IMPLEMENTATION
EASE OF 
IMPLEMENTATION
78   
HOW TO INVEST IN FARMERS? A GUIDE FOR AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT PROJECTS


Costs for producing and distributing videos may be 
moderate to high but cost per viewer may be very low when 
videos are widely viewed. For videos developed by film 
professionals, the team should consist of a camera operator 
and persons who understand local farming systems, 
communities and culture. Farmers developing videos 
require professionals to train them in using equipment and 
techniques. Improved access to videos through mobile 
phones and the internet is reducing viewing costs.	 
High as literacy is not necessary  	 
	
 
	
Good if women and youth have access to the means of 
viewing them.	
 
	
 
The proliferation and improved quality of mobile phones 
has made it much easier to view videos, especially for youth 
with access.	
 
Medium. Training a cadre of video producers who can 
develop agricultural programmes helps make high quality 
video sustainable.	
 
Videos complement more traditional approaches within 
education, extension methods and mass media. Videos 
involve verbal and visual communication, making it possible 
to present and explain complex operations and underlying 
principles. Processes such as crop or animal growth that 
take place over months or years can be depicted in just a 
few minutes. The challenges are the cost of production, the 
fact that communication flow is one way, and that they rely 
on devices to view the videos. Embedding video in an 
extension system as with Ethiopia ensures that farmer 
groups can meet to discuss the video and ask the extension 
agent questions. 
SUITABILITY FOR 
WORKING WITH 
LOW LITERACY 
POPULATIONS
SUITABILITY  
FOR WORKING 
WITH WOMEN 
AND YOUTH
FINANCIAL 
SUSTAINABILITY
STRENGTHS AND 
CHALLENGES
OTHER 
SUITABILITY 
CNSIDERATIONS
CAPACITIES 
REQUIRED  
AND COST
   79
AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT DEVELOPMENT METHODS


Village agents
CHANGES IN 
HUMAN CAPITAL 
SOUGHT
REACH
FIELDS OF 
HUMAN CAPITAL 
DEVELOPED
Sales agents, field agents 	
 
Persons selling inputs or services. They are either self-
employed or work for private companies or NGOs. Some 
also buy produce or link farmers to buyers.    	
 
 	
While the main role of village agents is to sell inputs and 
services, some also manage demonstration plots and 
advise and train farmers on how to use the products and 
services they sell, including seeds, fertiliser, plant pro-
tection products, credit, insurance and marketing. 
Providing advice to farmers can be profitable for a private 
company if it helps the company to increase the volume of 
inputs they sell and produce they buy from farmers.         	
  	
 	
In Uganda, many village agents use digital apps for farm 
profiling, that is, they map farmers’ fields and assemble 
information on their area under cultivation and input 
requirements useful for estimating yields, marketable 
surplus and income. They also help farmers link to other 
development actors and service providers. Some help 
farmers to “bundle” services, as when they sell inputs to 
farmers on credit and deduct the cost from sales of farmers’ 
produce. Some employers provide their agents and 
customers with apps that provide farmers with agronomic 
tips and information on weather and market prices (Franzel 
et al., 2020).  	
 
Technical agriculture, business 	
 
Increased knowledge, skills, networking	
 
	
 
Moderate	
 
Moderate
DEFINITION
PRINCIPLES
IMPLEMENTATION
EASE OF 
IMPLEMENTATION
SYNONYMS/
SUB-CATEGORIES
80   
HOW TO INVEST IN FARMERS? A GUIDE FOR AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT PROJECTS


Costs include training village agents, salaries, commissions, 
equipment and supervision and backstopping costs. Costs 
of employing village agents are high and moderate to high 
per customer served. Many companies find that employing 
village agents is profitable because of their positive impact 
on sales. 	
 
High, since agents work face to face with farmers	  
	
 
	
High, for youth, many village agents are young people, over 
75 percent in Uganda. But moderate suitability for women 
as the number of agents who are women is often low, 16 to 
33 percent in Uganda (Franzel et al., 2020). 	
 
High, particularly when they are employed by the private 
sector  	
 
Strengths are that village agents can link farmers to a range 
of inputs and services and help them determine the types 
and levels of inputs they need. Challenges are that village 
agents may not be able to provide valuable advice to 
farmers without adequate training and backstopping. Also, 
they may not have any incentive to promote practices that 
conserve public goods (e.g. soil conservation) and they are 
likely to be biased regarding the inputs and services they 
sell (e.g. mineral fertilizer) as compared to other practices 
(e.g. compost and manure). 
SUITABILITY FOR 
WORKING WITH 
LOW LITERACY 
POPULATIONS
SUITABILITY  
FOR WORKING 
WITH WOMEN 
AND YOUTH
FINANCIAL 
SUSTAINABILITY
STRENGTHS AND 
CHALLENGES
CAPACITIES 
REQUIRED  
AND COST
   81
AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT DEVELOPMENT METHODS


WhatsApp and other social 
media discussion groups
CHANGES IN 
HUMAN CAPITAL 
SOUGHT
REACH
FIELDS OF 
HUMAN CAPITAL 
DEVELOPED
WhatsApp discussion groups are groups of individuals 
interested in a particular topic who exchange information 
and experiences about it. Whereas these groups mainly 
use WhatsApp, other apps, either public or proprietary, are 
also used.     	
 
 	
The WhatsApp groups provide the means for as many as 
256 members to access information, ask and reply to 
questions, buy and sell products and share experiences, 
problems and solutions. In addition to texting or voice 
messages, users can also share images, links, and videos. 
In contrast to many human capital development methods, 
information circulates among users and not top-down from 
experts to farmers.  Groups form communities of practice 
as: 1) they have an identity defined by a shared interest; 2) 
they help each other and share information and experiences; 
and 3) they develop a shared stock of resources including 
experiences, tools and practices.          	
  	
 	
Farmers and others interested in exchanging information 
on agriculture such as producer organizations or extension 
agents establish these groups. Groups may be organized 
by topic, region, or a combination of these. One or more 
administrators may be tasked with keeping discussions on 
topic. In Colombia, members of the Colombian Cattle 
Growers’ Association use WhatsApp to buy and sell cattle 
without intermediaries, reducing costs and avoiding the 
risks of moving cattle to markets. They also exchange 
information on practices (Davis et al., 2021). In Madhya 
Pradesh State, India, over three-quarters of farmers 
surveyed reported using new crop management practices 
after learning about them on WhatsApp (Naruka et al., 
2017).  	
 
Technical agriculture, business 	
 
Increased knowledge, networking	
 
	
 
Medium. Limited to persons with internet devices, most 
commonly smartphones 	
DEFINITION
PRINCIPLES
IMPLEMENTATION
82   
HOW TO INVEST IN FARMERS? A GUIDE FOR AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT PROJECTS


Easy, as groups may be formed by producers without 
external support.	 
Smart devices are required and users must know how to 
use WhatsApp. Costs of organizing a group are low but 
overall costs and costs per user are high because 
smartphones are required. If the producer already has a 
smartphone then costs are low.	
 
	
Low, as text messaging is commonly used. 	
 
	
 
Low to moderate, depending on whether they have access 
to smartphones.   	
 
High, as costs are minimal and external support is not 
needed. 
The strength of WhatsApp groups is that they offer an 
inexpensive, easy and convenient way to communicate with 
other farmers. WhatsApp is useful for buying and selling 
produce, reducing transaction costs since buying and 
selling can be done virtually instead of having to travel to 
markets. Challenges are that many farmers do not have 
smartphones or live in areas without electricity or internet 
coverage. Others have smartphones but are unaware of 
WhatsApp groups or how to join them. Challenges within a 
WhatsApp group include difficulties in assessing the validity 
of information provided, having to sift through an overload 
of information or not finding the information relevant or 
comprehensible.
SUITABILITY FOR 
WORKING WITH 
LOW LITERACY 
POPULATIONS
SUITABILITY  
FOR WORKING 
WITH WOMEN 
AND YOUTH
FINANCIAL 
SUSTAINABILITY
STRENGTHS AND 
CHALLENGES
CAPACITIES 
REQUIRED  
AND COST
EASE OF 
IMPLEMENTATION
   83
AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT DEVELOPMENT METHODS


3	
Internships and apprenticeships are not classified as formal methods in Section 
 
	
2 of this module but are grouped with formal programmes here because they are 
 
	
often required to obtain degrees in academic or vocational programmes or they 
 
	
follow such programmes. 
	
	 PRINCIPLES FOR SELECTING WHICH HUMAN CAPITAL DEVELOPMENT 	
	
	 METHODS TO USE  
It is not possible to create an algorithm to select which methods one should 
use in developing human capital. However, in this section, we assemble data 
from the preceding sections into tables to facilitate systematic comparison of 
methods across selected criteria. Data in the tables are organized according 
to four questions that many planners will ask when considering initiatives to 
improve human capital in agriculture. 
•	 What if any formal educational or training programmes are needed? 	
	 Options in the tables are for agricultural vocational schools, farmer 	 	
	 training centres or internships and apprenticeships.3 
•	 What if any extension methods with field staff are needed? Options  
	 in the tables include certified community promoters, farmer field 	
	
	 schools, farmer-to-farmer extension, management advice for family 	
	 farms, and village agents. 
•	 What if any digital methods are needed? Options in the tables  
	 include agricultural call centres, edutainment television, radio, videos 	
	 or WhatsApp discussion groups. 
•	 What if any periodic methods are used? Options in the tables include 	
	 agricultural fairs and shows, coaching and study tours and farmer 	 	
	 exchange visits. 
The first step in deciding which methods to use is to specify types of human 
capital that are to be improved and changes sought in using different methods. 
This is done based on a participatory and comprehensive assessment of the 
needs of the target population, as discussed in the “framing building block” in 
Module 3. The assessment should define the target population’s main sub-
groups (e.g. women, youth, different types of producers), their assets, 
resources, literacy and access to digital technologies. It also needs to consider 
the socioeconomic context including government policies, past initiatives 
 
to develop human capital and the activities of other institutions working in 
 
the area. 
	
Table 4.1 breaks down the methods into four categories: formal 
education or training methods (three methods), extension methods involving 
field staff (five methods), digital methods (five methods) and periodic methods 
(three), that is, methods such as fairs. The table presents the potential of 
different methods to develop producers’ capital in technical agriculture, 
functional and business areas. All methods are suited to helping producers 
develop capabilities in technical agriculture and nearly all, except for call 
centres, farmer-to-farmer extension and village agents, can contribute to 
developing capabilities in business. The weakest area is functional capabilities, 
only six of the 16 methods can contribute to this.
84   
HOW TO INVEST IN FARMERS? A GUIDE FOR AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT PROJECTS


Table 4.1 presents the potential for different methods to generate changes in 
certain capabilities, that is, increasing knowledge, skills, education, 
empowerment, networks and social capital. All methods contribute to 
increasing knowledge and all contribute to some extent to improving producers’ 
skills. Of course, there is considerable variation in each one’s potential 
contribution to learning a particular skill. For example, since radio lacks a visual 
element, its contribution is limited when learning skills that require observing 
the skill being performed.
Table 4.1	
 
Potential for methods to improve human capital, and changes sought
Types of capital
Changes in human capital sought: increases in
Tech. Ag
Functional
Business
Knowledge
Skills
Education
Empower-
ment
Networks
Social  
capital
Education methods
Agricultural  
vocational schools
Farmer training 
centres
Internships and 
apprenticeships
Extension methods involving field staff
Certified community 
promoters
Farmer field schools
Farmer to farmer 
extension
Management advice 
for family farms
Village agents
Digital methods
Agricultural call 
centres
Edutainment TV
Radio
Videos
WhatsApp and other 
social media 
discussion groups
Periodic methods
Agricultural fairs and 
shows
Coaching
Study tours and farmer 
exchange visits
SOURCES: 
Authors’ 
own 
data. 
   85
AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT DEVELOPMENT METHODS


Three methods contribute to formal education – agricultural vocational schools, 
coaching and internships. Other methods such as video are commonly used 
in education but these three are highlighted because of their importance.  Only 
four methods contribute significantly to enhancing producers’ empowerment: 
internships, farmer field schools, management advice for family farms and 
coaching. All methods except two, farmer to-farmer extension and certified 
community promoters, contribute to enhancing farmers’ networks. Only four 
methods make significant contributions to increasing farmers’ social capital: 
agricultural vocational schools, farmer training centres, farmer field schools 
and study tours/farmer exchange visits. But, as stated in Module 1, tools that 
aim specifically at improving producer organizations’ capabilities are excluded 
from this study although some, such as FAO’s Dimitra groups (FAO, 2019), can 
help to strengthen producers’ social capital. 
	
Table 4.2 presents the performance of human capital development 
methods across selected assessment criteria introduced in Section 2 of this 
module. The reach of different methods is evenly distributed across the wide, 
medium and limited categories with digital technologies (edutainment TV, 
radio and videos) having the widest reach.  Only a few methods were easy to 
implement, such as WhatsApp groups and study tours. The implementation 
costs were mostly high, but some, particularly digital methods such as 
edutainment TV and call centres, had low costs per user because they can be 
disseminated widely. Most methods were suitable to producers with low 
literacy levels. 
	
Most were also suitable to women and youth, though efforts are often 
needed to ensure they are included, such as separate groups for youth where 
their participation in the presence of elders is limited due to social mores. 
Ensuring training sessions take place at times convenient to women can help 
boost their participation.  Poor producers’ access to smartphones is also an 
important constraint limiting their use of digital technologies. Some initiatives 
found innovative ways to reduce such barriers, such as promoting women’s 
listening groups to hear radio shows (IFAD, 2022a).  
86   
HOW TO INVEST IN FARMERS? A GUIDE FOR AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT PROJECTS


Table 4.2	
 
Performance of human capital development methods across selected assessment criteria 
	
Reach
Ease of 
implementation
Cost
Cost/user
Suitability low 
literacy
Suitability 
women (W) and 
youth (Y)
Wide
Mod.
Limited
Easy
Mod.
Diff.
Low
Mod
High
Low
Mod
High
High
Med
Low
High
Med
Low
Education methods
Agricultural  
vocational schools
Y
W
Farmer training 
centres
Y/W
Y/W
Internships and 
apprenticeships
Y/W
Extension methods involving field staff
Certified community 
promoters
Y/W
Farmer field schools
Y/W Y/W
Farmer to farmer 
extension
Y/W Y/W
Management advice 
for family farms
Y/W
Y/W
Village agents
Y
W
Digital methods
Agricultural call 
centres
Y/W Y/W
Edutainment TV
Y/W
Radio
Y/W
Videos
Y/W Y/W
WhatsApp and other 
social media 
discussion groups
Y/W
Y/W
Periodic methods
Agricultural fairs and 
shows
Y
W
W
Coaching
Y/W
Study tours and farmer 
exchange visits
Y/W
SOURCES: 
Authors’ 
own 
data; 
criteria 
adapted 
from 
David 
and 
Cofini. 
2017. 
A 
decision 
guide 
for 
rural 
advisory 
methods. 
Research 
and 
Extension 
Unit. 
Rome, 
FAO. 
   87
AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT DEVELOPMENT METHODS


It is also possible to broadly rank methods according to the contribution they 
make to improving human capital. In Table 4.3, methods are grouped into three 
categories: high, medium/high, and medium. Of course, the contribution that 
a method makes will vary depending on how it is implemented, what other 
complementary methods are used and a host of other factors. But it is possible 
to generalise to some extent and say, for example, that a method using highly 
trained master trainers and facilitators, such as farmer field schools, will on 
average, contribute more to increasing producers’ capabilities than one with 
minimal facilitator training, such as most farmer to farmer extension 
approaches.  
Table 4.3	
 
Usefulness of methods in developing human capital
Degree of usefulness in developing human capital
High
Medium–High
Medium
Education methods
Agricultural vocational schools
Farmer training centres
Internships and apprenticeships
Extension methods involving field staff
Certified community promoters
Farmer field schools
Farmer to farmer extension
Management advice for family farms
Village agents
Digital methods
Agricultural call centres
Edutainment TV
Radio
Videos
WhatsApp and other social media 
discussion groups
Periodic methods
Agricultural fairs and shows
Coaching
Study tours and farmer exchange visits
NOTE: 
Usefulness 
is 
the 
degree 
to 
which 
the 
method 
helps 
producers 
develop 
human 
capital 
and 
apply 
it 
to 
improve 
their 
livelihoods.
SOURCES: 
Authors’ 
own 
data. 
88   
HOW TO INVEST IN FARMERS? A GUIDE FOR AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT PROJECTS


1
2
3
4
5
	
	 PRINCIPLES FOR USING MULTIPLE METHODS  
In developing human capital, it is almost always beneficial to use multiple 
methods. The principles below provide some guidelines on which methods 
and which types of methods to use together. 
Use multiple methods to reinforce learning. 	
Different methods often reinforce each other. Farmers learning about how to 
prepare silage for their cattle from an extension agent will benefit from learning 
about the same practice from members of their WhatsApp group or from 
watching a video on YouTube. Receiving similar information from different 
channels helps ensure it is retained and the required steps taken, for example 
to purchase recommended inputs.  
Use multiple methods to offer validation. 
A farmer hearing about silage preparation from a single agent may wonder 
how valid the information is. Getting more information from the video and 
discussing with several farmers on WhatsApp about preparing silage helps 
validate the original source. 
Use multiple methods to offer elaboration.  
In the above example, whereas the extension agent describes how to prepare 
silage, watching a video adds the visual aspect. Videos are particularly useful 
because they can show the silage process at different stages – how to dig the 
pit, how to pack the grass into the pit, how to cover the pit and what the silage 
looks like when it is ready for feeding. The visual aspect and showing the 
process at different stages are particularly important for innovations and 
processes that take a long time to yield benefits, such as tree and livestock 
enterprises. 
Use digital methods to complement face to face methods.
The two digital methods, video and the WhatsApp group, offer reinforcement, 
validation and elaboration of the first method, the extension agent. They also 
have important advantages – they can be used over and over at the producers’ 
convenience, the video can show different stages of an agricultural practice 
over time, and the WhatsApp group allows farmers to exchange views and 
experiences by text, images and videos. Both allow the farmer to store and 
retrieve information on their smartphones although the main disadvantage is 
the need for smartphones, although videos can also be viewed on other devices 
if the producer has access to them.   
Select methods that target different audiences, particularly to reach marginal 
groups. 
Some methods are more appropriate for certain audiences than others. Study 
tours are a valuable way for farmers to learn about new practices, but they 
often attract more men than women because of social taboos restricting 
women from travelling or because women have domestic responsibilities that 
keep them at home. Organizing training events through women’s group 
meetings in which videos featuring new practices are shown may be a more 
appropriate way of helping women in such cases. The problem of low women’s 
participation in a particular human capacity development method may have 
more to do with the way women were approached to participate than the 
method itself. Coffee training events in Uganda tended to attract a very high 
   89
AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT DEVELOPMENT METHODS


6
7
proportion of males until Technoserve, the organization managing the sessions, 
took proactive steps to motivate women and make it easier for them to attend. 
Event organizers explicitly encouraged women to attend, changed the timing 
of training events to suit women and offered childcare services during the 
sessions. As a result, the proportion of women attending significantly increased 
(Technoserve, 2012). Such programme tweaks can also ensure training reaches 
other marginalized groups, such as youth, the disabled and Indigenous 
Peoples. For example, with support from several donor organizations, NGOs 
and private companies, Mediae Ltd launched a TV show in Kenya and United 
Republic of Tanzania in 2017 aimed at increasing agricultural entrepreneurship 
among youth. The show, called “Don’t Lose the Plot”, follows young farmers 
as they put their farming skills to the test to compete for cash prizes. 	
 
Use higher cost, higher quality human capital development methods alongside 
lower cost, lower quality ones when resources are limited. 
Human capacity development is expensive and many initiatives face the 
problem of a shortage of staff or the resources to pay them. For example, in 
Rwanda, the government appreciated the FFS approach as a means to improve 
crop yields and farmer livelihoods but could not afford to implement it in all 
 
14 200 of Rwanda’s villages. Instead, they chose to introduce it on a limited 
scale, recruiting and training about 2500 FFS facilitators. At the same time, 
they recruited and trained 14 200 farmer promoters, one for each village. 
Farmer promoters are less qualified and work voluntarily but play an important 
role hosting demonstration plots, providing training on a few practices, and 
linking farmers to development agents. Farmer trainers were linked to nearby 
FFS facilitators so they could benefit from the FFS findings and experiences 
and share these with their peers (Neza et al., 2021).
	
Similarly in Jharkhand State, India, the Jharkhand Opportunity for 
Harnessing Rural Growth Project recruited and trained livestock advisers at 
two different levels for similar reasons as in Rwanda. Both master trainers and 
community service providers in Jharkhand are certified but master trainers 
have more training and experience and are thus able to carry out tasks that 
the community service providers cannot, such as vaccinations and castrations. 
 
There are currently 63 master trainers and 1500 community service providers 
in Jharkhand (Kumar et al., 2021). 
Formal training and vocational education programmes often need to be 
accompanied by other methods to ensure students can find a job or become 
self-employed.  
Planners often assume that students on training or vocational programmes 
can easily enter employment or self-employment at the end of their studies. 
But needs assessments often find that students need further support to 
develop their human capital before, during and after they complete their 
studies (Figure 1). First, it was sometimes found that their primary and 
secondary education was inadequate. Agropastoral vocational training 
schools in Cameroon addressed this problem by providing coaches to develop 
students’ foundational skills such as literacy and numeracy (Takamgang and 
Lhoste, 2021). Coaches also helped the students with other skills they needed, 
such as writing and public speaking. 
90   
HOW TO INVEST IN FARMERS? A GUIDE FOR AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT PROJECTS


At the end of training, “one on one” interventions to help trainees settle into 
jobs or develop businesses are often needed, such as apprenticeships, 
internships, or job coaching. The Cameroon programme used both internships 
and job coaching successfully to help graduates develop their skills and 
transition into jobs or self-employment. Also frequently needed is help to 
access financial services, particularly for those who are self-employed (Figure 
4.1). This not just about obtaining loans but includes opening a bank account, 
joining a savings and loan group or learning to keep financial records to 
establish creditworthiness.	
 
	
Many methods are available to improve human capital. It matters a 
great deal which ones a programme uses depending on which fields and types 
of human capital are needed, the target groups in the population, the available 
resources including partner capacities and the importance of different 
assessment criteria such as a method’s reach, ease of implementation and 
cost. A further complication is that while some methods are more effective 
than others, the performance of each depends on its design and implementation. 
This highlights the importance of thorough, participatory assessments to 
decide which methods to use, careful implementation of those methods and 
rigorous monitoring, evaluation and learning during and following the 
programme. 
Using different methods reinforces learning as these are often highly 
complementary, in the way they promote learning and reach different target 
groups.     
Multiple methods are almost always desirable as no single 
method is a silver bullet. 
   91
AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT DEVELOPMENT METHODS


Figure 
4.1
Human 
capital 
development 
methods 
useful 
for 
supplementing 
technical 
training 
and 
education 
to 
achieve 
self- 
and 
wage 
employment
SOURCE: 
Adapted 
from 
EDC 
(Education 
Development 
Center). 
2018. 
USAID 
Huguka 
Dukore 
Akazi 
Kanoze 
Annual 
Report. 
Washington, 
DC, 
USAID 
and 
Kigali, 
Educational 
Development 
Center. 
www.edc.org/
usaid-huguka-dukore-akazi-kanoze-annual-report-2018.
Needs assessment
Identifying different target groups and aspirations of each; understanding context
Foundational  
training
• Numeracy/literacy
• Work readiness
• Goal setting
 
Technical training/ 
education 
Self-employment
Coaching and 
internships
Wage employment
Access to  
financial services
Traditional approach 
Additional steps in 
improved approach
92   
HOW TO INVEST IN FARMERS? A GUIDE FOR AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT PROJECTS


©FAO/Luis Tato
© FAO/Lucie Chocholata




Module 5 
A deep dive into  
two agriculture  
human capital 
investment cases
	
	 INTRODUCTION
The first case is an example of a human capital development method through 
use of certified community promoters. This is referred to as the Jharkhand 
Opportunities for Harnessing Rural Growth (JOHAR) project and community 
service providers (see Module 4) in the state of Jharkhand in India. This case 
study was analysed in detail by Kumar et al. (2021). In the toolkit we apply the 
lessons learned from the various modules to this model. 
	
The second case is farmer to farmer extension (Haku Winay/Noa 
Jayatai) using Yachachiq, who are local promoters hired to implement comm-
unity projects in Peru.  More can be seen on this case in Salcedo Du Bois and 
Zimmerman (2021). 
Learning objective 
To be able to cite examples from these cases and apply  
them to other modules. This module provides two in-depth 
case studies to apply learning from the other modules  
and to give examples.  
!
   95


Both are examples of extension methods involving field staff. However, JOHAR 
involves more formal, certified community providers of extension services, 
while Haku Winay/Noa Jayatai uses farmer to farmer extension. The community 
promoters are trained but not formally certified. JOHAR community service 
providers are certified by the Agriculture Skills Council of India and paid by the 
community, with a supplementary payment of INR 1200 (USD 15) per month 
from JOHAR along with profits from the sale of inputs to livestock farmers. 
	
Another difference is in the type of AHCI (Module 1). JOHAR is a typical 
project financed through an international financial institution with an 
implementing partner and strong local government involvement. It is a six-year 
project (2017–2023).
	
Haku Winay/Noa Jayatai is an example of strong government comm-
itment and support to developing AHC over a much longer period. The 
Government of Peru has run the programme since 2014, financed by the 
Cooperation Fund for Social Development (FONCODES), an executive branch 
of the Ministry of Development and Social Inclusion of Peru. 
96   
HOW TO INVEST IN FARMERS? A GUIDE FOR AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT PROJECTS


©CIFOR/Faizal Abdul Aziz
Jharkhand Opportunities for Harnessing 
Rural Growth Project in India
Case study 1
	
	 BRIEF PROJECT DESCRIPTION
JOHAR is an encompassing public project, initiated in 2017. Its “project dev-
elopment objectives” are to enable rural producers and producer collectives 
to diversify and add value to their production, achieve resilience, access 
markets, participate in the private sector and finally to develop skills. The latter 
is particularly relevant within a specific sub-component of the JOHAR project, 
namely the  livestock development  component, which is our focus in this case 
study. 
	
The Jharkhand State Livelihoods Promotion Society (JSLPS) imple-
ments the livestock development component of JOHAR, focusing primarily on 
women livestock farmers. Its overall objectives are asset creation, productivity 
enhancement, risk reduction related to climate change via diversification and 
market access for selected livestock (broilers, layers, pigs, goats and dual 
purpose backyard poultry). These objectives are achieved partially through a 
 
 
human capital development method of certified community promoters  (see 
Module 4). 
	
Female livestock farmers in Jharkhand are trained and certified in 
paraveterinary skills and called  Ajivika Pashu Sakhis  (APS) or livestock friends. 
The APS offer inputs, advice and support on productivity issues (breeding, 
feeding, animal health, shed construction) and are responsible for training 
50–100 other female livestock farmers in their respective villages. Some APS 
go on to become  master trainers  (MTs) through additional training, and they 
in turn train new APS. The JOHAR project thereby invests in the AHC of women 
livestock farmers in Jharkhand through a cascading farmer to farmer method. 
	
The next section follows the building block structure of Module 3 but 
skips certain building block elements as they are less relevant to this case.
©Unsplash/Gyan Shahane
   97
A DEEP DIVE INTO TWO AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT CASES


	
	 FRAMING BUILDING BLOCK
	 	
	
 
A  Farmers: Jharkhand, the livestock sector and women
Livestock is one of the fastest growing sectors and a promising sector for small 
and landless farmers in Jharkhand. It accounts for a quarter of household 
income and the primary source of earnings for about one-fifth of agricultural 
households with small parcels of land. Nevertheless, at 37 percent Jharkhand 
has the second highest poverty rate in the country. Progress across social 
groups is uneven, with scheduled castes, scheduled tribes and women 
performing significantly worse than other social groups. Half of tribal peoples, 
27 percent of all households in Jharkhand, are poor. 
	
Several challenges exist within the livestock sector and limit its 
contribution to rural household incomes. Firstly, livestock farmers have limited 
access to irrigation, skills, markets and finances. Secondly, productivity is low 
(less than 12 percent of that in other states) due to domestication of local 
breeds and inadequate quality and access to veterinary services. This has 
meant high livestock mortality (over 30 percent loss of goats, and up to 80 
percent of pigs and poultry), egg production at 30 percent below its potential 
and livestock for meat products requires 4–6 times longer to reach ideal 
market weights.  
	
Women livestock farmers, the JOHAR target group, face additional 
challenges. They live in a typical rural patriarchal society with gender biases 
against women and have limited decision-making power and opportunities. 
Women are expected to stay at home and do household work while income 
and skill related activities are considered men’s domain. Many of the targeted 
women also face challenges from limited or no access to land as well as biases 
against their ethnic groups.
	
The main opportunity for change from the JOHAR project lies within 
the nexus of the livestock sector and women, who account for over 70 percent 
of production. Local market prices in India for meat and eggs have increased 
by 70–100 percent in the past decade and pushed up farm gate prices. 
Diversification to high-value livestock breeds could more than double a 
household’s primary income. Livestock rearing is an activity where women 
play a critical role and represents an opportunity to enhance their human 
capital to acquire new skills, take decisions that increase family income and 
contribute towards women’s empowerment. 
B  Institutions: an existing institutional platform of  
	
women livestock farmers
Women in Jharkhand are organizing into  self-help groups. These typically have 
10–20 members, meet weekly and save around INR 10 per week per person in 
a personal savings – the total amount saved by all members is treated as a 
community fund. Apart from the savings, the members deal with gendered 
roles in their communities, livelihood issues, credit requirements and access 
to government schemes.  At district level, 10–15 self-help groups are organized 
into village organizations and 20–30  village organizations  are in turn organized 
into a cluster level federation. The latter two group formations meet twice a 
month to manage financial transactions and livelihood plans. There is thus a 
wide three-tiered network of female livestock farmers in Jharkhand. 
98   
HOW TO INVEST IN FARMERS? A GUIDE FOR AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT PROJECTS


©CIFOR/Faizal Abdul Aziz
This institutional platform of self-help groups derives from another institution, 
the National Rural Livelihoods Mission, a national poverty alleviation 
programme also implemented by JSLPS and funded by the World Bank. The 
Mission shows that community managed institutions for poor smallholders or 
landless farmers can function as efficient partners in livelihood enhancement. 
This institutional platform of self-help groups has facilitated a large cadre of 
women community leaders, mobilizers and resource personnel as well as 
greater participation by women in decision-making. This network is therefore 
highly relevant for implementing JOHAR. The cluster level federations are 
registered as societies under the Societies Registration Act, 1860, giving them 
formal non-profit status.
 
C  Providers: existing human capital development –  
	
or lack thereof
Veterinary services and basic animal care services are extremely limited in 
Jharkhand. There are very few private paravets and they are poorly trained, 
remote and their services expensive. Government paravet services are almost 
non-existent in remote villages, and the very few hospitals/veterinary centres 
are far from those villages. The required skills for efficient animal husbandry 
and effective support services for livestock farmers are also missing from 
remote areas. Smallholders lack access to key services like advice, training 
and access to quality inputs supporting nutrition, health, breeding, and 
management. The ratio of veterinarians and paravets to livestock in the state 
is among the lowest in India, with limited resources and services that mostly 
focus on cattle and buffaloes. There is an immense opportunity for skill 
enhancement for farmers and community service providers to deliver effective 
support services. 
 
E  Implementers
While the JOHAR project is legally implemented under the Rural Development 
Department of the State Government of Jharkhand, the JSLPS is the de 
 
facto implementer. It is registered and funded by the  Rural Development 
Department and designated as the special purpose vehicle for project 
implementation. JSLPS is responsible for the overall outputs and outcomes of 
the project, sourcing co-financing through convergence and technical support 
through partnerships. It is also implementing the ongoing National Rural 
Livelihoods Mission.
	
The key line implementing departments are listed in Table 5.1. These 
departments provide technical support through training and extension 
services as well as finance through convergence with government schemes. 
F  Partners
Three main partners collaborate in implementing JOHAR. Heifer International 
and its subsidiary Asset & W both provide training, skills development and 
capacity building. Heifer International has over 10 years of experience in 
training community service providers in India. The Agriculture Skills Council 
of India sets the exams and certification of community service providers.
   99
A DEEP DIVE INTO TWO AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT CASES


 
G  Funding
JOHAR is a six-year project ending in 2023, where the World Bank is investing 
USD 100 million as a loan to the Government of India which has committed 
USD 43 million. Investment in the livestock component is USD 15.6 million. See 
the funding flow in Figure 5.1. The important stakeholders involved in the 
project and their contribution are detailed in Table 5.1. 
Figure 
5.1
Funding 
flow 
system 
of 
JOHAR
SOURCE: 
World 
Bank. 
2017. 
Project 
appraisal 
document 
on 
a 
proposed 
loan 
in 
the 
amount 
of 
USD 
100 
million 
to 
the 
Republic 
of 
India 
for 
a 
Jharkhand 
opportunities 
for 
harnessing 
rural 
growth 
(JOHAR) 
Project. 
Agriculture 
Global 
Practice, 
South 
Asia 
Region 
Report 
No: 
Pad2273. 
International 
Bank 
for 
Reconstruction 
and 
Development. 
World Bank
District Mission 
Management Unit 
(DMMU) 
Producer  
organizations
Producer  
groups
Block Mission  
Management Unit
(BMMU) 
CAA & A,  
Government of India (GoI)
Government  
of Jharkhand
JSLPS State Mission  
Management Unit (SMMU)
Advance and replenishments 
into designated account
Back to back  
transfers
Claims 
submitted to GoI
Funds drawn from State 
Treasury against approved 
annual budget
Grant released  
as per operational 
guidelines
Funds in single state level project 
bank account operating at district 
and block levels through zero 
balance child account
*CAA & A, Controller of Aid 
Accounts and Audit
100   
HOW TO INVEST IN FARMERS? A GUIDE FOR AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT PROJECTS


Table 5.1	
 
Main stakeholders in the JOHAR project 
 
Stakeholder 
Role 
Contribution 
Community stakeholders
Producer groups
(these did not exist before JOHAR, and 
are described in section M)
Community institutions
Livestock production, practice skills 
learned, engage services of APS  
and MTs for enhanced production  
and income
Self-help groups
Community institutions
Financial transactions, livelihood 
plans, support on gender issues 
APS and MTs
Trainee and beneficiary 
Provide skills, services and products 
on farmers’ doorsteps
Implementation actors
Rural Development Department  
of Jharkhand  
Implementer (de jure) 
Host the project, provide fiduciary 
support as required 
Jharkhand State Livelihoods 
Promotion Society 
Implementer (de facto) 
Implement with the farmer and 
community groups supported by 
JSLPS 
Department of Agriculture 
(encompassing the directorates of 
horticulture, animal husbandry, 
fisheries and soil conservation)
Partners for implementation 
Technical support through training 
and extension services as well as 
financial support through conver-
gence with government schemes 
Department of Environment, Forest, 
and Climate Change
Department of Water Resources
Department of Higher and Technical 
Education
Department of Energy 
Partners
Heifer International
Partner 
Developing the technical training 
content and modules for APS  
and MTs
Asset & W
Partner for training 
Provide technical training to the 
livestock farmers, APS and  MTs
Agriculture Skills Council of India
Partner for certification  
A government accredited training  
and certification agency 
Conducts exams and provides 
certification of APS and MTs as 
certified paravets 
World Bank
Financier 
Financing 
SOURCES: 
Authors’ 
own 
elaboration. 
 
 
   101
A DEEP DIVE INTO TWO AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT CASES


	
	 ASPIRATIONAL BUILDING BLOCK
	 	
 
H  Impacts
The JOHAR project aims to enhance and diversify household income through 
the livestock component by targeting about 57 000 women livestock farmers 
and APS and MTs. It aims to improve livestock production, productivity and 
access to markets with its main objective empowerment of women. 
I  Outcomes: changes in actions and behaviours
The JOHAR project aims to change actions and behaviours among women 
livestock farmers through improved livestock rearing, reinvestment of incomes 
into production, price negotiations as well as seeking help and community and 
market engaging behaviour. The changes sought in actions and behaviours 
among APS and MTs are to provide paraveterinary services to other farmers, 
teaching and taking on leadership roles.
J  Outputs: development of human capital
The human capital investments in JOHAR revolve around enhancing the 
technical, functional, business and managerial capacities of farmers. They 
learn  technical skills  such as improved animal care, animal and shed 
cleanliness, correct use of feed supplements and clean drinking water. They 
acquire   functional skills  like the confidence to seek timely veterinary services 
and first aid for their animals, taking pride in their contribution to family income, 
leaving home to participate in training sessions, communicating with other 
people and attending self-help group meetings. They also learn  business skills 
like selling goats based on body weight, investing income from livestock in 
improved farming, as well as decision-making skills in other areas of investment 
and sending children to school instead of relying on their help with livestock.   
	
Both the APS and MTs develop technical, functional and business skills. 
The  technical skill  focus is on building capabilities as paraveterinary service 
providers, including skills in deworming, nutrition, teeth conservation, timely 
castration, animal first aid, basic diagnosis and shed design and construction. 
Functional skills include: using a computer and digital training content; 
designing and conducting training sessions; presenting oneself at training 
sessions; valuing contributions towards the betterment of society; dealing with 
gender biases in society (e.g. having the courage to leave home for meetings/
trainings, talking to people other than family members taking independent 
decisions); and communication skills. Business skills for APS include dev-
eloping marketing linkages for livestock, valuation of animals based on body 
weight, and having a business plan for veterinary services and products. The 
MTs acquire advanced skills like group facilitation and are teachers for APS 
and farmers. Both APS and MTs gain skills in how to reinvest in their own 
businesses as livestock farmers.
	
MTs have all the skills required by an APS and are also skilled in 
community facilitation and conflict resolution. As trainers, they have the skills 
to present themselves at training sessions, prepare the content, deliver the 
programme and use computers and ICT materials. MTs have the confidence 
to travel from their villages to different blocks (administrative units) and 
districts, staying overnight if necessary. 
102   
HOW TO INVEST IN FARMERS? A GUIDE FOR AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT PROJECTS


Figure 5.2 gives a broad overview of the connection between the outputs, 
outcomes and impacts in the JOHAR project. It likewise alludes to the choices 
of development methods under “Input”, described in more detail in the 
following design building block.
Impact
Changes  
resulting from 
adopted  
actions and 
behavours
Outcome
Actions  
and behaviours 
adopted by 
farmers due  
to new human
capital 
Output
Agriculture  
human capital
developed
Input
Implementation  
of project  
design strategies
Technical Service Providers provide 
training for APS and MTs at the 
Technical Support Agencies  
Agriculture Skill Council of India 
provide certification exams of  
APS and MTs
APS and MTs provide training  
at structured training events at 
training centres
APS and MTs provide continued 
extension in farmer field schools in 
home location
Implementation actions
Technical agricultural skills
•	 improve animal care
•	 animal and shed cleanliness 
•	 feed supplements and clean 
drinking water 
Functional skills
•	 seeking timely veterinary services
•	 self-confidence as an 
income-earner
•	 self-confidence to participate  
in out-of-home trainings, PG 
meetings
•	 communication skills
Business skills
•	 selling goats based on weight
•	 reinvesting income in production
Technical agricultural skills  
(para-vet skills)
•	 deworming
•	 nutrition
•	 teeth clipping
•	 timely castration
•	 animal first aid 
Functional skills
•	 operating computers and using 
digital training content
•	 designing and conducting training 
sessions
•	 presenting during training sessions
•	 valuing their contribution towards 
betterment of their society
•	 dealing with gender related biases 
in the society
•	 communication skills
•	 Group facilitation and teaching 
skills (MTs)
Business skills
•	 developing marketing linkages for 
livestock
•	 valuation of animal based on body 
weight
•	 having a business plan of their 
veterinary services and products
•	 networking with other experts in 
the sector and seek support from 
them whenever required.
•	 How to reinvest in own businesses 
as livestock farmers
Skills developed
Farmers with access to APS/MTs 
services improve their livestock 
rearing practices 
Farmers with access to APS/MTs 
reinvest incomes in their production 
Farmers negotiate for better market 
prices, spending whole days outside 
of houses, talking to new people and 
traders
Help-seeking behaviour
APS and MTs start providing 
para-vet services to livestock 
farmers - also beyond JOHAR
APS and MTs take on teaching, 
networking and leadership roles, 
conduct training programs, set 
examples for good rearing practices 
APS and MTs reinvest in their own 
businesses 
APS and MTs search for better jobs 
due to certification
What farmers now do
Improvements in livestock 
production and productivity  
Increased incomes for farmers  
and APS and MTs 
Acceptance and self-confidence, 
empowerment of women farmers
APS and MTs gain self-confidence 
and recognition from families and 
community, acceptance as experts
APS and MTs become empowered
Improved and supportive 
community networks  
Increase in livestock businesses 
Impacts
Human capital development “add-on”
provision of grants to producer 
groups
Human capital development “add-on”
Establishing Livestock Service 
Centres (small shops) run by 
producer groups helps APS and  
MTs to provide necessary inputs  
and medicine
LIVESTOCK FARMERS
APS AND MT
s
Figure 
5.2
Theory 
of 
change 
in 
JOHAR
SOURCE: 
Authors’ 
own 
elaboration.
   103
A DEEP DIVE INTO TWO AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT CASES


	
	 DESIGN BUILDING BLOCK
	 	
 
K  Targeting women livestock farmers, APS and MTs
As a target group, the 57 000 women are smallholder/livestock farmers with 
land holdings from 0.1 ha to 1.2 ha and all members of self-help groups. They 
are between 20–53 years of age, have education levels ranging from no 
schooling to graduates and are willing to invest in improving animal rearing 
practices. They are traditional animal farmers with livestock consisting of a 
few goats, cattle, pigs, hens and ducks. 
	
From the 57 000 female livestock farmers, each village selects APS 
based on eligibility criteria that include: (i) a minimum of nine years schooling; 
(ii) belonging to the same village; (iii) membership of a local producer group; 
(iv) being a livestock farmer with at least two animals; (v) willing to travel for 
training and exposure visits; and (vi) actively looking for increased cash income. 
	
MTs are all previous APS selected for further training according to the 
following criteria: (i) proven training skills based on earlier experience in farmer 
training; (ii) hands-on experience with livestock; (iii) female between 30–45 
years of age; (iv) education level of at least 10 years schooling; and (v) ability 
to travel to various parts of the state. 
	
MTs are all women in the 28–34-year-old group, all are smallholder 
farmers, holding around 1.5 acres of land and having 10–15 years of formal 
education.  
	
A few male livestock farmers are involved in the JOHAR project, however 
95 percent of trained ASP and thereby MTs are female.
L  Method
The method of agriculture human capital development in the JOHAR project 
has two distinct components according to who the primary learner is: (i) how 
the APS and the MTs acquire their skills and capabilities; and (ii) how other 
livestock farmers do so. See Figure 5.2.
How APS and MTs develop their agriculture human capital
To become an APS, MTs train the women in groups of 15–20. Each APS receives 
30 days training over 18 months in five sessions of 4–7 days each. After 
completing the third training session and six months’ experience, the APS is 
eligible to take the certification examination with further preparation from the 
Agriculture Skills Council of India over seven days. Certification offers many 
benefits, it professionalizes the APS and helps standardize their quality across 
the country. The cost of training an APS includes that for training an MT in 
trainer-of-trainer mode and is INR 75 000 (USD 975). This includes acco-
mmodation, travel expenses and all associated costs such as the services of 
Asset & W in preparing materials, training MTs and coaching support for APS. 
MTs are responsible for training the APS such as preparing the venue, planning 
the 6–7 days, deciding training content, sub-group activities, setting tests 
during training, feedback forms, field assignments, logistics and handling the 
participants’ urgent needs. 
	
MTs obtain additional certification, giving the added benefit that they 
are recognized as the most professional trainers and can work anywhere in 
India. To learn community facilitation skills and conflict resolution, they under-
go ten days special training with Asset & W.
104   
HOW TO INVEST IN FARMERS? A GUIDE FOR AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT PROJECTS


Both APS and MTs are trained at  Technical Support Agencies,  where  technical 
service providers, generally staffed by Asset & W, oversee teaching and 
capacity building. Heifer International and Asset & W provide training materials 
and training for MTs, APS and livestock farmers, capacity building and technical 
advisory support in raising goats, pigs and backyard poultry. Asset & W employ 
technical service providers, who select and offer training to APS and MTs as 
well as input delivery and APS demonstrations.
How livestock farmers develop their agriculture human capital
The rest of livestock farmers are trained by the APS in training centres within 
the State Rural Institute for Training. Back home, the farmer field school 
approach is adopted to educate livestock farmers where the APS facilitates 
the field schools and arranges regular get-togethers at different farms, where 
farmers meet to learn skills (“learn to do by doing”) covering the areas of animal 
care and improved practices. Thereafter the APS supports farmers with 
ongoing services and inputs. Since the APS is a part of the livestock farming 
community, she can readily follow up with farmers to remind them of the new 
skills and lessons learned. Farmer training to develop and help them adopt 
new skills is a long-term activity. The farmer field school approach supported 
by APS has led to high acceptance rates of new efficiency and marketing 
practices. 
	
This method of certified community promoters ensures services at 
farmers’ doorsteps for animal vaccination, castration, teeth maintenance, 
deworming, basic diagnosis, first aid, and advising the farmer about animal 
cleanliness, clean drinking water, feed supplements, shed design and 
construction, The aim is to motivate farmers to adopt improved animal rearing 
practices and deal with gender related social and cultural stresses. Whenever 
farmers have a particular need about a specific issue, APS seek support from 
MTs and veterinarians. They also help develop market linkages and the 
estimated sale value of animals and advise farmers accordingly. 
	
As a part of JOHAR, many livestock farmers organize into producer 
groups  which benefit from the training and services provided by the APS and 
MTs. They develop skills and expertise within producer groups, hence they 
have a big contribution to make in capacity development. Producer group 
meetings held by the APS and MTs are learning events where participants can 
share experiences. These are the main community institutions with which 
JOHAR works and most are not exclusive to women. The skills development 
specific to producer group meetings are added agriculture value, diversification, 
intensification, competitive advantage, easier access to finance, entrepre-
neurship and agribusiness skills.
	
Both APS and MTs have a business plan around the services and inputs 
they provide. MTs are paid based on their training work, INR 750 per training 
day (USD 10). They also provide medicines/feed supplements to farmers at a 
cost. Both APS and MTs are paid partly by livestock farmers for their services 
and the inputs or products they deliver and partly from the JOHAR project. It 
is expected when the project is over, they will maintain their income with 
payments from farmers for their services and products.
   105
A DEEP DIVE INTO TWO AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT CASES


Fundamental to the human capital development supported by APS and MTs 
is providing equipment including a smartphone and a kit containing a blue sari, 
apron, hat, cool box for medicines, weighing scales, castrator, and a basic initial 
stock of first aid supplies. Ayurvedic treatments are provided when available. 
Equipping each APS costs INR 5000 (USD 65) for the kit and another 
 
INR 5000–7000 (USD 65–91) for a smartphone, totalling about INR 12 000 
(USD 156). After the first inventory of supplies is complete, the APS uses her 
income to maintain her supplies which she purchases from the Livestock 
Service Centre.  
In addition to human capital development JOHAR’s work with producer groups 
involves providing grants. The JOHAR livestock development activities are as 
follows:
1.	 provision of sub-grants to producer groups to procure improved stock 		
	
for pig and goat breeding;
2.	 provision of sub-grants to producer groups for demonstration units on 		
	
livestock housing and improved breeds;  
3.	 provision of sub-grants to producer groups to finance input and service 	
	
costs of livestock rearing;  
4.	 helping establish livestock service centres, product outlets for the 	
	
	
producer groups with access to inputs, services and markets through 	 	
	
aggregation. These centres are part of the producer organization;  
5.	 capacity building and technical support on productivity enhancement 	 	
	
and marketing; continued extension support is provided to producers 	 	
	
through APS; 
6.	partnerships with  technical support agencies  to provide end-to-end 	 	
	
solutions, capacity building and technical support and with private sector 	
	
agencies to supply quality inputs; support through convergence  
	
with Government of Jharkhand programmes is likely for several activities  
	
in this sub-component including livestock housing, introduction of  
	
improved animal breeds, and establishment of feed plants.
106   
HOW TO INVEST IN FARMERS? A GUIDE FOR AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT PROJECTS


Figure 
5.3
Layering 
and 
phasing 
of 
JOHAR 
project 
activities
SOURCE: 
Authors’ 
own 
elaboration.
	 	
 
M  Organizing
The project implementation architecture of JSLPS is spread over various levels 
(Figure 5.3).  
State level
A High-Level Steering Committee steers the project, headed by the Chief 
Secretary of Jharkhand State, co-chaired by the Development Commissioner, 
and comprising the Principal Secretaries of the relevant departments (Rural 
Development, Agriculture, Environment, Forest and Climate Change, Water 
Resources, Energy and Higher and Technical Education). A State Mission 
Management Unit (SMMU) for JOHAR, headed by the Chief Executive Officer 
of JSLPS, has a multi-disciplinary team of staff and technical consultants 
working exclusively for JOHAR. 
Women  
livestock 
farmers  
from SHGs
SHG members
Formation and 
strengthening  
of producer  
organizations (PO) 
Stabilization of producer 
organizations (e.g. product 
diversification, value addition, 
aggregation of input as 
enterprises within PO)
Consolidation and post 
project sustainability, 
continue to work with PO  
for business development, 
linkages
Expansion of  
marketing  
interventions, moving 
from local to more 
lucrative markets
Higher order skills 
for service delivery, 
enterprise 
development
Introduction  
of interventions 
in livestock 
activity, skill 
development, 
financial  
access and 
market linkages 
continue 
throughout the 
project period
Formation  
of producer  
groups
Selection  
and training  
of APS
Trained APS  
and MT
Pay membership fee
Training and services to livestock farmers
Orientation by BMMU staff
YEAR 1 AND 2
YEAR 3 AND 4
YEAR 5 AND 6
   107
A DEEP DIVE INTO TWO AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT CASES


District level
There is a  District Mission Management Unit  (DMMU) for JOHAR in each of 
the 17 districts. It is staffed by a multi-disciplinary team of technical consultants 
whose expertise focuses on the specific sub-sectors in the district and includes 
experts in high-value agriculture, irrigation, livestock, fisheries and non-timber 
forest products. 
Block level
Each of the 68 blocks (administrative units of state governments) has a 
dedicated JOHAR Block Coordinator reporting to the Block Project Manager 
of JSLPS in the  Block Mission Management Unit (BMMU).  Three cluster-level 
field coordinators provide technical support and coordination services to 
ensure smooth implementation, working closely with APS at village level and 
senior APS at cluster level. The APS in turn are responsible for the formation 
and functioning of producer groups and provide the last mile link delivering 
project services like advice, paravet services and inputs like medicines and 
nutrient supplements to producer groups. 
Village level
JOHAR works with and supports community institutions of self-help groups 
and  village organizations  and  cluster level federations  with training in 
livestock rearing. Small producers are aggregated around key subsectors to 
form producer groups and larger producer organizations such as companies 
and cooperatives. Farmer field schools are formed once APS are selected and 
trained. 
Figure 
5.4
Implementation 
structure 
of 
JOHAR
SOURCE: 
Authors’ 
own 
elaboration.
District Mission 
Management Unit 
(DMMU) 
Producer  
organizations
Producer  
groups
Block Mission  
Management Unit
(BMMU) 
Plan, 
review, 
finance
JSLPS State Mission  
Management Unit (SMMU) JOHAR
Aggregation and 
transactions
Training 
and coaching
Certification
Technical 
support  
agency TSA
Farmer
CSP
ASCI
108   
HOW TO INVEST IN FARMERS? A GUIDE FOR AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT PROJECTS


	 	
 
N  Scaling and sustaining
There are ongoing efforts to scale up this model in India, together with the 
Ministry of Rural Development. This is an opportunity to share detailed 
concepts and learning notes with the Ministry to build bridges with national 
programmes such as the National Rural Livelihoods Mission (NRLM). JSLPS 
can scale up the project in Jharkhand since it already has a large livestock-
based livelihoods programme in place. As JOHAR is a small project 
implemented under the NRLM, the learning from it can be shared with other 
places through NRLM systems, provided it is fully informed about JOHAR.
	
The project interventions build on the existing social capital of women’s 
self-help groups and their federations, and through them develop local 
producer groups and higher order producer organizations (collections of 
producer groups) to facilitate collective production, increase bargaining power 
and employ economies of scale. The producer organizations function as 
entities that will continue to operate through business activities supported by 
linkages to formal financial institutions like banks and microfinance institutions. 
The project design emphasizes building community capacity through local 
APS and MTs who will be paid based for their services and thus are primed to 
work with producer organizations as business associates. The project builds 
sustainability of production systems through investments in community 
capacity as well as infrastructure for diversification, productivity enhancement, 
climate resilience and market responsiveness. More information is needed on 
the financial viability of the existing APS model since the project is ongoing 
and may need some time to make them financially stable. 
	
There are opportunities for scaling up the APS model beyond the State 
of Jharkhand. It can be replicated in regions with livestock farmers where 
educated women are willing to be trained and provide veterinary services to 
livestock farmers. In implementing similar initiatives, there is a need for 
structured investment and capacity enhancement for the women community 
service providers. 
O  Keep improving: monitoring and reviewing
Institutional support, monitoring and review system
The project and local veterinarians provide emergency back up support, for 
animal injuries or complicated births through smartphones and WhatsApp. It 
enables vets to focus on cases they are best trained to handle.  
 	
Farmer producer groups monitor the APS delivery of services and 
inputs through broad criteria such as the number of farmers trained and the 
number of animals marketed or vaccinated. An app can support service 
delivery as well as monitoring and evaluation. 
   109
A DEEP DIVE INTO TWO AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT CASES


	
	 LESSONS LEARNED AND EVIDENCE OF IMPACTS
At the centre of the intervention are women livestock farmers, who were 
strategically identified, trained, and coached as APS under JOHAR to provide 
doorstep technical, marketing and risk reduction support to other women 
livestock farmers. 
	
Certified MTs support the APS a model that is almost unique, offering 
evidence of capacity enhancement in the form of changed practices by 
livestock farmers (Kumar et al., 2021). The improved practice changes included 
timely vaccinations, deworming, castration, animal cleanliness and provision 
of feed supplements and clean drinking water for livestock. These changes 
increased income significantly and enhanced animal survival rates. They also 
reduced production time, recognized the role of women in families and their 
communities, offered a supportive network to livestock service providers, 
increased investments in businesses, education of children and confident APS 
and livestock farmers. The model enhanced the economic and social well-
being of poor rural women working as livestock farmers and APS. 
	
Since human and animal health are now seen as a continuum, there is 
need for strategic interventions and collaboration with ministries responsible 
for animal and human health. Animal husbandry departments should support 
disease diagnosis, since it is a public good and requires considerable 
investment. APS can supplement animal husbandry departments by suppor-
ting livestock farmers. 
	
The work of APS under the JOHAR project shows that it is possible to 
enhance human capacities in agriculture, even among the poorest, most 
marginalized groups, such as women and Indigenous Peoples who raise 
livestock on very small farms in remote villages. This was made possible by: 
1.	 training  local people only as APS; 
2.	 direct involvement in all activities, as APS are also livestock farmers 	
	
	
belonging to producer groups so there is peer pressure to maintain 	
	
	
support;  
3.	 structured training and coaching by one of the best firms in the business 	
	
e.g. Asset & W; 
4.	 effectiveness of training evaluated by an independent appraising agency 	
	
such as the Agriculture Skills Council of India; 
5.	 technical training in functional skills and values; 
6.	 opportunities for progression from APS to MT; 
7.	 supplementary income and earnings from services rendered; 
8.	 opportunities to work anywhere as a certified APS or MTs; 
9.	 development of a supporting network with MTs and external experts; 
10.	ongoing support through regular reviews and producer group meetings; 
11.	 structured intervention along the entire value chain from shed  
	
construction, veterinary services, feed supplements to marketing;  
12.	potential for APS and MT interventions to apply their skills for their own 	
	
well-being and that of livestock farmers in their village. 
110   
HOW TO INVEST IN FARMERS? A GUIDE FOR AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT PROJECTS


©FAO/Jordi Vaqué Rabal
	
	 BRIEF PROJECT DESCRIPTION
The Government of Peru has run the Haku Wiñay/Noa Jayatai programme 
since 2014. Built upon lessons from previous programmes and funded by the 
government and international cooperation (FAO, IFAD), it comprises a set of 
interventions combining social protection with agricultural development. By 
the end of 2020, Haku Wiñay/Noa Jayatai covered 140 000 households in the 
subsistence economy, while more than 130 000 have completed the three-year 
cycle, covering more than 270 000 households between 2014 and 2020. 
	
The programme is implemented by the Cooperation Fund for Social 
Development (FONCODES) of the Ministry of Development and Social Inclusion 
and is a results-oriented budget programme, meaning the Ministry of Econo-
mics and Finance is directly involved in design, monitoring and budget 
allocation to ensure good value for public expenditure. Haku Wiñay/Noa 
Jayatai has four components:
Component 1 – Improved agricultural systems	
 
Technical assistance to implement simple, low-cost technology innovations
Component 2 – Healthy housing	
 
Technical assistance for household innovations, such as safe cooking stoves, 
water and solid waste management, vegetable gardens, and barns for small 
animals
Component 3 – Improved financial capacity	
Technical assistance to develop savings plans and basic accounting skills 
Component 4 – Inclusive rural business	
Technical assistance to organize business associations, prepare business 
plans and apply for grants by participating in government competitive funding 
programmes	  
The Haku Wiñay/Noa Jayatai
Case study 2
   111
A DEEP DIVE INTO TWO AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT CASES


The first two components take place during the first two years of the programme 
and the last two in year three. After the three-year cycle is complete, the 
programme finishes in that community. 
	
The following subsections provide further insights about contextual 
factors (framing building blocks), programme purpose (aspirational building 
blocks) and programme design (design building blocks).
	
	 FRAMING BUILDING BLOCK
	 	
	
 
A  Farmers
Family farming in Peru covers more than 95 percent of farms, or about 2.1 
million families and employs more than 3 million people. Most family farms, 
about 1.9 million, are in the subsistence economy, which means most are 
smallholders, have limited access to markets and are chronically poor. Haku 
Wiñay/Noa Jayatai focuses on improving the human capital of family farms and 
rural households in the subsistence economy. The programme defines them 
as households which derive more than 75 percent of their income from 
agriculture, have less than 1.3 hectares, less than 10 percent of their production 
is sold in markets and more than 75 percent of their labour is devoted to 
agriculture. Around 65 percent of rural households meet these four criteria, 
about 1.3 million households, including Indigenous People from the Highlands 
and Amazon regions. 
	
The target population has limited access to extension services: only 3 
percent  of subsistence farmers used extension services in 2012.3 They have 
limited access to irrigation (0 percent), certified seeds (0 percent), fertilizers 
(30 percent), land titles (29 percent) and credit (4 percent). Only 21 percent 
consider they have sufficient income to meet basic household needs.
 
B  Institutions
Haku Wiñay/Noa Jayatai contributes to the implementation of Pillar 4 of the 
National Policy for Development and Social Inclusion, which refers to economic 
inclusion. 
E  Implementer
Fully implemented by FONCODES, the programme design allows for co-
implementation by other institutions, such as municipalities, governmental 
programmes and the private sector. Although FONCODES provides institutional 
support and financing the programme is implemented through community 
projects managed by the community (see Design building blocks).
112   
HOW TO INVEST IN FARMERS? A GUIDE FOR AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT PROJECTS


F  Partner
The main partners of FONCODES are local municipalities. They do not make 
any intervention and rarely allocate funds to the programme, but are involved 
in selecting villages and the design of community projects and choose one 
member of the Community Implementation Committee Board, (see Design 
building blocks). 
G  Financing
The Peruvian Government funds the programme fully. The total budget 
allocation between 2014 and 2022 was USD 490 099 461, with an average 
annual spend of USD 54 455 496 (constant 2015). Average expenditure per 
household between 2014 and 2020 was USD 1410 during which the programme 
covered about 270 000 households.  
	
The programme gathers information for the framing building blocks 
from several sources: at district level, using secondary data such as the census 
of agriculture, population census or district-level records from the Ministry of 
Agriculture and Regional Agricultural Statistics Offices. Village information is 
gathered through the participatory diagnostic, part of the design phase of the 
community project. 
   113
A DEEP DIVE INTO TWO AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT CASES


Impact
Outcome
Output
Input
Implementation  
of project  
design strategies
Yachachiqs* provide agriculture 
technical assistance + training on:
•	 Irrigation systems (sprinkler, drip)
•	 Water harvesting
•	 Permanent and seasonal crops
•	 Vegetable gardens and 
greenhouses
•	 Pastures
•	 Animal husbandry
•	 Agroforestry
•	 Organic fertilizers
•	 Aquiculture
•	 Conservation of native varieties
Yachachiqs provide training in 
healthy housing:
•	 Nutrition
•	 Stove making
•	 Health practices, e.g., hand 
washing
•	 Water safety
•	 Solid waste management
•	 Time management
Financial Yachachiqs provide 
financial education according the 
the Financial Education Plan
Local marketing advisors provide 
business training to sub-target group 
(those who apply for funding for their 
business plan)
Implementation actions
Technical agricultural skills
•	 Install and maintain irrigation 
systems (sprinkler, drip)
•	 Harvest water
•	 Install and maintain permanent 
and seasonal crops
•	 Install vegetable gardens and 
greenhouses
•	 Manage pastures
•	 Raise small animals
•	 Install agroforestry systems
•	 Produce organic fertilizers
•	 Develop aquiculture
•	 Conserve of native varieties
“Livelihood skills” on how to
•	 Prepare healthy diets
•	 Install and use improved stoves
•	 Undertake healthy practices
•	 Improve home’s organization
•	 Secure safe water
•	 Manage solid waste
•	 Organize household activities to 
save time
Business and household financial 
skills
•	 Basic accounting skills
•	 Knowledge of how to make 
savings plans
Business development skills on
•	 Where and how to apply for 
funding
•	 How to form and organize 
businesses (3–4 ppl.)
•	 How to prepare business plans 
•	 How to brand products
•	 Packaging
•	 How to ensure food safety 
•	 Other crafts for sale
 
Mindset
Openness to undertake production  
as a business
Skills developed
Adoption of improved practices of
•	 Irrigation systems (sprinkler, drip)
•	 Water harvesting
•	 Permanent and seasonal crops
•	 Vegetable gardens and 
greenhouses
•	 Pastures
•	 Animal husbandry
•	 Agroforestry
•	 Organic fertilizers
•	 Aquiculture
•	 Conservation of native varieties
Adoption of healthy housing 
management
•	 Cook more healthy diets
•	 Build and use improved stoves
•	 Undertake health practices
•	 Securing safe water
•	 Manages solid waste
•	 Allocate and organize their time 
more efficiently
What farmers now do
Increased crop productivity
Farmers gain access to local markets
Women empowerment as all four 
inputs target women
Improved health of family members 
 Improved agricultural performance 
(due to better health) 
 
Households have more time 
 
Improved well-being
Adoption of record-keeping 
 Better financial management 
 Farmers start up savings
Adoption of record-keeping 
 Better financial management 
 Farmers start up savings
Improve agricultural performance 
(due to better management) 
Improve household resources’ 
management
Improve agricultural performance 
(due to better management) 
Improve household resources’ 
management
Impacts
Impacts from all 4 inputs
Human capital development “add-on”
investments in agricultural 
infrastructure, e.g., small irrigation 
systems, low cost greenhouses
Human capital development “add-on”
investments in agricultural 
infrastructure, e.g., small irrigation 
systems, low cost greenhouses
Human capital development “add-on”
access to funding
COMPONENT 1 
IMPROVED AGRICUL
TURAL 
 SYSTEMS
COMPONENT 2 
HEAL
THY HOUSING
COMPONENT 3 
IMPROVED 
 FINANCIAL CAPACITY
COMPONENT 4 
INCLUSIVE RURAL 
BUSINESS
Figure 
5.5
Summary 
of 
aspirational 
building 
blocks 
of 
Haku 
Winay/Noa 
Jayatai
SOURCE: 
Authors’ 
own 
elaboration.
*Yachachiqs = local promoters
Agriculture  
human capital
developed
Actions  
and behaviours 
adopted by farmers 
due to new  
humancapital 
Changes  
resulting from 
adopted  
actions and 
behavours
A newly developed local market in 
agricultural extension services 
(Yachachiqs) 
BONUS: Social capital development 
ECE gained management skills of 
how to implement a project, how to 
look for funding, who to hire, from  
the project implementation itself,  
not from an input
114   
HOW TO INVEST IN FARMERS? A GUIDE FOR AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT PROJECTS


	
ASPIRATIONAL BUILDING BLOCK
	 	
	
H  Impacts
Haku Wiñay/Noa Jayatai’s theory of change seeks to address the challenges 
faced by the target population. The main problem is “rural households in a 
subsistence economy with limited access to markets”, based on the current 
status of family farms gathered while developing the Framing building blocks. 
The programme document includes a problem tree with the direct and indirect 
causes supported by the best available evidence. These are as follows.
Direct cause 1: Decapitalization of assets
•	 unsustainable natural resources management;
•	 limited access and low quality of assets;
•	 low asset management and preservation capacities;
•	 limited access to financial assets.
Direct cause 2: Weak capacities to develop productive activities
•	 low organizational capacities to manage resources;
•	 low technology management capacities to guarantee production quality; 
•	 limited access to technical assistance;
•	 low capacities to access financial assets and improve production.
Direct cause 3: High transaction costs to access markets
•	 high transport costs;
•	 limited road infrastructure;
•	 limited telecommunications infrastructure;
•	 limited access to market information.
Based on the identified main problem, the final impact of the theory of change 
from the programme is: “Rural households in a subsistence economy with 
opportunities to access local markets”. This is achieved through the following 
results from the programme:
•	 increased crop productivity;
•	 improved linkages with agricultural value chains.
In addition, several studies report additional impacts not originally identified 
in the programme’s theory of change: 
•	 improved health of family members;
•	 improved agricultural performance due to better health;
•	 women’s empowerment;
•	 improved well-being;
•	 development of market for agricultural extension services;
•	 community managerial skills development.
   115
A DEEP DIVE INTO TWO AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT CASES


	 	
	
 
I  Outcomes
The programme seeks to achieve these impacts by transforming the agricultural 
system of family farms in a subsistence economy. As farmers adopt the 
innovations and technologies promoted by the programme, this leads to 
changes not only in agricultural production but also in household and business 
management. Farmers are adopting technologies and innovations in the 
following topics. 
Improved farming production systems: 
•	 irrigation systems (sprinkler, drip); 
•	 water harvesting; 
•	 permanent and seasonal crops; 
•	 vegetable gardens and greenhouses;
•	 pastures; 
•	 animal husbandry; 
•	 agroforestry; 
•	 organic fertilizers; 
•	 aquaculture; 
•	 conservation of native varieties. 
Developed and maintained healthy housing: 
•	 healthy diets; 
•	 improved stoves;
•	 healthy practices;
•	 home organization;
•	 safe water;
•	 solid waste management.
Greater financial capacity: 
•	 adoption of record keeping;
•	 improve financial management;
•	 savings;
Promotion of inclusive rural businesses:
•	 organization for business development; 
•	 preparing business plans; 
•	 pursuing grants by participating in governmental funding programmes; 
•	 developing “business behaviour”. 
J  Outputs
The outputs of the programme refer to the development of a set of skills in the 
fields mentioned above, summarized as follows.
Output 1: Technical agricultural skills:
•	 how to install irrigation systems (sprinkler, drip); 
•	 how to harvest water; 
•	 how to install and maintain permanent and seasonal crops; 
•	 how to install vegetable gardens and greenhouses; 
•	 how to manage pastures; 
116   
HOW TO INVEST IN FARMERS? A GUIDE FOR AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT PROJECTS


•	 how to raise small animals; 
•	 how to install and maintain agroforestry systems; 
•	 how to produce organic fertilizers; 
•	 how to develop aquaculture; 
•	 how to conserve native varieties. 
Output 2: Livelihood skills:
•	 how to devise healthy diets; 
•	 how to install and use improved stoves; 
•	 how to undertake healthy practices; 
•	 how to improve home organization;
•	 how to source safe water;
•	 how to manage solid waste; 
•	 how to organize household activities to save time. 
Output 3: Business and household financial skills:
•	 how to keep records;
•	 how to manage financial resources;
•	 how to save.
Output 4: Business development skills: 
•	 where and how to apply for funding; 
•	 how to prepare business plans; 
•	 how to brand products; 
•	 how to use packaging; 
•	 how to ensure food safety; 
•	 how to develop other crafts for sale. 
Note the different fields of human capital developed and described here differ 
slightly from the three field categories in Module 3. This is due to the more 
holistic approach of the Haku Wi/Noa Jayatai project and the inclusion of 
human capital beyond agriculture such as livelihood and household skills.
   117
A DEEP DIVE INTO TWO AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT CASES


	
	 DESIGN BUILDING BLOCK
	 	
 
K  Targeting
The selection of the programme participants is based on three steps.	
 
1.	 Villages are invited to participate in the programme based on the  
	
following three criteria:  
•	 towns and villages in districts with more than 40 percent monetary 		
	 poverty rate, based on the District Poverty Map of 2013;
•	 towns and villages within agricultural registration areas from the 2012 	
	 Agricultural Census with an average land possession of 1.3 ha; and 
•	 towns and villages comprising Indigenous Peoples. 
These criteria yielded 11 191 towns and villages with 533 962 households 
considered eligible for the programme. This number covers about 40 percent 
of subsistence economy households.	
 
2.	 FONCODES decides which villages will participate each year based  
	
on the budget allocated to each region, synergies between villages 	
	
	
selected in previous years and potential new villages, and dialogue  
	
with municipalities and other local actors, mostly NGOs. 
3.	At household level, the Community Implementation Committee  
	
(CIC) selects the households for a given year with the participation  
	
of a community assembly, based on the participatory diagnostic  
	
(explained below).
The programme runs nationwide, but most households are in the highlands 
and the Amazon Region. While the programme does not target women and 
youth directly it recognizes this limitation and is implementing ad hoc targeting 
strategies to increase their participation. 
M  Organization for delivery
Community participation
In making a selection FONCODES teams visit the villages, meeting community 
leaders and the mayor of the district to guarantee the community approves 
their participation. If all are in favour, an agreement is signed between 
FONCODES, the community and the municipality. 
Community Implementation Committee
The CIC in selected villages develops programme activities through projects 
designed with the participation of the community. Each CIC works with 
approximately 100 households and is managed by community members under 
the supervision of FONCODES. A CIC board comprises a President, Treasurer 
and a Secretary as well as a member designated by the local municipality. Once 
the board is up and running and the Operations Manual written, the CIC must 
be registered on the National Registration System, which means it has legal 
responsibility for the funds it receives. The CIC then appoints a manager, who 
leads all the activities performed in the community. 
118   
HOW TO INVEST IN FARMERS? A GUIDE FOR AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT PROJECTS


CIC board members receive training by FONCODES staff in accounting and 
management. Since they have legal responsibility for how the funds are used, 
they must be aware of and understand the procurement process.	
Participatory diagnostic
The first CIC activity is the participatory diagnostic of the community, to identify 
major problems faced by the community regarding agriculture and access to 
markets. All community members participate and provide information about 
their situation. 
Community project design
The information is used to design community-specific projects and implement 
Components 1 and 2. The CIC manager leads the design of the project rooted 
in community needs and a “menu” of pre-selected possible activities, based 
on the skills the project aims to develop (see Outcomes at the “Aspirational 
building blocks”). CIC members must approve the project and the project 
document which outlines the activities to be performed and the funding 
required from FONCODES. Community projects are implemented during the 
first two years of intervention. 
Yachachiq
Following a selection process, the CIC hires Yachachiq as local promoters to 
implement community projects. They have direct contact with programme 
participants and provide all the technical assistance and training to improve 
agricultural productive and household management skills. Yachachiq receive 
training from FONCODES technicians, come from the same or surrounding 
communities and speak the same language. The average monthly salary of a 
Yachachiq is USD 428 plus transport and a per diem when they travel to other 
villages.
	
Yachachiq are the basis of the programme organization. They need to 
build trust among programme participants, not always an easy task. They must 
constantly prove the techniques that farmers will learn are effective and easy 
to implement. Also, household management skill development is fundamental, 
especially the installation of improved cook stoves, a key icebreaker. 
Financial education
Component 3 is implemented with all adult community members. The CIC 
approves a financial education plan that considers advice and training on 
savings, funding, accountability and asset management. It hires a financial 
yachachiq who is trained by FONCODES staff. These activities take place 
during the third year of the programme. 
Inclusive rural business plans
Component 4 is implemented through business plans selected by community 
members via a public contest and funded from programme resources. The 
CIC hires a local marketing adviser with funding from the programme. The 
adviser leads the design of the business plans, providing technical assistance 
to those community members (self-organized in small groups) who participate 
   119
A DEEP DIVE INTO TWO AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT CASES


in this process. Potential businesses are not exclusively agricultural although 
most are.  Others include small animal husbandry (usually guinea pigs or cuy) 
and many relate to handcrafts, clothes, bakeries, restaurants, tourism and 
even hairdressing.
Local Committee of Resources Allocation
All groups that receive technical assistance and designed business plans can 
participate in an all-day public contest to select one business which will receive 
start-up funding. The selection committee, the Local Committee of Resources 
Allocation (CLAR), is composed of staff from FONCODES, the local municipality 
and community members. 
Business development
Winning groups receive funding to start their business. The average grant 
received by each group between 2015 and 2019 was USD 3216 which covered 
about 65 percent of the cost of the business plan.  Entrepreneurs receive 
technical assistance and training in accountancy and finances, management, 
branding, food safety and other aspects of business-. Technical assistance 
and training are provided during the last year of the intervention. Once training 
is finished and the business is up and running, the programme moves on from 
the community. 
Figure 
5.6
Summary 
of 
components 
and 
processes 
developed 
by 
Haku 
Wiñay/Noa 
Jayatai
SOURCE: 
Authors’ 
own 
elaboration.
Selection of 
villages by 
FONCODES and 
Municipalities
Installation  
of CIC and  
CIC Board
Hiring of 
community 
project 
manager
Participatory 
Diagnostic
YEAR 1 AND 2
YEAR 3
Community 
project 
funding
Technical 
assistance on 
production 
techniques
Technical assistance  
on dwelling organization 
and healthy practices
COMPONENT 1  
Improve agricultural 
systems
COMPONENT 3  
Improve financial 
capacity
COMPONENT 2 
Healthy housing
COMPONENT 4 
Inclusive rural 
business
Hiring of 
Yachachiqs
Training on 
financial 
education
Community 
project 
design
Financial 
education 
program 
design
Call for 
business 
plans
Technical 
assistance on 
business plan 
design
Business 
plans funding
Installation of CLAR 
and selection of 
business plans that 
will be funded
Technical 
assistance  
to rural 
business
120   
HOW TO INVEST IN FARMERS? A GUIDE FOR AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT PROJECTS


	 	
 
L  Method
Yachachiq provide technical assistance, advice and training in Haku Wiñay/
Noa Jayatai through informal meetings, workshops and one-to-one training 
sessions. It is considered a farmer-to-farmer learning by doing method, given 
that Yachachiq meet with farmers and together apply the techniques to be 
learned. They also use written and visual materials to communicate basic 
concepts and key messages, but sessions are mostly hands-on. After the 
group sessions, Yachachiq visit each household during the following days to 
provide technical advice not only on agricultural techniques, but on household 
management and organization. Each Yachachiq works with 35 households on 
average.
	
It is worth noting that investment in human capital in Haku Wiñay/Noa 
Jayatai is provided along with physical capital, such as small agricultural 
infrastructure and dwelling improvements. Yachachiq are crucial to identify 
the specific farm and household needs, not just skills but also physical needs. 
N  Scaling and sustaining
The programme has already covered almost half of the target population, with 
about 35 000 new households each year. Its success relies on the effectiveness 
of CIC and community project managers to develop procurement processes. 
The design of Haku Wiñay/Noa Jayatai gives the programme a significant 
amount of flexibility so as to adapt to each territory. Although Yachachiq need 
to address community needs, there is no fixed study plan, in the sense that 
they can adapt training sessions based on local needs, given their previous 
work with participating farmers. 
	
Regarding sustainability, the intention was to run the programme along 
with Juntos, a cash transfer programme. If they had run together, households 
could have invested their monthly payment from Juntos (USD 30 per month) 
in farm improvements and technology adoption. This did not happen and it is 
rare for households to participate in both programmes. 
O  Keep improving
The programme records all the information on tasks and activities, as well as 
disbursements and budget spending with great detail on participating 
households and their members. Nevertheless, it does not assess farmers’ 
performance after the programme ends. After year three no follow-up 
information is recorded nor provided by community members. External 
agencies have filed assessment and impact evaluation reports, showing 
improvements with respect to the baseline or in comparison to the control 
group vis-a-vis the treatment group for experimental studies. 
	
With respect to planned improvements, the programme is considering 
investing in natural capital, such as reforestation to conserve water or reduce 
hillside erosion. 
   121
A DEEP DIVE INTO TWO AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT CASES


	
	 LESSONS LEARNED
Based on the impact evaluation studies and assessment reports, the 
programme shows positive impacts on farm households’ well-being through 
several mechanisms, with improvements in agricultural human capital the 
major drivers of change. Higher agricultural sales are one of the major impacts 
reported, achieved mainly because of the training and technical assistance of 
Yachachiq. However, interventions in business development do not show 
significant positive impacts. Possible reasons are that community members 
do not welcome the formation of business development groups. Some studies 
have shown that community members forming a group to develop a business 
plan believed erroneously they could split any funding received between them 
with each using their share separately.  This is not allowed. Other studies 
suggest that one year may be too short for business development.
	
While the programme indicates success in the highlands, results in the 
Amazon Region are mixed. It appears the organization of the programme is 
not suitable for the idiosyncrasies and difficulties of the Amazon, such as 
limited access and connectivity, resulting in higher implementation costs. 
Adapting the programme to Amazon conditions requires further analysis. 
	
Community approval of projects is key. From the start of the three-year 
intervention, the community not only makes decisions on how to use resources 
but also decides what will be developed and who benefits. This feature ensures 
there is community empowerment and transparency in the processes adopted. 
122   
HOW TO INVEST IN FARMERS? A GUIDE FOR AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT PROJECTS


©Unsplash/Evgeny Nelmin
©Unsplash/Drew Masmar




Module 6 
Appraising agriculture 
human capital 
investments in the 
context of economic  
and financial analysis 
Sound economic and financial analysis (EFA) during project design, appraisal 
and implementation plays a key role in achieving the desired economic 
outcomes and increasing the likelihood of sustained economic benefits from 
a project.  The main goal of financial analysis (FA) is to examine the financial 
returns to project participants (beneficiaries, project entity, institutions and 
governments) to ensure all actors have enough financial incentive to participate. 
Economic analysis (EA) on the other hand assesses the project’s efficiency in 
terms of its net contribution to national economic and social welfare. The subtle, 
yet important differences between FA and EA are discussed in Box 6.1. Box 6.2 
provides an example of EFA. 
Learning objective 
To be able to understand and use EFA in AHCI related 
programmes and projects.
!
   125


EFAs are typically a requirement of most project investors. They provide the 
grounds for making decisions on investment financing for any project based 
on its financial and economic viability. The FAO Investment Centre and 
international financing institutions have developed several tools to aid in 
developing EFAs (FAO, 2022a). 
	
EFAs are challenging to undertake for “soft” investments such as 
human and social capital programmes and projects.  First, some costs may 
be difficult to identify while second, the benefits may be even more difficult to 
measure. Monetary costs come directly from input or training costs, which are 
very tangible. Other costs can be estimated, for example, time devoted by 
farmers to training. But monetary benefits could come from changes in direct 
income from agricultural sales. Other benefits may be difficult but not 
impossible to estimate.  Attributing certain changes, such as productivity, 
income, and empowerment to the project or programme interventions will be 
challenging.  Nonetheless, there are numerous examples of the use of EFAs 
and impact evaluations with AHCI related projects.  Seminal studies and meta-
analyses of extension, research and innovation investment projects have 
pointed to high rates of return, using  net present value  and internal rates of 
return calculations (McNamara, 2020).  
DIFFERENCES BETWEEN FINANCIAL AND ECONOMIC PARTS OF THE EFA IN 
INVESTMENT PROJECTS
Financial part of the EFA 
A key objective of FA is to determine the viability of the proposed investment  
throughout its entire life, based on a particular analytical timeframe. This is usually  
the first part of the EFA, and thus all concepts and data must be in order and  
consistent. Normally an inflow and outflow profile over a minimum of ten years.  
It aims to understand the distributional impacts of the proposed investment. 
Economic part of the EFA 
The economic analysis focuses on impacts of the proposed investment on the 
economy and society. It aggregates costs and benefits to the national economy to 
determine the level of improved well-being after the investment is made. EA is 
grounded in information developed from financial cash flows, but takes them a step 
further and adds the principles developed in applied welfare economics.  If the gains 
outweigh the costs, the investment is considered economically viable and justifiable.
BOX 6.1 
SOURCE: 
Authors’ 
own 
elaboration.
126   
HOW TO INVEST IN FARMERS? A GUIDE FOR AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT PROJECTS


Rigorous analysis of extension and technology transfer interventions, using 
randomised control trials (RCTs) have provided more robust evidence on the 
impact of a variety of programmes and projects (McNamara, 2020). While 
these are not the classic ex-ante EFAs, they do provide a wealth of information 
on project impacts and lessons learned which can drive future work.
	
Up until now we have discussed EFA generally for any investment 
project. Below we provide an overview of the potential methods for calculating 
EFAs with AHCI projects. There are two cases where the training or extension 
actions are embedded within a package of interventions and one where the 
intervention focuses solely on human capital investments. This section also 
provides links to EFA analyses completed on projects with considerable AHC 
components or activities. It also contains a more detailed presentation of the 
overall approach to EFAs in projects.  
	
	 Potential methods to identify and quantify AHCI costs and benefits
The quantification of benefits and costs associated with investments in human 
capital (e.g. education, training) is a challenging exercise in the economic 
analysis of project appraisals. Quantification of AHC costs and benefits is often 
omitted from direct EFA valuations and discussed in qualitative terms only or 
evaluated in the “package approach” (as in Case 1 below). However, there are 
options to include AHC valuations in project appraisals. These will depend on 
the nature of the project with two potential cases discussed below.
PERU’S AGRICULTURE INNOVATION PROJECT AND AHCI EFA 
Between 2015 and 2021 the Peruvian Government partnered with the World Bank  
and others to implement a National Agriculture Innovation System Support 
Programme valued at USD 129.95 million (World Bank: USD 40 million, Government of 
Peru: USD 56.95 million, beneficiaries: USD 30.75 million). This project is emblematic 
of AHCI. The Ministry of Agricultural Development and Irrigation (MIDAGRI) and its 
agriculture research arm, the National Institute of Agriculture Innovation (INIA), were 
the main implementers. The FAO Investment Centre provided technical assistance  
in project design, supervision and evaluation. An innovative ex-post EFA analysis 
captured the full array of costs and benefits for this project. It also documented the 
challenges of identifying different technology adoption rates with their associated 
streams of benefits and costs.  More details are in Annex A and the cited document. 
BOX 6.2 
SOURCE: 
World 
Bank. 
2021. 
Fuelling 
an 
engine 
of 
sustainable 
growth: 
agricultural 
innovation 
in 
Peru. 
Results 
Briefs. 
www.worldbank.org/en/results/2021/11/04/fue-
ling-an-engine-of-sustainable-growth-agricultural-innovation-in-peru 
 
 
   127
APPRAISING AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENTS 


CASE 1
CALCULATION OF AHCI COSTS AND BENEFITS WHEN THE INTERVENTION  
OR PROJECT IS TREATED AS A “PACKAGE SOLUTION”
WITHOUT PROJECT (WOP), WITH PROJECT (WP) AND INCREMENTAL SCENARIOS
WOP scenario 
This scenario shows the situation before introducing the proposed investment or 
intervention and the situation if the status quo continued. (Generally, a dynamic WOP 
scenario, not a static one, should be modelled as the situation is likely to change even 
without any intervention.) 
WP scenario 
This scenario outlines the predicted situation after introducing the investment or 
intervention. In the ex ante modelling, this scenario needs to be based on well 
supported assumptions about the future situation (e.g. how the status would change 
in future if the intervention was implemented). These assumptions are usually based 
on a combination of sources: interviews with various actors, literature research, 
available data (national and international) and inflation forecasting.
BOX 6.3 
The project or intervention assumed in Case 1 constitutes a package solution 
delivered to direct beneficiaries (farmers) as a set of well-coordinated 
components that may include: support (a loan or grant, for example) to obtain 
improved inputs (seeds, fertilizer, irrigation) plus appropriate farm management, 
storage and marketing training (e.g. when to seed, how to tend to crops, how 
to store, pack, market). With such a package solution the AHC benefits and 
costs are embedded in the overall benefits and costs for these farmers will 
experience.4 The separate AHC valuation in these cases is very hard to 
calculate as it is difficult to directly capture the pure effect of training on the 
income increase for a beneficiary farmer. There are too many confounding 
factors (e.g. better seeds, better fertilizer and other farmer-specific factors) 
that may influence the income increase. Investors, whether government or 
international financial institutions will not pursue a separate analysis of costs 
and benefits. However, the appraisal of an intervention or project is relatively 
straightforward and usually pursued in financial and economic terms. This 
assumes the realization of AHC benefits and costs is accounted for in the net 
project or the gains for the direct beneficiary; that is, what the farmer gained 
from the intervention and the income increase. As described in Box 6.3 and 
Figure 6.1, one can use the WOP, WP and incremental scenario to analyse the 
package. As many development projects bring a package solution, there is 
less need to disentangle these potential benefits. In such cases, the appraisal 
generally takes place in financial and economic terms using a standard form.
4	
See excellent example of the Government of Pakistan in IFAD. 2021. Khyber 	
	
Pakhtunkhwa Rural Economic Trans-formation Project. Project Design Report. Annex 
 
	
12, pp. 53-68. www.ifad.org/en/-/pakistan-2000002333-kp-retp-project-design-	
	
report-november-2021   
128   
HOW TO INVEST IN FARMERS? A GUIDE FOR AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT PROJECTS


CASE 2
CALCULATION OF AHC COSTS AND BENEFITS WHEN INTERVENTION  
OR A PROJECT COMPRISES SOLELY A TRAINING COMPONENT
The project or intervention in Case 2 differs from Case 1 because the 
quantification of the project or intervention’s benefits and costs have to be 
transferred to the sphere of evaluating intangible effects (economic valuation). 
Even though the costs of preparing and implementing such training are usually 
well known, the economic costs may need to be estimated for training recipients 
(e.g. the value of time spent training). The most challenging task will include 
evaluating the economic benefits from the training. To disentangle benefits 
from AHC improvements, one needs to use experimental techniques such as 
RCTs and non-experimental ones such as regression discontinuity, propensity 
and score matching. There may be several designs depending on the context 
and nature of the project but these are usually expensive and time consuming. 
There may be reservations from government officials, beneficiaries, and other 
about using RCTs. As part of an ongoing project, FAO is working with Innovations 
in Poverty Action (IPA) to examine RCTs that aim to isolate the impact of training 
and technology transfer programmes on human capital development. Usually, 
if evaluators do not have enough time to prepare such an analysis (without the 
luxury of running an RCT) they conduct a literature search, referencing past 
research and projects with assumptions on the potential yield increase to 
farmers who receive training and calculating the economic benefits from 
increased income. The analyst usually runs a sensitivity analysis on this 
assumption of yield from training to show several “what if” scenarios (e.g. what 
would the situation be if training increased the yield by 50 percent, 40 percent 
or 30 percent).Another way of doing a training EA is to assess "the added 
benefit of having incremental levels of training". Through reference studies 
one can understand how incomes have increased for farmers who received 
more intensive training, those who received less intensive training or none at 
all and then compare the effect of yield/incomes on the degree of training. For 
more information about sensitivity analysis, please refer to Box 6.5. 
Incremental scenario 
This constitutes the difference between the WP and WOP scenarios (WP-WOP) and 
shows the expected impact of the investment or intervention on individuals or groups 
of individuals. The incremental changes are the most important to examine from the 
investment point of view as they predict the impact of the investment or intervention.
For more details, please refer to Figure 6.1.
SOURCE: 
Authors’ 
own 
elaboration.
   129
APPRAISING AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENTS 


	
	 Overall approach to economic and financial analysis, ex ante investment 		
	
	 appraisals in projects
In their standard forms, investment appraisal methodologies commonly 
known as EFAs use multiple tools to estimate ex ante financial, economic, 
social, and environmental impacts. The widely used methods postulate 
separate analyses to tackle financial, economic, social, and environmental 
studies individually rather than as a part of a bigger and interconnected entity. 
Integrating all these analytical building blocks and their joint consideration in 
investment appraisal is the key to a more thorough analysis. The standard EFA 
should be considered a cost-benefit analysis (CBA) but taken one step further 
to provide an evaluation in the form of an integrated investment appraisal (IIA). 
An IIA typically includes three scenarios: WOP scenario, WP scenario and 
incremental scenario (see Box 6.3 and Figure 6.1 for more detail on these 
scenarios). Additional analytical steps like sensitivity analysis and stakeholder 
and distributional analysis are natural analytical extensions. 
Figure 
6.1
Integrated 
investment 
appraisal 
methodology
SOURCE: 
Authors’ 
own 
elaboration.
Financial analysis
(individual level)
Financial analysis
(individual level)
Financial analysis
(individual level)
Stakeholder and 
distributional 
analysis
Financial analysis
(aggregate level)
Financial analysis
(aggregate level)
Financial analysis
(aggregate level)
Sensitivity
analysis
Economic analysis
(aggregate level)
Economic analysis
(aggregate level)
Economic analysis
(aggregate level)
WOP scenario
WP scenario
Incremental  
scenario:  
WP–WOP
Additional  
IIA steps
Economic analysis
(individual level)
Economic analysis
(individual level)
Economic analysis
(individual level)
130   
HOW TO INVEST IN FARMERS? A GUIDE FOR AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT PROJECTS


	
	 The three scenarios
The  WOP scenario  should show the situation before the intervention or project. 
However, all inflows and outflows in the financial part of the analysis of benefits 
and costs and the economic part should also predict how these variables may 
change over time. The analytical steps look the same in the case of the WP 
scenario (after the intervention or project starts). This requires modelling of 
some level of forward looking expectations about the measurable effects. This 
usually involves various assumptions concerning yield and expected prices. 
This is where field interviews are crucial as are other secondary sources of data 
(e.g. statistical offices, various ministries, websites of international 
organizations, literature, reports, project impact evaluations, and many more). 
The  incremental scenario  is the difference between the WOP and WP scenarios. 
It shows the incremental change after the intervention or project. Depending 
on the type of analysis (financial and economic or economic only), the 
incremental scenario will show financial and economic or economic results 
only.
Further analyses	
 
Beyond these basic analyses, sensitivity and stakeholder distributional 
analyses are possible. Sensitivity analysis should move certain influential 
variables and recalculate all net present values (NPVs), internal rates of return 
(IRRs) and all the profitability measures using new levels of these variables. At 
the minimum analysts examine varying increases in costs and decreases in 
benefits and conduct sensitivity analysis around these changes but it is 
possible to use much more nuanced considerations to conduct the analysis. 
Distributional analysis can show which stakeholders will benefit from the 
project and by how much, recalling that the standard group of stakeholders 
are project beneficiaries, the government, and the entire economy. Stakeholder 
distributional analysis can take place if there is a financial and economic part 
to the analysis. Further descriptions on distributional analysis can be found at 
the Investment Centre, Investment Learning Platform (FAO, 2022a).
Defining direct beneficiaries and attribution of costs and benefits 
One of the critical elements of any investment appraisal is defining the direct 
beneficiaries of the project or intervention whose perspective forms the basis 
of the analysis. The definition of direct beneficiaries is key as analysis from a 
farmer’s perspective will be different to that of a commercial bank that provides 
a loan to the farmer. Attribution, being able to say with certainty a project 
intervention led to greater production, productivity, empowerment and other 
desired outcomes, is very challenging.  The WP and WOP scenarios can attempt 
to analyse this, using arguments from the theory of change but these cannot 
account for costs and benefits in all cases.
The rationale for pursuing a financial and economic analysis
A financial analysis is necessary and justified when the proposed intervention 
or project will yield financial inflows (or revenues) to direct beneficiaries. A very 
common example is a project where a farmer receives a loan with a subsidized 
interest rate to improve farming (e.g. via increased production efficiency). Such 
a loan is likely to increase the farmer’s income in years to come. It is possible 
to estimate cash flows because there is an expectation about actual financial 
   131
APPRAISING AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENTS 


inflows and outflows. The natural extension of such an analysis would be to 
convert all financial prices (financial cash flows) into economic ones using 
conversion factors (CFs) and to construct economic resource flows. The 
appraisal could include both financial and economic parts in such a case.
The rationale for an exclusively economic analysis
There are projects where beneficiaries will not observe a tangible income 
increase as they will not observe direct financial inflows from the project. An 
example of such a development project is providing Wi-Fi to a community. In 
this case, farmers will gain some economic benefits, but no financial inflows 
(revenues) are recorded, even though the financial costs are likely to be known. 
Consequently, the analysis needs to economic terms in such a case. Therefore, 
estimation of financial cash flows is not possible. The rationale for the financial 
analysis is that beneficiaries observe financial inflows and outflows so the 
tangibility of these flows is essential. The financial part of the analysis should 
adhere to at least some basic accounting principles, where all entries are 
included in a common denominator. For the economic analysis, tangibility is 
not necessary as costs and benefits can be present without observing actual 
cash flows. While the valuation of financial inflows and outflows is relatively 
simple, being based on observed market prices, the valuation of economic 
benefits and costs frequently uses indirect methods, some of which may be 
intensive and time-consuming.
Quantify intangible benefits and costs
Intangible benefits are those attributed to the project or intervention, but 
cannot be measured in direct financial terms. They bring an additional level of 
complexity to investment appraisals. The first issue relates to a proper definition. 
This definition and determining applicable intangible costs and benefits are 
likely to be specific to each project or intervention. The second issue concerns 
how to value them accurately. While field interviews, similar projects and peer-
reviewed literature can offer an assessment of the potential spectrum of costs 
and benefits, their valuation can be a significant obstacle as methods applied 
elsewhere may not be suitable. Box 6.4 contains further details on possible 
steps to evaluate intangible benefits.
 
132   
HOW TO INVEST IN FARMERS? A GUIDE FOR AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT PROJECTS


STEPS IN VALUING INTANGIBLE BENEFITS AND COSTS
Define applicable costs and benefits. All potential intangible costs and benefits that 
accrue to beneficiaries from the AHCI intervention need to be defined. The definitions 
usually come from field interviews, past literature, similar projects pursued elsewhere, 
and other secondary resources. For AHCI projects, potential costs may include the 
farmer’s time spent attending training. The value of this time subtracted from regular 
daily tasks does not have an immediate price, but it is possible to estimate it using  
the indirect valuation method (see Step 2). An intangible AHCI benefit might be better 
organization of the project’s community of farmers after training when they may be 
more willing to cooperate. Cooperation, in turn, can bring more cohesion to a commu-
nity and decrease the number of disputes. There is a method to value time savings 
from reducing the number of such conflicts.
Decide which costs and benefits can be quantified. Among the potential costs  
and benefits in Step 1, there will be some that can be quantified using indirect 
methods and some that cannot because there are no methods to value them. In the 
EFA, only quantifiable costs and benefits are included in economic resource flows.  
All other potential costs and benefits are usually discussed only in qualitative terms 
(in qualitative analysis, as per Step 4 below). Depending on the type of costs and 
benefits, there may be different ways to quantify them, the most popular is to use  
the concept of opportunity cost.
1.	 Value time (gains or losses) using the opportunity cost of 	
	
labour measured as the average daily wage in the area.
2.	 Use cost savings arising from switching from the standard 	
	
technology/management in the WOP scenario and them as 	
	
benefits in the WP scenario. 
3.	Value forgone wages as the economic costs of implementing 	
	
automation or digital solutions that diminish labour demand.
4.	 Some other methods may include more time consuming and 	
	
elaborate methods.
5.	 Use future potential income gains due to educational  
	
attainment as benefits of the education or training. 
6.	Employ contingent valuation methods and surveys of farmers 	
	
who received training.
Choosing a suitable valuation method depends on multiple factors like data 
availability, the time for the analysis and funding. For ex ante EFAs, time is usually a 
limiting factor and valuations usually occur without any surveys or an actual valuation 
of future potential income gains due to training. Quantifying these benefits and costs 
usually follows methods 1–3, described above and the effects observed elsewhere 
(past projects, literature review).
STEP 1
STEP 2
BOX 6.4 
   133
APPRAISING AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENTS 


Choosing proper discount rates
A discount rate is the opportunity cost of funds invested in a project. It is a 
critical variable in applying investment criteria to select an investment. 
Choosing the right discount rate is essential as even a slight variation can 
profoundly affect the net incremental results (Box 6.5).
Include quantified costs and benefits in economic resource flows. All derived 
potential costs and benefits valued using methods in Step 2 are included  
in the resource flows as economic costs or benefits, respectively. The standard 
measures of investment sustainability (economic NPV, economic IRR) are then 
calculated as in the case of costs and benefits priced directly.
Qualitative discussion of costs and benefits that could not be valued. All costs and 
benefits that cannot be quantified are normally excluded from the economic resource 
flows as there are no numerical values assigned to them. However, the expected size 
of these costs and benefits is normally discussed in a qualitative analysis.
STEP 3
STEP 4
SOURCE: 
Authors’ 
own 
elaboration. 
FINANCIAL AND ECONOMIC DISCOUNT RATE
Financial discount rate 
In the context of the financial part of the EFA, the proper discount rate is the one  
that applies to equity holders. The relevant cost of funds is the return on equity earned 
from its alternative use. 
Economic discount rate 
In the economic part of the analysis, the economic discount rate is the economic 
opportunity cost of capital (EOCK). Estimating this is an uneasy task as it needs to 
start with the capital market as the marginal source of funds. In practice most 
governments set the social discount rate used in the calculation of cost benefit 
analysis. For example, the Office of Management and Budget of the Government of 
the United States of America has set it at 7 percent (OMB, 1992), while in Peru's  
case it is 8 percent for projects with 20 years or less impact and analysis (MEF, 2019). 
Although the most recent EOCK is not known, a sensitivity analysis on the latest 
known value assumes different levels to see how profitability and economic 
sustainability change under different EOCK values. 
BOX 6.5 
SOURCE: 
Authors’ 
own 
elaboration.
134   
HOW TO INVEST IN FARMERS? A GUIDE FOR AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT PROJECTS


Deciding on an analytical timeframe
Investment decisions are fundamentally different from consumption decisions 
as a unit of money spent or received today is worth more than one sometime 
later. For EFA modelling, the typical analytical timeframe is a minimum of ten 
years. A shorter time is not advisable as it is hard to show the entire stream of 
investment benefits. However, the analysis can be extended over a number of 
years, 15 or 20, if need arises and a rationale exists to pursue this analysis 
 
for longer.
Dealing with uncertainty and risk
Financial cash flows and the economic resource flows of each EFA model can 
include only one entry per year for each inflow or outflow. But this is not realistic, 
given that uncertainty in the price of inputs and outputs, inflation and exchange 
rates etc., is the norm. It is important to address these uncertainty issues 
around the proposed investment as the results and recommendations should 
not be based on deterministic values. Sensitivity analysis tools are there to 
help tackle this problem (Box 6.6). 
SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS
Steps in conducting a risk analysis 
While it is not possible to predict upfront the exact variables that need to be sensitized, 
it is possible to outline the task. The following steps will help assess the risk level for 
an investment or intervention.
Identifying risk variables through sensitivity analysis 
This step evaluates how sensitive are the project outcomes (e.g. FNPV, ENPV) to 
changes in the value of one parameter (also known as “what if” analysis). This process 
is repeated for each variable expected to impact on the outcomes of the investment. 
The sensitized variables must constitute a large share of cash receipts or 
disbursements, and their impact on the investment must be significant within the 
range of probable values.
Scenario analysis 
This involves analysing changes in two or more variables and the combined effect of 
these changes, investigating how sensitive are the project’s outcomes (e.g. FNPV, 
ENPV) to changes in the value of these variables.
Monte Carlo analysis 
This is a natural extension of sensitivity and scenario analysis. Monte Carlo simulation 
creates multiple versions of the future based on what may happen by studying and 
defining the expected variability in the input parameters of the EFA modelling.
BOX 6.6 
SOURCE: 
Authors’ 
own 
elaboration.
 
STEP 1
STEP 2
 
STEP 3
   135
APPRAISING AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENTS 


As noted by McNamara (2020) it important to include full intervention costs 
such as project management, training of trainer costs, institutional 
implementer costs (i.e. ministries and/or NGOs) and direct farmer and 
opportunity costs, to fully capture the costs of interventions.  Often it will be 
necessary to use estimations, proxies and information from prior analyses to 
prepare estimates of financial and economic benefits.  
	
AHCI related appraisals are challenging and the results are 
approximations (unless using experimental or quasi-experimental methods), 
even when essential for programme and project preparation. Such results will 
be context specific, probably inaccurate on the benefits side and somewhat 
true only under stated assumptions. These assumptions need to be strong 
and rather inflexible. But even when there is an RCT involved, the results are 
likely to be region and training specific. This complicates things when striving 
for a template-like approach. See Box 6.7 for further considerations when 
conducting EFAs with AHCI projects.
ADDITIONAL USEFUL EFA MODELLING REMARKS
The WOP scenario and its challenges 
The challenge with the WOP scenario is that analysts often do not create it at all or 
when they do, set up unrealistic WOPs (showing negative returns) that compound 
benefits due to the mathematical construction of the incremental scenario (WP-WOP). 
If WOP = -200 and WP = 100, the result of 100-(-200) = 300 is an incremental gain, 
hence an incremental benefit. The illogic of such a setup is clear. If an analyst cannot 
establish a WOP scenario due to lack of data, it is advisable to appraise only the WP 
scenario and treat it as an incremental scenario to avoid this problem.
Financial versus economic prices 
Financial prices of inputs and outputs come from the meeting of supply and demand 
in any given market. They normally include various taxes (including trade taxes), 
subsidies, market power and other distortions and are used in the financial part of  
the analysis (financial cash flows). The economic prices of inputs and outputs, in turn, 
should exclude all taxes, subsidies, market power and other distortions and should 
constitute so called “shadow prices”. It is possible to calculate these through CFs  
that adjust financial prices to economic ones by excluding market distortions in 
financial prices. It is important not to mix financial and economic prices nor combine 
them in one flow of cash or resources. Special diligence is advised.
Greenhouse gases and other quantified environmental effects 
Whenever possible the economic part of the analysis should include a valuation  
of environmental impacts. If the volume of carbon emissions is known, it should  
be priced using proper shadow pricing and included in the resource flows of the 
economic part of the EFA.
BOX 6.7 
SOURCE: 
Authors’ 
own 
elaboration.
136   
HOW TO INVEST IN FARMERS? A GUIDE FOR AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT PROJECTS


Cost effectiveness analysis
Another option to assess AHCI benefits is cost effectiveness analysis (CEA). 
This can be used instead of a standard EFA (or CBA) if quantifying benefits is 
impossible. However, these methods should apply to all the project’s 
components, not only the AHCI part of estimations.
 	
This method analyses investment possibilities after setting the 
project's goals (e.g. competency scores, accreditation standards, learning 
costs, standardized test scores.) It is used when benefits from expenditure 
are hard to measure but the costs are obvious. It helps to choose the least 
expensive option among a group of alternatives that produce the same result 
(a set of predetermined objectives). For AHCI cost effectiveness it can assess 
the mode of dissemination and location after the project's goal, such as 
learning outcomes, to determine the best investment alternative (e.g. digital 
classrooms or farmer field schools.). It is a less data demanding technique 
and indicates the least costly way to achieve an objective within a specified 
level of costs. 
	
The process entails first listing and quantifying the costs of the 
different options in monetary terms before contrasting them with those 
incurred in the base scenario or with threshold costs. The results are then 
compared to determine the least expensive intervention after total costs are 
discounted at year 1. In other words, valuation by cost effectiveness compares, 
on a present worth basis, all alternatives that can achieve the same benefit 
(Gittinger, 1985) and selects the least costly.
	
Both CEA and CBA can be used on the same project and are compatible. 
After a CBA has determined a particular public investment is warranted, CEA 
looks at project design possibilities to deliver anticipated outcomes at the 
lowest cost. However, any cost savings through CEA from selection of an 
efficient option can be used as benefits while conducting the CBA. 
Example of cost effectiveness analysis
A programme manager plans to introduce new training in ag-tech for  
25 young agripreneurs, approved by the Skills Council with a budget of  
USD 1000 per trainee. The manager has two options for conducting the 
training: (a) computer-based training followed by a three-day practical 
workshop; and (b) an intensive, two-week workshop followed by two on-site 
training sessions. Table 6.1 presents all the costs associated with each type 
of training. A graduate who scores 80 percent on the evaluation meets the 
standards set by the Skills Council.
   137
APPRAISING AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENTS 


Table 6.1	
 
Comparative costs for two distinct approaches to training
Total cost of conducting the training
Computer-based training 
and three-day workshop
Intensive two-week 
workshop and two on-site 
training sessions
Cost of training
USD 12 025
USD 20 000
Cost of follow up support
USD 8000
USD   2000
Total cost of transfer of learning
USD 20 025
USD 22 000
Trainees
25
25
Cost per trainee
USD 801
USD 880
Trainees who meet the Skills Council standards
15
22
Cost per trainee who meets the performance standard
USD 1335
USD 1000
SOURCE: 
Authors’ 
own 
elaboration. 
 
In spite of post-training support, only 15 graduates of the computer-based 
training met the required standard, whereas 22 graduates of the intensive 
training did so. A simple cost analysis shows the computer-based training 
followed by a three-day practical workshop is the more efficient method 
regarding total costs as well as the cost per training programme. But after 
taking account of the training programme objectives, the cost per 
successfully trained and accredited graduate of the computer-based training 
is USD 1335 versus USD 1000 for the intensive training. 
	
The key to this result is collecting cost data on all the activities in the 
training and measuring effectiveness in terms of accredited candidates. 
Measuring success simply by the number of trainees means the lower cost 
per trainee may displace competence as the basis for selecting a training 
option.
138   
HOW TO INVEST IN FARMERS? A GUIDE FOR AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT PROJECTS


©Pexels/sippakorn-yamkasikorn
©Pexels/Thor Garlan




Module 7 
Key messages and 
recommendations on 
investing in AHCI
This toolkit and the other studies in this AHCI series provide a rich base for key 
messages on improving the quality and impact of AHCI. We present seven key 
messages from the global synthesis report as recommendations. Box 7.1 
details areas for further evidence building as new projects or programmes 
come on stream. 
   141


Partnership and 
collaboration are 
crucial for 
greater impact
Provide 
incentives for 
learning
The delivery 
method matters
Understand 
impacts  
of investing  
in farmers
Invest more  
in agriculture 
human capital 
Ensure no one  
is left behind
Partnering 
can 
ensure 
holistic 
integration, 
provide 
incentives 
 
for 
learners, 
help 
sustain 
efforts 
through 
multiple 
funding 
channels, 
and 
help 
to 
scale 
up. 
Policies 
 
can 
make 
agriculture 
human 
capital 
investment 
more 
conducive, 
thus 
collaboration 
is 
needed 
to 
ensure 
the 
right 
policy 
environment.
Motivation 
and 
incentives 
are 
key 
 
to 
effective 
participation 
 
in 
agriculture 
human 
capital 
development 
programmes. 
Appropriate 
delivery 
methods 
need 
to 
consider 
the 
audience 
and 
adapt 
 
to 
their 
needs. 
Skills 
 
must 
be 
reinforced. 
Digital 
approaches 
are 
good, 
but 
must 
be 
approached 
with 
care. 
More 
research 
is 
needed 
on 
agriculture 
human 
capital 
development, 
 
and 
evaluations 
should 
 
go 
beyond 
economic 
measures 
and 
include 
social, 
human 
and 
environmental 
impacts.
Due 
to 
disruptors 
and 
opportunities, 
the 
time 
 
to 
invest 
in 
agriculture 
human 
capital 
investment, 
compared 
to 
other 
sectors 
 
in 
agriculture 
is 
ripe 
and 
needs 
greater 
investment.
Programme 
design 
 
should 
understand 
cultural, 
societal, 
 
and 
economic 
limitations 
to 
participation 
by 
marginalised 
groups. 
Youth 
should 
be 
targeted 
at 
an 
early 
age.
1
4
2
5
3
6
Figure 
7.1
Key 
recommendations 
for 
investing 
in 
farmers 
 
SOURCE: 
Davis 
et 
al. 
2021. 
Investing 
in 
Farmers: 
Agriculture 
Human 
Capital 
Investment 
Strategies. 
Rome, 
FAO 
and 
IFPRI. 
https://doi.org/10.4060/cb7134en
142   
HOW TO INVEST IN FARMERS? A GUIDE FOR AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT PROJECTS


1
2
Promote agriculture human capital and invest more in it.  
This may seem obvious coming from this toolkit, but it is important to 
advocate for including human capital in programme and project designs 
because we have seen that these activities may be hidden or not explicitly 
included when in fact AHCI can be the key to their success. We have seen this 
may refer to an entire programme/project, sub-components or just key 
activities within an initiative but it is important to advocate for using the 
elements from this toolkit to design the intervention.  It is also important to 
identify the benefits and costs of the intervention, within the scope of larger 
initiatives.  Use the evidence of the impacts to justify the intervention (see 
Module 4). 
Critical point. Agriculture human capital investment leads to outcomes and 
impacts in the medium and long term and has many positive societal 
spillovers, such as increased citizen participation, empowerment and rural 
incomes, literacy improvements, food security and better health. While the 
effects of human capital investments may be difficult to measure with return 
frameworks that are hard to predict, it is critical to invest in such capital 
because the results are long-term and wide-reaching. Unlike other types of 
capital, it is not easy to erode or destroy human capital. This is particularly 
relevant today with frequent human displacement and population movements 
as human capital is both personal and portable. It is thus important to 
incorporate AHCI in most types of agriculture and rural development 
investment projects (e.g. value chains, market access and climate mitigation 
and adaptation).
Partnership and collaboration are essential. 
The complex, holistic nature of AHCI programmes means partnerships and 
multi-stakeholder platforms are necessary to advance human capital 
initiatives. They are essential to public and private partnerships with rural 
entrepreneurs (like community workers in India), value chain actors and 
producer groups (IFAD, 2022b. Include explicit linkages and  key performance 
indicators (numerical evidence of progress towards the desired result 
alongside more direct farm productivity/resilience actions. 
Critical point. Partnering can ensure holistic integration, provide incentives 
for learners, help sustain efforts through multiple funding channels and 
scaling up. Collaborative policies can make AHCI more conducive because of 
the numbers of actors potentially involved, each of whom can contribute 
technical and financial resources. Digital service providers, producer 
organizations and private sector players each have their own assets and 
approaches that can help to make a programme stronger and richer. However, 
to achieve sustainable partnership beyond the programme, it is important to 
reflect on the motivations and incentives for each member, considering the 
value propositions of the extension/human capital development (IFAD, 2016).
   143
KEY MESSAGES AND RECOMMENDATIONS ON INVESTING IN AHCI


Delivery methods matter.   
Appropriate human capital development methods need to be client driven 
and adapt to the needs of the clientele.  Each method also has an enabling 
environment, policies, operational considerations, costs, benefits, inclusion, 
and sustainability considerations. Module 4 contains 16 potential methods 
and tools with their advantages, range of costs, target audiences, and the 
toolkit provides a rich set of background resources to draw from, including 
concrete cases. Different methods are often complementary and reinforcing, 
as when using digital media such as videos and radio with farmer field schools 
or other face-to-face extension approaches.  
Critical point. Implementation (especially as initiatives are scaled up) should 
not be static but adapted to the needs of participants. It helps to standardise 
the core principles but adapt the methodology, much like the farmer field 
school approach. A customised approach may be more difficult and costly, 
but it is important to facilitate human capital development according to the 
clientele. Minimally, programmes need to develop adequate stakeholder 
engagement and feedback from beneficiaries and adapt accordingly. Several 
cases from the global synthesis mentioned the importance of practical 
learning. Experiential learning and alternating from theory to practice and 
relating experience back to theory can help to reinforce learned skills, as can  
the power of social interactions and a community of practice. Initiatives from 
Kenya, Rwanda, and Peru used group approaches and/or community leaders 
to reinforce learning objectives. The use of digital tools to deliver agriculture 
human capital development should be thoughtfully explored. Digital techno-
logies bring many benefits, such as the ability to reach wider audiences at 
lower costs (Sylvester et al., 2021). They also have caveats: many people do 
not have access to or cannot afford digital tools. However, the COVID-19 crisis 
has induced digital innovation. It will be beneficial for the building blocks 
(policies, legislation, public/private incentives, infrastructure, training prog-
rammes and others) and access to digital technologies for future human 
capital investment. 
Leave no one behind. 
The case studies and other evidence in this toolkit showed AHCI that 
successfully targeted groups of farmers whose inclusion in development 
projects or programmes is not always a given and these are key to 
strengthening AHC. While selecting a typically marginalised target group is 
one thing, designing and implementing a model of human capital 
development that actually facilitates these groups’ inclusion is another. 
Culturally relevant training/educational methods should be used. FAO and 
the African Union Commission offer sound guidance on how to involve 
members of marginalized groups, such as youth and women, in the design, 
implementation and evaluation of programmes (FAO and AUC, 2022).
3
4
144   
HOW TO INVEST IN FARMERS? A GUIDE FOR AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT PROJECTS


Critical point. When investing in or designing an AHCI model, it is crucial to 
first understand the cultural, societal, and economic limits to the participation 
of youth, Indigenous Peoples, remote, poor, or female producers. The 
methods, timing and location of the interventions can limit participation. 
Understanding how to develop skills and also build confidence among 
learners is a key feature of a model targeting farmers with unrecognised 
potential. Other limitations may be logistical or financial – a model that 
succeeds in overcoming all these limitations will be truly inclusive. Human 
capital development is a long-term investment and this is one reason it is 
valuable to invest in young people, offering them learning opportunities to 
acquire hands-on experience they otherwise may lack. Integrating vocational 
training, apprenticeships or work-study mixed training in an AHCI model may 
be valuable. A variety of entry points and approaches may be necessary to 
reach all the intended participants.  This implies using multiple methods and 
approaches.
Provide incentives for learning.   
For AHCI to be successful in building farmers’ capital as well as sustaining its 
impact, motivating learners and incentives for participation in learning is key. 
This can be seen in the AHCI series case study on Chile with access to stable 
markets and specialised technical support and India’s market access and 
insurance services.
Critical point. One way to ensure motivation is to promote ownership of 
learning by incorporating participation and decision-making into the model. 
A key lesson from the AHCI series is the need for farmers to design their own 
development plans or choose the crops they want to produce, thereafter 
providing the tools and skills for this. . Feedback is another important aspect 
of learner participation. It is essential this type of participatory approach 
remains relevant to be able to empower local communities and adapt to 
disruptive changes. Actions must be based on a vision and values shared by 
all the actors. Ensuring participation while communicating incentives for 
learning is also fundamental to motivation. As we learned from the ACHI 
series case studies, farmers who clearly understood the opportunities their 
new skills can offer enjoyed high levels of self-determination and endurance 
when taking on the challenges of learning something new or a change of 
mindset. 
	
When implementing human capital development models, make sure 
that: a) there is an incentive for learning rooted in the needs and aspirations 
of farmers; b) incentives are clearly communicated and explored with farmers; 
and c) such incentives are attainable. If they remain out of reach despite 
building human capital, chances are farmers will see no reason to learn the 
new practices. Many models integrate market access as a successful learning 
incentive. But while economic incentives (increased sales, yields, or incomes) 
are crucial, especially for poor households, there are many other valid 
reasons for learning. Greater self-confidence, recognition in the community, 
a better division of labour within families, or the preservation of cultural 
traditions are all incentives that relate broadly to well-being, identities, and 
livelihoods, all of which can be realised when developing human capital (Friis-
Hansen and Duveskog, 2012).
5
   145
KEY MESSAGES AND RECOMMENDATIONS ON INVESTING IN AHCI


Use the evidence on AHCI in programme and project design  
As noted in the EFA section, government officials, international financial 
institutions and others seek evidence of programme and project worthiness 
before investing in them.  This is more so the case with AHC.  This means 
using existing and new evidence on the variety of AHC investment options.  
Further, it means answering new questions on potential programmes and 
project interventions.  
	
Quality ME and continuous feedback allow for improvement and 
updating to optimise the implementation mechanism. One example from the 
global AHCI synthesis, used an app-based monitoring system.  Local 
implementers or trainers can also provide important feedback on how the 
training is received and what else may be needed. International knowledge 
exchange allows the most relevant and current knowledge to inform 
experiences in the field.
Critical point. Impact evaluations can be costly especially if using RCTs. They 
imply the availability of robust baseline information with or without project 
information. This may not be realistic in all cases.  Decision-makers may rely 
on existing studies or earlier project designs to make their case. The EFA 
section provides a good range of existing materials and examines the use of 
RCTs. 
	
There are a number of areas which need more information regarding 
AHCI (Box 12). While this is not the task of the project or programme designer 
it is useful to know some of the research gaps where such information is 
needed. It is important to encourage the use of ME tools to at least record 
farmers’ participation, learning and key results (knowledge, attitudes and 
practice indicators) as part of a logical framework. This can be done more 
easily thanks to ICT simple data collection tools used by community workers 
and group leaders.
6
146   
HOW TO INVEST IN FARMERS? A GUIDE FOR AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT PROJECTS


THE NEED FOR MORE AGRICULTURE HUMAN CAPITAL RESEARCH 
New project designs are an excellent opportunity to seek answers to questions  
and provide further evidence on outcomes from human capital investment. We 
include here a number of areas where further evidence would be very useful in AHCI. 
•	 What is the interaction between different types of human capital generated?  
	 Is there an ideal mix between human and social capital?
•	 What are the economic trade-offs to consider when designing human capital 	
	
	 investment projects? 
•	 Which investment options are high impact? 
•	 What is the best way to capture AHCI costs and benefits when actions are subsumed 	
	 into other larger project components?
•	 What are the long-term impacts of investing in farmers, for individuals but also 	
	
	 society, some 10–20 years after the investment? 
•	 Are there particular human capital investment needs to support climate  
	 smart agriculture?
•	 Which sectors are investing in AHCI? 
•	 How much do national and subnational governments finance agricultural human 	
	
capital investment and how do those amounts compare to donor financing? 
•	 Does donor funding for agriculture human capital development mobilise country 	
	
funding or crowd it out? 
•	 What are the private sector and civil society (e.g. farmers’ organizations)  
	
contributing to AHCI? 
•	 With regards to younger people, do agricultural human capital programmes lead  
	 to 	more of them staying in rural or peri-urban regions instead of migrating to urban 	
	 areas? 
•	 Does agriculture human capital invested in women lead to enhanced outcomes  
	 and impacts? 
•	 What are the best ways to build human capital in fragile or marginalised contexts 	 	
	 such as Indigenous Peoples, pastoralist or nomadic husbandry groups, 	
	
	
	 displaced people and in post crisis situations? 
•	 Is there a role or interrelation between human capital and conflict mitigation or 	
	
	 peacebuilding? 
•	 Which unique skills and attributes are needed among human capital development 	 	
	 actors to accelerate success? 
BOX 7.1 
SOURCE: 
Authors’ 
own 
elaboration.
   147
KEY MESSAGES AND RECOMMENDATIONS ON INVESTING IN AHCI




©Pexels/Ishay Botbol
©CIFOR/Axel Fassio




References 
Alemayehu, N. 2013. Farmer training centres and the IPMS programme in 
Ethiopia; Improving the productivity and market success of Ethiopian 
farmers’ programme. Canadian International Development Agency. 
IPMS, Addis Ababa. https://cgspace.cgiar.org/bitstream/
handle/10568/33314/FTC_Nigatu.pdf?sequence=1
Amanah, S. Suprehatin, S., Iskandar, E., Eugenia, L. & and Mutiara, R. 2021. 
Investing in farmers through public-private-producer partnerships: 
Rural empowerment and agricultural development scaling-up initiative 
in Indonesia. Rome, FAO and IFPRI. https://doi.org/10.4060/cb7126en
Atteridge, A., Savvidou, G. & Meintrup, L. 2019. Aid Atlas. Stockholm 
Environment Institute (SEI). https://aid-atlas.org/about/
sectors#agricultural-water-resources
Atuya, C. 2017. Trade fairs for better agricultural practices. CTA Wageningen, 
Netherlands. https://cgspace.cgiar.org/bitstream/handle/10568/ 
96627/Exp_Cap1_Atuya_en.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y
Bentley, J., Chowdhury, A. & David, S. 2018. Videos for agricultural extension. 
In: Davis, K., Bohn, A., Franzel, S., Blum, M., Rieckmann, U., Raj, S., 
Hussein, K. and Ernst, N. (eds). What works in rural advisory services? 
Global good practice notes. Lausanne, Switzerland: GFRAS. www.g-
fras.org/en/gfras/1040-what-works-in-rural-advisory-services.html
Bernard, T., Makhija, S., Orkin, K., Tafesse, A.S. & Spielman, D.J. 2016. 
Assessing the impact of digital green’s video-based extension 
approach to promoting technology adoption among smallholder 
farmers in Ethiopia: A feasibility study. Addis Ababa / Washington, DC / 
Oxford: International Food Policy Research Institute. www.digitalgreen.
org/wp-content/uploads/2017/06/Study-by-IFPRI-on-Video-based-
ag-extension-in-Ethiopia.pdf
Bicksler, A.J., Bates, R., Burnette, R. & Thansrithong, B. 2014. The current and 
future roles of small farm resource centers in extension and advisory 
services. Synthesis report from seven case studies in Southeast Asia. 
MEAS. http://dev.meas.illinois.edu/wp-content/uploads/2015/08/
MEAS-CS-SFRC-0-Synthesisand-Lessons- Learned-November-2014.
pdf
Bruns, B. 2002. Exchange visits as a learning and networking tool. 
Environment and Development Affinity Group, New York, Ford 
Foundation. https://dlc.dlib.indiana.edu/dlc/bitstream/
handle/10535/4479/Bruns-Exchange_Visits.pdf
   151


Clarkson, G., Garforth, C., Dorward, P., Mose, G., Barahona, C., Areal, F. & 
Dove, M. 2018. Can the TV makeover format of edutainment lead to 
widespread changes in farmer behaviour and influence innovation 
systems? Shamba Shape Up in Kenya. Land Use Policy, 76. ISSN 
02648377. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.landusepol.2018.05.011.
Coggins, S., McCampbell, M., Sharma, A., Sharma, R., Haefele, S.M., Karki, 
Hetherington, J., Smith, J. & Brown, B. 2022. How have smallholder 
farmers used digital extension tools? Developer and user voices from 
Sub-Saharan Africa, South Asia, and Southeast Asia. Global Food 
Security 32. www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S2211912421000857 
CRS (Catholic Relief Services). 2017. Agricultural fair and voucher manual. 
Baltimore, Catholic Relief Services. https://www.crs.org/our-work-
overseas/research-publications/agricultural-fair-and-voucher-
manual-1
David, C. 2020. Community, crowdsourcing and commerce: WhatsApp 
groups for agriculture in Kenya. School of International Development 
and Global Studies. Ottawa, University of Ottawa. https://ruor.uottawa.
ca/handle/10393/41530
David, S. & Cofini, F. 2017. A decision guide for rural advisory methods. 
Research and Extension Unit. Rome, FAO. 
Davis, K., Bohn, A., Franzel, S., Blum, M., Rieckmann, U., Raj, S., Hussein, K. & 
Ernst, N. 2018. What works in rural advisory services? Global Good 
Practice Notes. Lausanne, Switzerland: Global Forum for Rural 
Advisory Services. https://www.g-fras.org/en/gfras/1040-what-works-
in-rural-advisory-services.html
Davis, K., Gammelgaard, J., Preissing, J., Gilbert, R. & Ngwenya, H. 2021. 
Investing in farmers: Agriculture human capital investment strategies. 
Rome, FAO and IFPRI. https://doi.org/10.4060/cb7134en 
Davis, K., Nkonya, E., Kato, E., Mekonnen, D.A., Odendo, M., Miiro, R. & 
Nkuba, J. 2012. Impact of farmer field schools on agricultural 
productivity and poverty in East. Africa. World Development 40(2): 
402-413. doi: 10.1016/j.worlddev.2011.05.019 
Degrande, A., Tchoundjeu, Z., Kwidja, R. & Foupe, G.F. 2018. Rural resource 
centers. In: Davis, K., Bohn, A., Franzel, S., Blum, M., Rieckmann, U., Raj, 
S., Hussein, K. & Ernst, N. What works in rural advisory services? Global 
Good Practice Notes. Lausanne, Switzerland: Global Forum for Rural 
Advisory Services. www.g-fras.org/en/gfras/1040-what-works-in-rural-
advisory-services.html
DFID (Department for International Development). 1999. Sustainable 
livelihoods guidance sheets. London, DFID. 
152   
HOW TO INVEST IN FARMERS? A GUIDE FOR AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT PROJECTS


Dhamankar, M. & Wangtschowski, M. 2018. Farmer field schools. In: Davis, K., 
Bohn, A., Franzel, S., Blum, M., Rieckmann, U., Raj, S., Hussein, K. & 
Ernst, N. 2018. What works in rural advisory services? Global Good 
Practice Notes. Lausanne, Switzerland: Global Forum for Rural 
Advisory Services. https://www.g-fras.org/en/gfras/1040-what-works-
in-rural-advisory-services.html
Diez, A. & Correa, N. 2016. Informe de evaluación: Desarrollo productivo y 
pobreza rural. Implementación y efectos del programa Haku Wiñay. 
http://evidencia.midis.gob.pe/wp-content/uploads/2018/05/Informe_
Final_6-2.pdf  
Escobal, J. & Ponce, C. 2016. Combinando protección social con generación 
de oportunidades económicas: Una evaluación de los avances del 
programa Haku Wiñay. Lima, Perú: GRADE Grupo de Análisis para el 
Desarrollo. 
Farm Radio International. 2014. Farmer radio in sub-Saharan Africa: A 
snapshot. Final Report of the African Rural Radio Program Analysis 
Project. Ottawa, Farm Radio International. www.farmradio.org/wp-
content/uploads/Farm-Radio-International-ARRPA-Report-April-2014.
pdf 
Faure, G., Pautrizel, L., de Romemont, A., Toilier, A. Odru, O. & Havard, M. 
2018. Management advice for family farms to strengthen 
entrepreneurial skills. In: Davis, K., Bohn, A., Franzel, S., Blum, M., 
Rieckmann, U., Raj, S., Hussein, K. & Ernst, N. 2018. What works in rural 
advisory services? Global Good Practice Notes. Lausanne, Switzerland: 
Global Forum for Rural Advisory Services. www.g-fras.org/en/
gfras/1040-what-works-in-rural-advisory-services.html
Faure, G., Toillier, A. & Moumouni, I. 2018.  How to scale Management Advice 
for Family Farms in Africa. Canadian Journal of Development Studies. 
39:4, 515–532. DOI: 10.1080/02255189.2018.1447912
FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations). 2011. Social 
analysis for agriculture and rural investment projects. Rome, FAO. 
FAO. 2012. State of food and agriculture: investing in agriculture for a better 
future. Rome, FAO.
FAO. 2016. Farmer field school guidance document: Planning for quality 
programmes. Rome, FAO. www.fao.org/3/i5296e/i5296e.pdf
FAO. 2019. Dimitra Clubs: What’s the Impact? Rome, FAO. www.fao.org/
fao-stories/article/en/c/1200214/ 
FAO. 2020. The programme clinic designing conflict-sensitive interventions: 
approaches to working in fragile and conflict-affected contexts. Rome, 
FAO. www.fao.org/3/ca7494en/ca7494en.pdf
FAO. 2022a. Investment Learning Platform. www.fao.org/investment-
learning-platform/investment-cycle-phases/en/
   153
REFERENCES


FAO. 2022b. Tool for designing, monitoring and evaluating Land 
administration programmes in Latina America. Glossary. www.fao.org/
in-action/herramienta-administracion-tierras/glossary/i/en/    
FAO and AUC (African Union Commission). 2022. Investment guidelines for 
youth in agrifood systems in Africa. Rome, FAO and AUC. https://doi.
org/10.4060/cb9001en
 
Franzel, S., Degrande, A. Kiptot, E., Kirui, J., Kugonza, J., Preissing, J. & 
Simpson, B. 2018. Farmer-to-farmer extension. In: Davis, K., Bohn, A., 
Franzel, S., Blum, M., Rieckmann, U., Raj, S., Hussein, K. & Ernst, N. 2018. 
What works in rural advisory services? Global Good Practice Notes. 
Lausanne, Switzerland: Global Forum for Rural Advisory Services. 
www.g-fras.org/en/gfras/1040-what-works-in-rural-advisory-services.
html
Franzel S., Kiptot E. & Degrande A. 2019. Farmer-to-farmer extension: A 
low-cost approach for promoting climate-smart agriculture. In: 
Rosenstock T., Nowak A. & Girvetz E. eds. The Climate-Smart 
Agriculture Papers. Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-92798-
5_24.
Franzel, S., Miiro, R., Uwitonze, N., Davis, K., Luzobe, B. & Rurangwa, R. 2020. 
Engaging young agripreneurs: Options to include youth in private 
sector extension and advisory services in Rwanda and Uganda. 
Developing Local Extension Capacity Project. Washington DC, USAID. 
www.digitalgreen.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/09/DLEC-Study-on-
Engaging-Young-Agripreneurs_Lessons-from-Rwanda-and-Uganda.
pdf
Friis-Hansen, E. & Duveskog, D. 2012. The empowerment route to well-being: 
An analysis of farmer field schools in East Africa, World Development. 
40:2:414-427. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.worlddev.2011.05.005 
Friis-Hansen, E., Duveskog, D. & Taylor, E. 2012. Less noise in the household: 
The impact of farmer field schools on gender relations. Journal of 
Research in Peace, Gender and Development, 2(2): 44–55. www.
interesjournals.org/JRPGD 
GBC (Greater Baltimore Council). 2020. Developing an internship program. 
Baltimore MD, Greater Baltimore Council. www.towson.edu/
careercenter/media/documents/employers/gbc_handbook_
developing_an_internship_program_for_employers.pdf
Goldin, C. 2014. Human capital. In: Diebolt C. & Haupert M. eds. Handbook of 
Cliometrics. Berlin, Heidelberg, Springer.
Gordon, A. 2021. Professionalizing farmer organizations through private 
sector-led models – Capacity development initiatives in Cameroon and 
Côte d'Ivoire. Rome, FAO and IFPRI. https://doi.org/10.4060/cb7133en 
154   
HOW TO INVEST IN FARMERS? A GUIDE FOR AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT PROJECTS


Human Resource Professionals Association. 2010. Glossary of professional 
regulation and certification terms. Toronto, HRPA. https://docplayer.
net/11405042-Hrpa-glossary-of-professional-regulation-and-
certification-terms-1.html
IFAD (International Fund for Agricultural Development). 2016. How to do 
Public-Private-Producer-Partnerships (4Ps) in agricultural value 
chains. www.ifad.org/documents/38714170/40314128/Public-Private-
Producer+Partnerships+%284Ps%29+in+Agricultural+Value+Chains.
pdf/853d82f8-45c9-4493-b2da-b509112cc0b3?t=1555415705000 
IFAD. 2022a. Knowledge-sharing broadcasts help female women farmers 
thrive. https://ruralsolutionsportal.org/en/-/knowledge-sharing-radio-
broadcasts-help-female-farmers-thrive
IFAD. 2022b. Lessons learned from supporting pluralistic extension services. 
https://www.ifad.org/documents/38714170/46847063/lessons-
extension-services.pdf/e7b2bbe5-c1d7-1438-21c7-1fb903efeafb? 
t=1669635950998 
Jackel, D. 2011. Evaluating the effectiveness of an internship program. Paper 
no. 117. Service Learning Commons. Western Kentucky University. 
Bowling Green, KY. https://digitalcommons.wku.edu/theses/1117/
JICA (Japan International Cooperation Agency). 2008. Agricultural extension 
methodology: A reference manual. Agricultural Support Assist Project. 
Tokyo, JICA. https://ershad.moa.pna.ps/downloads/reports/2013 
0728122608.pdf
Jones, K. 2013. The role of agricultural technical and vocational education 
and training in developing countries: A review of literature, issues and 
recommendations for action. USAID InnovATE Project. USAID, 
Washington, DC. https://innovate.cired.vt.edu/wp-content/
uploads/2015/08/ATVET-CCS-Kristal-Jones-11-12-2014.pdf 
Khisa, G. 2003. Self-financing farmer field schools. In: Farmer field schools: 
The Kenyan experience. Report of the farmer field schools 
stakeholders’ forum, 27 March 2003, Nairobi, Kenya.
Kiptot, E., Franzel, S., Nora, C. & Steyn, A. 2019. Edutainment television for 
disseminating information about agricultural technology. In: Davis, K., 
Bohn, A., Franzel, S., Blum, M., Rieckmann, U., Raj, S., Hussein, K. & 
Ernst, N. (eds) What works in rural advisory services? Global Good 
Practice Notes. Lausanne, Switzerland: GFRAS. www.g-fras.org/en/
gfras/1040-what-works-in-rural-advisory-services.html
Kiptot, E., Franzel, S., Nzigamasabo, P.B. & Ruganirwa, C. 2016. Farmer-to-
farmer extension of livestock feed technologies in Rwanda: A survey of 
volunteer farmer trainers and organizations. ICRAF Working Paper No. 
221. Nairobi, World Agroforestry Centre. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.5716/
WP16005.pdf
   155
ANNEX


Kirui, J., Franzel, S., Kiptot, E., Kugonza, J., Ongadi, P.M., Wambire, R., 
Nanjekho, S.W., Karanja, E., Nzigamasabo, P.B. & Ruganirwa, C. 2016. 
The Volunteer Farmer-Trainer Extension Approach: A User Guide. 
Technical Manual. World Agroforestry Centre, Nairobi. http://dx.doi.
org/10.5716/TM16068.pdf   
Kumar, A., Kumar, A. & Kumar, M. 2021. Investing in women livestock 
advisers and farmers – Jharkhand Opportunities for Harnessing Rural 
Growth Programme in India. Rome, FAO and IFPRI. https://doi.
org/10.4060/cb7116en
Maguire, E., Bell, M. & Crump, A. 2015. Agricultural call centers: An 
infrastructure and demand audit. Champagne-Urbana, IL, USAID.
	
https://meas.illinois.edu/wp-content/uploads/2015/04/MEAS-EVAL-
Esoko-Call-Center-Aug-2015.pdf
Matras, F., Sidi, F. & Treinen, S. 2013. Exchange visits: Advice for improving 
the impact. Knowledge management and gender. Good Practice fact 
sheet. Rome, FAO. www.fao.org/docrep/019/aq213e/aq213e.pdf
McNamara, P. 2020. Economic evaluation of agricultural human capital 
investments: Challenges and approaches. FAO [unpublished].
MEF (Ministry of Economy and Finance, Government of Peru). 2019. Anexo 
11. Parámetros de evaluación social. www.mef.gob.pe/contenidos/inv_
publica/anexos/anexo11_directiva001_2019EF6301.pdf 
Mondelêz International. 2017. Exploring a new model of farmer engagement: 
From training to coaching. Chicago, Mondelez International. www.
idhsustainabletrade.com/uploaded/2017/04/From-training-to-
coaching_Mondelez-Ecom.pdf
Myers, B. & Jones, L. 2004. Effective use of field trips in educational 
programming: A three stage approach. Institute of Food and 
Agricultural Sciences. Gainesville, University of Florida. http://edis.ifas.
ufl.edu/wc054
Naruka, P.S., Shilpi, V., Sarangdevot, S.S., Pachauri, C.P., Shilpi, K. & Singh, 
J.P. 2017. A study on role of WhatsApp in agriculture value chains. Asian 
Journal of Agricultural Extension, Economics and Sociology, 20(1): 1-11 
https://journalajaees.com/index.php/AJAEES/article/view/27473 
NEPAD (New Partnership for Africa’s Development). 2013. Review of 
agricultural technical and vocational education and training in Africa: 
Best practices from Benin, Ethiopia, Namibia and Sierra Leone. 
Planning and Coordinating Agency, Midrand, South Africa, NEPAD. 
www.nepad.org/publication/review-of-agricultural-technical-
vocational-education-and-training-atvet-best
156   
HOW TO INVEST IN FARMERS? A GUIDE FOR AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT PROJECTS


Neza, B.N., Higiro, J., Mwangi, L.W. & Ochatum, N. 2021. Institutionalizing 
farmer field schools – Twigire Muhinzi national extension system in 
Rwanda. Rome, FAO and IFPRI. https://doi.org/10.4060/cb7131en
Nkonu, M. 2014. Guidelines for agricultural call centers. London, Global 
System for Mobile Communications. www.gsma.com/
mobilefordevelopment/wp-content/uploads/2014/08/Guidelines-for-
Agri-Call-Centres.pdf 
Odubote, K., Mulila-Mitti, J., Ajayi, O. & Kadzamira, M. 2019. Seed fairs: an 
innovative climate-smart practice to obtain stress-tolerant seeds.  
Wageningen, Netherlands, CTA. www.cta.int/en/blog/all/article/
seed-fairs-an-innovative-climate-smart-practice-to-obtain-stress-
tolerant-seeds-sid0a92f1424-a108-40de-b61d-4db397fe8544
Olorunfemi, O.D. & Oladele, O.J. 2018. Knowledge of extension agents 
regarding professionalization of extension services: Evidence from 
South West Nigeria. Journal of International Agricultural and Extension 
Education. 25:3:33-49.
OMB (Office of Management and Budget, Government of the United States 
of America). 1992. Circular A-94 Guidelines and Discount Rates for 
Benefit-Cost Analysis Of Federal Programs. www.wbdg.org/FFC/FED/
OMB/OMB-Circular-A94.pdf 
Rao, S. 2019. Using radio in agricultural extension. In: Davis, K., Bohn, A., 
Franzel, S., Blum, M., Rieckmann, U., Raj, S., Hussein, K. & Ernst, N. eds. 
What works in rural advisory services? Global Good Practice Notes. 
Lausanne, Switzerland: GFRAS. www.g-fras.org/en/gfras/1040-what-
works-in-rural-advisory-services.html
Reddy, M.N. & Swanson, B.E. 2006. Strategy for up-scaling the “ATMA” 
model in India. Paper presented at the 22nd Annual Conference 
Proceedings of the Association for International Agricultural and 
Extension Education, Clearwater Beach, Florida, USA.
Salcedo Du Bois, R. & Arca Zimmermann, A. 2021. Investing in rural 
households through community promoters: The Haku Wiñay/Noa 
Jayatai Programme in Peru. Country Investment Highlights No. 3. 
Rome, FAO and IFPRI. https://doi.org/10.4060/cb5744en
Scheer, J. & Ariko, J. 2019. Village agent model study: Likely effect on the 
Ugandan agricultural sector. Developing Local Extension Capacity 
Project. Washington DC, USAID. www.agrilinks.org/sites/default/files/
resources/dlec_village_agent_model_study.pdf 
Sen, A. 1992. Inequality reexamined. New York, Russell Sage Foundation. 
   157
REFERENCES


Sylvester, G., Davis, K., Gammelgaard, J. & Preissing, J. 2021. Smart farmers 
– Learning with digital technologies. Investment brief. Rome, FAO and 
IFPRI. https://doi.org/10.4060/cb7947en
Takamgang, M. F. & Lhoste, F. 2021. Investing in youth vocational training 
professional training programme in the agropastoral and fisheries 
sectors in Cameroon. FAO Investment Centre. Country Investment 
Highlights No. 11. FAO, Rome. https://doi.org/10.4060/cb7819en
Technoserve. 2012. The coffee initiative: Lessons learned. Washington DC, 
Technoserve. www.technoserve.org/resources/lessons-learned-the-
coffee-initiative-2008-to-2011
United Nations. 2021. Secretary-General’s Chair Summary and Statement of 
Action on the UN Food Systems Summit. www.un.org/en/food-
systems-summit/news/making-food-systems-work-people-planet-
and-prosperity
United Nations Development Group. 2021. Results-based management 
handbook. Harmonizing RBM concepts and approaches for improved 
development results at country level. 
UNCDF (United Nations Capital Development Fund). 2020. Digital extension 
services improve farm productivity. New York, United Nations Capital 
Development Fund. www.uncdf.org/article/6617/farmer-call-centre-
and-digital-extension-agents-delivering-extension-and-agronomic-
services-in-uganda
van Coller-Peter, S. & Cronje, J.P. 2020. The contribution of coaching and 
mentoring to the development of participants in entrepreneurial 
development programmes, International Journal of Evidence-based 
Coaching and Mentoring 18 (2) 51-67 DOI: 10.24384/bg74-fc70
Van Mele, P., Okry, F., Wanvoeke, J., Barres, N.F., Malone, P., Rodgers, J., 
Rahman, E., Salahuddin, A. 2018. Quality farmer training videos to 
support South–South learning. Barres3 CSIT 6(3–4):245–255. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s40012-018-0206-z
Waddington, H. & White H. 2014. Farmer field schools: From agricultural 
extension to agricultural education. Systematic Review. London, 
International Initiative for Impact Evaluation. 
Wambugu, C., Franzel, S., Tuwei, P. & Karanja, G. 2001. Scaling up the use of 
fodder shrubs in central Kenya. Development in Practice 11:4. 
Wellard, K., Rafanomezana, J., Nyirenda, M. 2013. A review of community 
extension approaches to innovation for improved livelihoods in Ghana, 
Uganda and Malawi. J. Agric. Educ. Ext. 19(1):21–35. 
158   
HOW TO INVEST IN FARMERS? A GUIDE FOR AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT PROJECTS


Wordofa, M. G, & Sassi, M. 2018. Impact of farmers’ training centres on 
household income: Evidence from propensity score matching in 
Eastern Ethiopia. Social Sciences 7, no. 1: 4. https://doi.org/10.3390/
socsci7010004 
World Bank. 2019. The changing nature of work. World Development Report 
2019. Washington, DC. The World Bank.
World Bank. 2020. Nutrition smart agriculture: When Good Nutrition is Good 
Business. [online]. www.worldbank.org/en/topic/agriculture/
publication/nutrition-smart-agriculture-when-good-nutrition-is-good-
business 
World Bank. 2021. Fuelling an engine of sustainable growth: agricultural 
innovation in Peru. Results Briefs. www.worldbank.org/en/
results/2021/11/04/fueling-an-engine-of-sustainable-growth-
agricultural-innovation-in-peru   
   159
REFERENCES


Glossary 
Concept/Term
Definition
Reference
Agriculture human 
capital
The skills and capabilities of small-scale agricultural producers to 
successfully manage agricultural enterprises.
Davis et al., 2021
Agriculture human 
capital development 
method
A systematically applied technique to provide information, knowledge, 
advice, skills, training, education and other services to producers and  
to facilitate problem-solving and learning.
David and Cofini, 2017
Agriculture human 
capital investment
Policies and investment actions which focus on improving skills, 
capacities, and capabilities of agricultural producers with the idea that 
this will provide increased income, productivity, access to markets,  
social capital, and economic, environmental, and social returns to 
individuals and society.
Business skills
Expertise and abilities relating to farming as a business including 
planning, recordkeeping, marketing, finance and budgeting.
Davis et al., 2021
Capability
The ability to perform certain basic functions in life.
Sen, 1992
Capacity
The ability of people, organizations and society as a whole to manage 
their affairs successfully.
Organization for 
Economic Cooperation 
and Development/
Development Assistance 
Committee (OECD/DAC) 
as cited in FAO Corporate 
Development Strategy
Education
Expertise in a discipline by undergoing systematic instruction and 
learning, especially at a school or university.
Davis et al., 2021
Empowerment
A process that increases the capacity of people to make choices and 
influence collective decisions towards desired actions.
Danida, 2004
Functional skills
Social capabilities relating to communication, leadership, public speaking, 
conflict resolution and empowerment.
Davis et al., 2021
Human capital
The skills, knowledge, ability to work and enjoy good health that together 
enable people to pursue different livelihood strategies and achieve their 
livelihood objectives; from an economic perspective, this refers to assets 
that improve individual productivity and produce economic value.
DFID, 1999; Goldin, 2014
Impact
Wider socioeconomic effects resulting from the change in behaviour, 
which may entail changes in productivity and incomes, but also more 
intangible impacts such as changes in health and well-being.
Davis et al., 2021
Input
Activities associated with implementing a given AHCI model such as 
training or workshops, based on project design strategies
Davis et al., 2021
Internal rate of return 
(IRR)
The rate of return on an investment adjusted to the times that receipts 
and expenditure occur, the discount rate makes the net present value of 
an investment equal to zero.
FAO, 2022b
Investment
Accumulating assets that generate increased income or other benefits in 
the future.
FAO, 2012
160   
HOW TO INVEST IN FARMERS? A GUIDE FOR AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT PROJECTS


 
Concept/Term
Definition
Reference
Key performance 
indicators
A performance indicator specifies what is to be measured along a scale or 
dimension but does not indicate the direction or change.  It is a qualitative 
or quantitative means of measuring an output or outcome, to gauge the 
performance of a programme or investment.
United Nations 
Development Group, 
2021
Knowledge
Theoretical or practical understanding of a subject through an active 
learning process.
Model of AHCI
Overlapping components (target group, skills providers, agriculture 
human capital development method, type of human capital, implement-
ers, funders) that make up an agriculture human capital development 
project or programme.
Davis et al., 2021
Net present value (NPV)
Derived by discounting the net benefit stream by a factor equal to the esti-
mated opportunity cost of capital.
Financial and economic 
analysis,  FAO Investment 
Learning Platform 
Networking
Ability to link with people or entities that affect their well-being such as 
input suppliers, off-takers, government agencies, and financial services.
Outcome
Actions and behaviours adopted by the target group from new or 
developed human capital.
Davis et al., 2021
Output
Changes in the stock of agriculture human capital among the target 
group.
Davis et al., 2021
Skills
Expertise often occupation-based and focused on competencies for 
economic value, may be technical, functional or business-related.
Davis et al., 2021
Social capital
Ability to strengthen trust and cohesion with others through groups, 
networks and associations to achieve social and development outcomes.
DFID, 1999
Technical agricultural 
skills
Expertise and abilities relating to practices that improve incomes and 
livelihoods while protecting and minimizing harm to the environment.
Davis et al., 2021
Training
Training imparts a special skill, often at occupational level.
Davis et al., 2021
   161
GLOSSARY




Annex
Economic and financial analysis:  National Agricultural Innovation System 
Support Project (Peru, USD 174.04 million; World Bank: USD 40 million;  
Inter-American Development Bank (IDB): USD 40 million; other funders:  
USD 94.04 million). 
Analytical approach  
The cost-benefit study included both financial analysis using actual market 
prices inclusive of taxes, subsidies, and other distortions, as well as economic 
analysis using economic prices adjusted in some instances to correct for 
taxes, subsidies, and other distortions in the Peruvian economy. This analysis 
was designed to estimate standard measures of project worth including net 
present value (NPV), financial and economic internal rates of returns, benefit/
cost ratio, payback period, and incremental benefits per beneficiary in terms 
of present value. These indicators were estimated: (i) for the overall project; 
(ii) by project components; (iii) by subproject type; (iv) by commodity 
grouping/value chain; and (v) by type of training provided to extension and 
research agents. Sensitivity analysis explored the likely impacts of possible 
changes in key variables such as benefits, costs, technology adoption rate, 
training days, success training rate, social discount rate, and evaluation 
period.
A. IDENTIFICATION OF INCREMENTAL PROJECT COSTS AND BENEFITS
The ex post cost-benefit analysis considered incremental costs and benefits 
attributable to the project, identified based on activities taking place during 
it as well as developments expected to occur in future years, as reflected in 
the theory of change. The main expected incremental costs and benefits for 
each type of subproject and activity, organized by the Project components, 
are summarized in Table A.1. 
   163


Table A.1	
 
Expected incremental costs and benefits for each type of subproject and activity 
Subprojects/activities
Benefits/costs 
Component 1. Strengthening the capacity of INIA to lead the National System of Agriculture Innovation (SNIA)
Incremental benefits were not identified for Component 1, since it is assumed activities implemented under this component aim to 
create the enabling institutional capacities and regulatory conditions whose direct and indirect benefits are reflected in those 
generated by activities financed under Components 2 and 3. Costs associated with implementing Component 1 were included in 
the overall cost-benefit analysis as part of total project costs.
Component 2. Consolidating the market for innovation services
Adaptive research subprojects
Benefits: Increased revenues due to higher yields, increased production, improved quality, 
reduced losses, and/or increased prices
Costs: Labour (60 percent of total cost), tradable goods and services used as production 
inputs (40% of total cost) 
Labour characterized as: (i) low skilled (extension subprojects); or (ii) semi-skilled 
(adaptative research subprojects, seed enterprise pilots)
Extension subprojects
Seed enterprise pilots
Component 3. Strategic capacities in the SNIA
Strategic research subprojects
Benefits: Increased revenues are projected for future innovation adopters, plus increased 
incomes of researchers directly involved in implementing strategic research subprojects. 
Costs: Increased labour and input costs are projected for future adopters of innovations.
Note: It is assumed innovations developed by strategic research subprojects will be 
adapted and then disseminated using the same mechanisms found in adaptive research 
and extension subprojects. 
Capacity building subprojects 
Benefits: Increased income for extensionists after receiving training during the project 
through capacity-building subprojects
Costs: The opportunity cost of training, calculated as income foregone during participation 
in capacity-building subprojects 
Scholarships and internships 
Benefits: Increased income for agricultural professionals as a direct result of the training 
Costs: The opportunity cost of graduate study or internship, calculated as income foregone 
during participation in a graduate programme or internship 
SOURCE: 
Authors, 
based 
on 
World 
Bank. 
2021. 
Implementation 
Completion 
and 
Results 
Report 
(ICR). 
 
https://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/399891636578418140/pdf/Peru-National-Agricultural-Inno-
vation-Project.pdf 
 
B. KEY ASSUMPTIONS AND PARAMETERS
All cash flows were estimated using nominal prices. The exchange rate for 
converting soles to US dollars was determined considering the annual 
average value prevailing during the project. For baseline scenarios, the cost 
of capital was set at 10.5 percent and the social discount rate at 8 percent, 
with an evaluation period of 10 years. The factors used to convert market 
prices to social prices were those stipulated by the Peruvian public investment 
system: (i) currency: 1.08; (ii) tradable goods: 0.867; (iii) investment: 0.83; (iv) 
operating costs: 0.8475; (v) skilled labour: 0.81; (vi) semi-skilled labour: 0.665; 
and (vii) unskilled labour: 0.5. Positive externalities generated by the project, 
such as technology spillovers and environmental and social benefits, were 
not included in the analysis due to the complexity quantifying them and 
limited information. 
164   
HOW TO INVEST IN FARMERS? A GUIDE FOR AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT PROJECTS


C. DATA SOURCES, SAMPLING STRATEGY, AND DATA ANALYSIS
The ex post cost-benefit analysis relied on information from three sources: (i) 
a survey of 70 collaborative subprojects randomly selected from among the 
541 subprojects financed using the competitive grants mechanism; (ii) a 
survey as part of the independently conducted final impact evaluation of 190 
researchers and extension agents who benefited from capacity strengthening 
financed by the project; and (iii) project records. The survey instruments 
included questions designed to allow comparison of “with project” and 
“without project” scenarios. For every subproject, data were collected on 
yields, production volume, and the value of sales, prices paid and received, 
production costs, and other variables. The data collected at subproject level 
were supplemented with information taken from the project records to 
aggregate subproject level results to the overall project level, including the 
total number of subprojects financed, direct and indirect investment costs, 
the project implementation period, technology and adoption rates.
	
The streams of costs and benefits associated with collaborative 
subprojects and strategic research subprojects, were adjusted to reflect 
average implementation periods for each type of subproject, and the 
associated technology adoption rates estimated by surveying participants. 
The results are presented in Table A.2.
Technology adoption rates were estimated by subproject typologies as those 
for practices and technologies are not exclusively for a crop (crop rotation/
association). It means farmers adopt technologies for different activities: soil 
preparation, integrated pest management or post-harvest practices.  The ex 
ante EFA analysis considered only some crops, the real demand was 
completely different.
	
Likewise, cash flows associated with capacity-building subprojects 
and scholarships and internships were adjusted based on data collected 
through the survey of extensionists and researchers on the duration of 
training activities and the success rate. 
Table A.2	
 
Technology adoption rates from the participants’ survey
Funding cycle
Subproject type
2015 (year 1)  
(n = 154)
2016 (year 2)  
(n = 156)
2017 (year 3)  
(n = 156)
Total
 (n = 466)
Adaptative research (n = 100)
37.5
75.3
59.3
64.2
Extension (n = 320)
87.2
77.6
79.8
79.9
Seed enterprise pilots (n = 46)
53.8
95.1
90.0
86.2
Total (n = 466)
77.1
79.1
73.9
76.7
SOURCE: 
Authors, 
based 
on 
World 
Bank. 
2021. 
Implementation 
Completion 
and 
Results 
Report 
(ICR). 
 
https://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/399891636578418140/pdf/Peru-National-Agricultural- 
Innovation-Project.pdf; 
and 
World 
Bank. 
2021. 
Fueling 
an 
Engine 
of 
Sustainable 
Growth: 
 
Agricultural 
Innovation 
in 
Peru. 
Results 
brief. 
www.worldbank.org/en/results/2021/11/04/fueling- 
an-engine-of-sustainable-growth-agricultural-innovation-in-peru.
   165
ANNEX


RESULTS
Table A.3	
 
EFA indicators: overall project  
Financial indicators
FNPV (USD million)
FIRR (percent)
Benefit/cost ratio
Payback period 
(years)
Incremental NPV 
per beneficiary 
(USD)
48.2
24.6
1.26
7.3
1121
Economic indicators 
ENPV (USD million)
EIRR (percent)
 
Benefit/cost ratio
Payback period 
(years)
Incremental NPV 
per beneficiary 
(USD)
86.2
31.2
1.48
6.8
2007
SOURCE: 
Authors, 
based 
on 
World 
Bank. 
2021. 
Implementation 
Completion 
and 
Results 
Report 
(ICR). 
https://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/399891636578418140/pdf/Peru-National-Agricultur-
al-Innovation-Project.pdf; 
and 
World 
Bank. 
2021. 
Fueling 
an 
Engine 
of 
Sustainable 
Growth: 
 
Agricultural 
Innovation 
in 
Peru. 
Results 
brief. 
www.worldbank.org/en/results/2021/11/04/ 
fueling-an-engine-of-sustainable-growth-agricultural-innovation-in-peru.
Table A.4 
EFA indicators: capacity-building component  
Financial indicators
FNPV (USD 
million)
FIRR (percent)
Benefit/cost 
ratio
Payback 
period (years)
Incremental 
NPV per 
beneficiary 
(USD)
Capacity-building subprojects
1 996 224
22.0
1.44
6.5
1639
Scholarships and internships
1 661 439
20.3
1.33
8.3
4774
Economic indicators 
ENPV (USD 
million)
EIRR (percent)
 
Benefit/cost 
ratio
Payback 
period (years)
Incremental 
NPV per 
beneficiary 
(USD)
Capacity-building subprojects
2 836 261
23.9
1.65
6.5
2329
Scholarships and internships
2 496 187
21.9
1.51
7.4
7173
SOURCE: 
Authors, 
based 
on 
World 
Bank. 
2021. 
Implementation 
Completion 
and 
Results 
Report 
(ICR). 
 
https://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/399891636578418140/pdf/Peru-National-Agricultur 
al-Innovation-Project.pdf; 
and 
World 
Bank. 
2021. 
Fueling 
an 
Engine 
of 
Sustainable 
Growth: 
 
Agricultural 
Innovation 
in 
Peru. 
Results 
brief. 
www.worldbank.org/en/results/2021/11/04/ 
fueling-an-engine-of-sustainable-growth-agricultural-innovation-in-peru.
166   
HOW TO INVEST IN FARMERS? A GUIDE FOR AGRICUL
TURE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT PROJECTS


©Pexels/Thor Garlan
©FAO/Ezequiel Becerra


Investing in farmers – or agriculture human capital – is crucial  
to addressing challenges in our agrifood systems. A global study  
carried out by the FAO Investment Centre and the International  
Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI), with support from the CGIAR 
Research Program on Policies, Institutions, and Markets (PIM)  
and the FAO Research and Extension Unit, looks at agriculture  
human capital investments, from recent trends to promising initiatives. 
This toolkit aims to provide investors including policymakers,  
government officials, international and national development banks  
and the private sector, with the evidence, analysis, guidance  
and processes to make sounder investment decisions on projects, 
programmes and policies that strengthen farmers’ capacities.  
This publication is part of the Investment Toolkits series under the  
FAO Investment Centre's Knowledge for Investment (K4I) programme.
CC4381EN/1/03.23
ISBN 978-92-5-137662-1
9
7 8 9 2 5 1
3 7 6 6 2 1