CoPa: General Robotic Manipulation through
Spatial Constraints of Parts with Foundation Models
Initial Observation
Hammer the nail.
Task-Oriented
Grasping
Module
Observation after Grasping
Post-Grasp Poses
{𝑃
1, 𝑃2, … , 𝑃𝑁}
Pose 𝑃
1
Pose 𝑃2
“Find scissors”
“Press button”
“Open drawer”
“Pour water”
“Put eraser into drawer”
“Insert flower into vase”
“Put glasses onto shelf”
“Put spoon into cup”
“Sweep nuts”
Task-Aware
Motion Planning
Module
Fig. 1: Overview. We present CoPa, a novel framework that utilizes common sense knowledge embedded within VLMs
for robotic low-level control. Left. Our pipeline. Given an instruction and scene observation, CoPa first generates a grasp
pose through Task-Oriented Grasping Module (detailed in Fig. 3). Subsequently, a Task-Aware Motion Planning Module
(detailed in Fig. 4) is utilized to obtain post-grasp poses. Right. Examples of real-world experiments. Boasting a fine-grained
physical understanding of scenes, CoPa can generalize to open-world scenarios, handling open-set instructions and objects
with minimal prompt engineering and without the need for additional training.
Abstract— Foundation models pre-trained on web-scale data
are shown to encapsulate extensive world knowledge beneficial
for robotic manipulation in the form of task planning. However,
the actual physical implementation of these plans often relies on
task-specific learning methods, which require significant data
collection and struggle with generalizability. In this work, we
introduce Robotic Manipulation through Spatial Constraints
of Parts (CoPa), a novel framework that leverages the com-
mon sense knowledge embedded within foundation models to
generate a sequence of 6-DoF end-effector poses for open-
world robotic manipulation. Specifically, we decompose the
manipulation process into two phases: task-oriented grasping
and task-aware motion planning. In the task-oriented grasping
phase, we employ foundation vision-language models (VLMs) to
select the object’s grasping part through a novel coarse-to-fine
grounding mechanism. During the task-aware motion planning
phase, VLMs are utilized again to identify the spatial geometry
constraints of task-relevant object parts, which are then used to
derive post-grasp poses. We also demonstrate how CoPa can be
seamlessly integrated with existing robotic planning algorithms
to accomplish complex, long-horizon tasks. Our comprehensive
real-world experiments show that CoPa possesses a fine-grained
physical understanding of scenes, capable of handling open-set
instructions and objects with minimal prompt engineering and
without additional training. Project page: copa-2024.github.io
∗The first two authors contributed equally.
1 Institute of Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University.
2 Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute.
3 Shanghai Jiao Tong University.
4 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory.
I. INTRODUCTION
Developing a general-purpose robot necessitates effective
approaches in two critical areas: (i) high-level task planning,
which determines what to do next, and (ii) low-level robotic
control, focusing on the precise actuation of joints [1], [2].
The emergence of high-capacity foundation models [3], [4],
pre-trained on extensive web-scale datasets, has inspired a
surge of recent research efforts aimed at integrating these
models into robotics [5], [6]. Nonetheless, these methods
generally address only the “higher level” aspects of task
planning [7]–[10]. In contrast, the prevailing approach for
low-level control continues to revolve around crafting task-
specific policies via diverse learning methods [11], [12].
Such policies, however, are brittle and prone to failure when
encountering unseen scenarios [13]. Even the largest robotics
models struggle outside environments they have previously
encountered [14], [15].
The question then arises: what makes generalizable low-
level robotic control so hard? We attempt to answer this
question through the lens of human object manipulation. For
instance, when an individual is tasked with hammering a
nail, regardless of their familiarity with the specific hammer,
they intuitively grasp it by the handle (instead of the head),
adjust its orientation so the striking surface aligns with the
nail, and then execute the strike. This process underscores
arXiv:2403.08248v1  [cs.RO]  13 Mar 2024


the importance of a fine-grained understanding of the phys-
ical properties of task-related objects, or more broadly, the
extensive common sense knowledge of the world that fa-
cilitates generalizable object manipulation. Some pioneering
works [16], [17] have sought to leverage the rich semantic
knowledge of Internet-scale foundation models to enhance
low-level robotic control. Yet, these approaches are heavily
dependent on intricate prompt engineering and suffer from a
fundamental limitation: a coarse understanding of the scene,
leading to failures in tasks requiring fine-grained physical
understanding. Such a detailed understanding is essential for
nearly all real-world robotic tasks of interest.
To endow robots with fine-grained physical understand-
ing, we propose Robotic Manipulation through Spatial
Constraints of Parts (CoPa), a novel framework that incor-
porates common sense knowledge embedded within foun-
dation vision-language models (VLMs), such as GPT-4V,
into the robotic manipulation tasks. We observe that most
manipulation tasks require a part-level, fine-grained physical
understanding of objects within the scene. Hence, we design
a coarse-to-fine grounding module to identify task-relevant
parts. Then, to leverage VLMs for aiding the robotic low-
level control, it is necessary to design an interface that not
only allows VLMs to reason in the form of language but
also facilitates robot’s object manipulation. Therefore, we
propose utilizing spatial constraints as a bridge between
VLMs and robots. Specifically, we utilize VLMs to generate
the spatial constraints that task-relevant parts must meet to
accomplish the task, and then employ a solver to determine
the robot’s poses based on these constraints. Finally, to
ensure the precise execution of the robot’s actions, transitions
between adjacent poses are achieved through traditional
motion planning methods.
We demonstrate that CoPa is capable of completing every-
day manipulation tasks with a high success rate through ex-
tensive real-world experiments. Attributed to the innovative
design of coarse-to-fine grounding and constraint generation
module, CoPa possesses a profound physical understanding
of the environment and can generate precise 6-Dof poses to
complete complex manipulation tasks, significantly surpass-
ing a strong baseline VoxPoser [16].
Our contributions are summarized as follows:
• We propose CoPa, a novel framework that utilizes
the common sense knowledge of VLMs for low-level
robotic control, which can handle open-set instructions
and objects with minimal prompt engineering and with-
out additional training.
• Through extensive real-world experiments, CoPa is
demonstrated to possess the capability to complete
manipulation tasks that require a fine-grained under-
standing of physical properties of task-relevant objects,
significantly surpassing baselines.
• We show that CoPa can be seamlessly integrated with
high-level planning methods to accomplish complex,
long-horizon tasks (e.g. make pour-over coffee and set
up romantic table).
II. RELATED WORK
Learning for Robotic Manipulation. Manipulation is a
critical and challenging aspect in the robotic field. Nu-
merous studies harness imitation learning (IL) from expert
demonstrations to acquire manipulation skills [14], [15],
[18]–[22]. Despite IL’s conceptual simplicity and its no-
table success across a broad spectrum of real-world tasks,
it struggles with out-of-distribution samples and demands
considerable effort in collecting expert data. Reinforcement
learning (RL) [12] emerges as another principal approach [7],
[23]–[26], enabling robots to develop manipulation skills via
trial-and-error interactions with their environment. However,
RL’s sample inefficiency limits its applicability in real-world
settings, leading most robotic systems to rely on sim-to-real
transfers [27]–[29]. Nonetheless, sim-to-real approaches ne-
cessitate the construction of specific simulators and confront
the sim-to-real gap. Furthermore, policies learned via these
end-to-end learning methods often lack generalization to new
tasks. In contrast, by leveraging foundation models’ common
sense knowledge, our CoPa can generalize to open-world
scenarios without additional training.
Foundation Models For Robotics. In recent years, foun-
dation models have dramatically transformed the landscape
of robotics [5]. Many works employ vision models, pre-
trained on large-scale image datasets, to generate visual
representations for visuomotor control tasks [20], [30]–[34].
Some other studies utilize foundation models for reward
specification in reinforcement learning [35]–[40]. Further-
more, numerous studies have leveraged foundation models
for robotic high-level planning, achieving remarkable suc-
cess [7], [8], [10], [41]–[49]. There is also a body of works
that employs foundation models for low-level control [14],
[15], [21], [22]. Some works fine-tune vision-language mod-
els (VLMs) to directly output robot actions. However, such
fine-tuning approaches require extensive amounts of expert
data. To address this issue, Code as Policies [17] applies large
language models (LLMs) to write code to control robots,
and VoxPoser [16] generates robot trajectories by producing
value maps based on foundation models. Nevertheless, these
methods rely on complex prompt engineering and possess
only a coarse understanding of the scene. In stark contrast,
benefiting from the rational use of common sense knowledge
within VLMs, our method exhibits a fine-grained understand-
ing of scenarios and generalizes to open-world scenarios
without additional training, requiring only minimal prompt
engineering.
III. METHOD
In this section, we first introduce the formulation of
manipulation tasks in Section III-A. Then, we describe
two critical components within our framework — the task-
oriented grasping in Section III-B and the task-aware motion
planning in Section III-C.
A. Promblem Formulation
Most manipulation tasks can be decomposed into two
phases: the initial grasp of the object and the subsequent
motion required to complete the task. For example, opening


Find grasping objects.
Hammer the nail.
Current Image
User
SoM
User
Find grasping parts.
Hammer the nail.
Grasping Objects
Fine-Grained
Part Grounding
Grasping Parts
GPT-4V
Coarse-Grained
Object Grounding
Fig. 2: Grounding Module. This module is utilized to identify the grasping part for task-oriented grasping or task-relevant
parts for task-aware motion planning. The grounding process is divided into two stages: coarse-grained object grounding
and fine-grained part grounding. Specifically, we first segment and label objects within the scene using SoM. Then, in
conjunction with the instruction, we employ GPT-4V to select the grasping/task-relevant objects. Finally, similar fine-grained
part grounding is applied to locate the specific grasping/task-relevant parts.
a drawer involves grasping the handle and pulling it in
a straight line, while picking up a water glass requires
first seizing the glass and then lifting it. Motivated by this
observation, we structure our approach into two modules:
task-oriented grasping and task-aware motion planning.
Additionally, we posit that the execution of robotic tasks
essentially entails generating a series of target poses for the
robot’s end-effector. The transition between adjacent target
poses can be achieved through motion planning.
Given a language instruction l and the initial scene obser-
vation O0 (RGB-D images), our objective in the task-oriented
grasping module is to generate the appropriate grasp pose for
the specified objects of interest. This process is represented
as P0 = f(l, O0). We denote the observation after the
robot reaches P0 as O1. For the task-aware motion planning
module, our goal is to derive a sequence of post-grasp poses,
expressed as g(l, O1) −
→{P1, P2, ..., PN}, where N is the
total number of poses required to complete the task. After
acquiring the target poses, the robot’s end-effector can reach
these poses utilizing motion planning algorithms such as
RRT* [50] and PRM* [51].
B. Task-Oriented Grasping
To generate the task-oriented grasp pose, our approach
initially employs a grasping model to produce grasp pose
proposals, and filter out the most feasible one through our
novel grasping part grounding module. The entire process is
depicted in Fig. 3.
Grasp Pose Proposals. We leverage a pre-trained grasping
model for generating grasp pose proposals. To achieve this,
we first convert RGB-D images into point clouds by back-
projecting them into 3D space. These point clouds are then
input into GraspNet [52], a model trained on a vast dataset
comprising over one billion grasp poses. GraspNet outputs 6-
DOF grasp candidates, including information on grasp point,
width, height, depth, and a “graspness score,” which indicates
the likelihood of a successful grasp. However, given that
GraspNet yields all potential grasps within a scene, it is
necessary for us to employ a filtering mechanism that selects
Pose
Filtering
Current Observation
User
Grasp Pose 𝑃
0
Grasp Pose Candidates
Find the grasping part.
Hammer the nail.
Grounding
Module
Fig. 3: Task-Oriented Grasping Module. This module is
employed to generate grasp poses. Grasp pose candidates
are generated from the scene point cloud using GraspNet.
Concurrently, given the instruction and the scene image, the
grasping part is identified by a grounding module (detailed in
Fig. 2). Ultimately, the final grasp pose is selected by filtering
candidates based on the grasping part mask and GraspNet
scores.
the optimal grasp based on the specific task outlined by the
language instruction.
Grasping Part Grounding. Humans grasp specific parts of
an object corresponding to the intended use. For instance,
when grasping a knife for cutting, we hold onto the handle
rather than the blade; similarly, when picking up glasses, we
grasp the frame instead of the lenses. This process essentially
represents the application of common sense knowledge by
humans. To mimic this ability, we utilize vision-language
models (VLMs), such as GPT-4V [53], which incorporate
vast amounts of common sense knowledge [10], [54], to
identify the appropriate part of an object to grasp.
We employ a two-stage process to ground language in-
structions to the specific parts of objects intended for grasp-
ing: coarse-grained object grounding and fine-grained part
grounding. The entire grounding process is shown in Fig.
2. At both stages, we incorporate a recent visual prompting
mechanism known as Set-of-Mark (SoM) [55]. SoM lever-
ages segmentation models to partition an image into distinct
regions, assigning a numeric marker to each, significantly


User
Grounding
Module
3D Processing
Task-Relevant
3D Components
Current Observation
Spatial Constraints:
1. Vector 2 and Vector 3 are colinear.
2. Point 2 is 5 cm above Point 3.
3. Vector 2 points downward.
4. Vector 1 is parallel to the table 
surface.
Subsequent Actions:
1. Move vertically down 7 cm.
Post-Grasp Poses
{𝑃
1, 𝑃2, … , 𝑃𝑁}
Constraint
Generation
Solver
Find task-relevant 
geometry parts.
Hammer the nail.
Fig. 4: Task-Aware Motion Planning Module. This module is used to obtain a series of post-grasp poses. Given the instruction
and the current observation, we first employ a grounding module (detailed in Fig. 2) to identify task-relevant parts within the
scene. Subsequently, these parts are modeled in 3D, and are then projected and annotated onto the scene image. Following
this, VLMs are utilized to generate spatial constraints for these parts. Finally, a solver is applied to calculate the post-grasp
poses based on these constraints.
boosting the visual grounding capabilities of VLMs. During
the coarse-grained object grounding phase, SoM is utilized
at the object level to detect and label all objects within the
scene. Following this, VLMs are tasked with pinpointing the
target object for grasping (e.g., a hammer), guided by the
user’s instructions. The selected object is then cropped from
the image, upon which fine-grained part grounding is applied
to determine the specific part of the object to be grasped (e.g.,
the handle of the hammer). This coarse-to-fine design endows
our method with fine-grained physical understanding ability,
enabling generalization across complex scenarios. Finally,
we filter the grasp pose candidates, projecting all the grasp
points onto the image and retaining only those within the
grasping part mask. From these, the pose with the highest
confidence scored by GraspNet is selected as the ultimate
grasp pose P0 for execution.
C. Task-Aware Motion Planning
After successfully executing task-oriented grasping, now
we aim to obtain a series of post-grasp poses. We divide
this step into three modules: task-relevant part grounding,
manipulation constrains generation and target pose planning.
The entire process is shown in Fig. 4.
Task-Relevant Part Grounding. Similar to the previous
grasp part grounding module, we use coarse-grained object
grounding and fine-grained part grounding to locate task-
relevant parts. Here we need to identify multiple task-relevant
parts (e.g. the hammer’s striking surface, handle and the
nail’s surface). Additionally, we observe that numeric marks
on the robotic arm may affect VLMs’ selection, so we filter
out the masks on the robotic arm (detailed in the Appendix).
Manipulation Constraints Generation. During the execu-
tion of tasks, task-relevant objects are often subject to various
spatial geometric constraints. For instance, when charging
a phone, the charger’s connector must be aligned with the
charging port; similarly, when capping a bottle, the lid must
be positioned directly above the mouth of the bottle. These
constraints inherently necessitate common sense knowledge,
which includes a profound comprehension of the physical
properties of objects. We aim to leverage VLMs to generate
spatial geometric constraints for the object manipulated by
the robot.
We first model identified task-relevant parts as simple
geometric elements. Specifically, we represent slender parts
(e.g. hammer handle) as vectors, while other parts are
modeled as surfaces. For the parts modeled as vectors, we
directly draw them on the scene image; for those modeled
as surfaces, we ascertain their center points and normal
vectors, which are then projected and marked on the 2D
scene image. The annotated image is used as input for
VLMs, which are prompted to generate spatial constraints for
these geometric elements. We craft a set of descriptions for
spatial constraints, such as collinearity between two vectors,
perpendicularity between a vector and a surface, and so
forth. We instruct the VLMs to first generate the constraints
necessary for the first target pose, followed by the subsequent
actions required after reaching that pose. Fig. 4 provides an
illustrative example of this process. Implementation details
of this process are provided in the Appendix.
Target Pose Planning. Upon obtaining manipulation con-
straints, we proceed to derive the sequence of post-grasp
poses. This is equivalent to computing a sequence of SE(3)
matrices such that, when applied to the parts of the object
manipulated by the robotic arm, these parts satisfy the spatial
geometric constraints. We operate under the assumption that
the object part under manipulation and the robotic end-
effector together constitute a rigid body. Consequently, these
calculated SE(3) transformations can be directly applied to
the robotic end-effector. We formalize the computation of
the SE(3) matrix as a constrained optimization problem.
Specifically, we compute a loss for each constraint, and
then a nonlinear constraint solver is used to find the SE(3)
matrix that minimizes the sum of these losses. Taking the
constraint “Vector 2 points downward” from Fig. 4 as an
example, the loss can be defined as the negative dot product
of the normalized Vector 2 after SE(3) transformation and
the vector (0, 0, −1). After obtaining the first target pose,
we solve for subsequent poses in alignment with the actions
specified by VLMs. Concretely, we sequentially compute
a new pose corresponding to each subsequent action. For
example, for the action “Move vertically down 7 cm,” we
simply subtract 7 cm from the current pose on the z-


axis. This process results in a complete set of post-grasp
poses {P1, P2, ..., PN}, with the transitions between adjacent
poses facilitated by motion planning algorithms. The detailed
process for solving the SE(3) matrix and a comprehensive
description of the subsequent actions can be found in the
Appendix.
IV. EXPERIMENTS
We first introduce the experimental setup in Section IV-
A. Subsequently, we evaluate the performance of CoPa in
real-world manipulation tasks in Section IV-B. Then we
highlight CoPa’s intriguing properties by comparing it with
the baseline VoxPoser [16] in Section IV-C. We further
present an ablation study to analyze the contribution of key
modules within our framework in Section IV-D. Finally, we
demonstrate that CoPa can be seamlessly integrated with
high-level task planning methods to accomplish complex
long-horizon tasks in Section IV-E.
A. Experimental Setup
Hardware. We set up a real-world tabletop environment. We
use a Franka Emika Panda robot (a 7-DoF arm) and a 1-DoF
parallel jaw gripper. For perception, we mount two RGB-D
cameras (Intel RealSense D435) at two opposite ends of the
table and calibrate them.
Tasks and Evaluations. We design 10 real-world manipu-
lation tasks, each demanding a comprehensive understand-
ing of the physical properties of objects. See Fig. 1 for
illustrations of the tasks. For each task, we evaluate all
methods across 10 different variations of the environment,
which encompass alterations in object types and their ar-
rangements. Detailed descriptions of the tasks are provided
in the Appendix.
VLMs and Prompting. We employ GPT-4V from OpenAI
API as the VLM. CoPa involves minimal few-shot prompts
to aid VLMs in comprehending their roles. Additionally,
the chain-of-thought technique [56] is utilized to facilitate a
deeper understanding of the scene by VLMs. The full prompt
is provided in the Appendix.
Baselines. We compare with Voxposer [16], a method ca-
pable of synthesizing closed-loop robot trajectories without
necessitating additional training through the utilization of a
series of foundational models. Following Huang et al [16],
we employ GPT-4 from OpenAI API as the LLM, and utilize
the open-vocabulary detector Owl-ViT [57] and Segment
Anything [58] for perception.
B. CoPa for Real-World Manipulation
We study whether CoPa can generate robot trajectories
to perform real-world manipulation tasks. The quantitative
results are detailed in Table I, while the Appendix showcases
additional qualitative outcomes, including visualizations of
part grounding results and manipulation constraints. We
find that CoPa achieves a remarkable success rate of 63%
across ten different tasks, significantly outperforming the
VoxPoser baseline and various ablation variants (detailed
in the following sections). A key factor in CoPa’s superior
performance is its leverage of common sense knowledge em-
bedded in VLMs, which enables a fine-grained understanding
Grasp stem of flower
Grasp flower
Move hammer to top of nail
Align striking surface with nail Insert spoon vertically down
Rotate to face the cup
Ours
VoxPoser
Fig. 5: Comparison with VoxPoser. We illustrate the exe-
cution of CoPa (top) and VoxPoser (bottom), demonstrating
that CoPa possesses a fine-grained physical understanding
of scenes and can effectively handle rotation DoF. The tasks
from left to right are sequentially Insert flower into
vase, Hammer nail, Put spoon into cup.
of objects’ physical properties during both part grounding
and constraint generation phases. For example, in the part
grounding phase, CoPa accurately identifies the need to grasp
the protective cover of an eraser in the Put eraser on
shelf task, and recognizes the stem of the flower and the
rim of the vase as critical parts in the Insert flower
into vase task. During the constraint generation phase,
CoPa comprehends that the spoon can be inserted vertically
down into the cup in the Put spoon into cup task, and
that the wooden stick needs to be aligned directly with the
button in the Press button task.
C. Understanding Properties of CoPa
In this section, we delve deeper into CoPa, shedding light
on its intriguing properties through a comparative analysis
with Voxposer, another method that utilizes the common
sense knowledge embedded in foundation models to synthe-
size robot trajectories. CoPa exhibits significant advantages
in the following three aspects:
Fine-Grained Physical Understanding. Many manipula-
tion tasks require a nuanced physical understanding of the
scene, which necessitates not only identifying object parts
with fine granularity but also comprehending their intricate
attributes. CoPa excels in this aspect, employing a coarse-to-
fine part grounding module to select grasping/task-relevant
object parts, and then utilizing VLMs to provide their spatial
geometry constraints. In contrast, Voxposer only perceives
objects in the scene as a whole. This coarse-grained level
of comprehension often leads to failure in tasks that require
precise operations. For instance, in the Insert flower
into vase task (shown in Fig. 5 left), CoPa grasps the
stem of the flower, whereas Voxposer seizes the petals. In the
Hammer nail task (shown in Fig. 5 middle), CoPa orients
the hammer to align precisely with the nail, while Voxposer
overlooks this fine-grained physical constraint, treating the
hammer as a single rigid body.
Simple Prompt Engineering. CoPa demonstrates remark-
able generalizability across a wide range of scenarios with


Tasks
CoPa
(Ours)
Voxposer
CoPa
w/o foundation
CoPa
w/o coarse-to-fine
CoPa
w/o constraint
Hammer nail
30%
0%
0%
0%
10%
Find scissors
70%
50%
10%
70%
70%
Press button
80%
10%
10%
60%
20%
Open drawer
80%
40%
10%
70%
30%
Pour water
30%
0%
0%
10%
0%
Put eraser into drawer
80%
30%
30%
60%
80%
Insert flower into vase
70%
0%
0%
60%
0%
Put glasses onto shelf
60%
20%
30%
50%
60%
Put spoon into cup
60%
10%
0%
30%
30%
Sweep nuts
70%
20%
20%
50%
70%
Total
63%
18%
11%
46%
37%
TABLE I: Quantitative results in real-world experiments. CoPa successfully complete everyday manipulation tasks with a
high success rate, demonstrating a profound physical understanding of scenes, significantly surpassing the baseline VoxPoser.
Furthermore, we conduct ablation study to validate the importance of foundation models in our algorithm, as well as the
design of coarse-to-fine grounding and constraint generation.
minimal prompt engineering. In our CoPa experiments, we
employ just three examples to aid the VLMs in compre-
hending their roles. In contrast, Voxposer relies on highly
complex prompts containing 85 hand-crafted examples. Its
capability for reasoning predominantly stems from the pro-
vided prompts, thereby limiting its generalizability to new
scenarios. When we attempt to simplify Voxposer’s prompts,
reducing the example count to three for each module, the
system’s performance drastically declines, resulting in almost
complete failure across all evaluated tasks.
Handling Rotation DoF. Robotic manipulation requires not
just the movement of the end-effector to a specified location
but also the precise control of its rotation. For example, in
the Pour water task, it is essential to rotate the kettle
to a certain angle to enable the water to flow out through
the spout. CoPa calculates the end-effector’s 6-DoF pose by
considering the spatial geometric constraints of key object
parts within the scene, allowing for accurate and continuous
control over rotation DoF. Conversely, Voxposer attempts
to have LLMs directly specify the end-effector’s rotation
DoF based on simple examples in prompts, causing the
output rotation values to be selected from a limited set of
discrete options. This approach often overlooks the dynamic
interactions and constraints between objects. For example,
in the Put spoon into cup (shown in Fig. 5 right),
CoPa rotates the spoon to a vertical orientation, whereas
Voxposer positions the robot’s end-effector to face the cup,
resulting in a collision between the spoon and the cup.
D. Ablation Study
We next conduct a series of ablation studies to demonstrate
the significance of the foundation model within our frame-
work, as well as the design of coarse-to-fine grounding and
constraint generation. The results are shown in Table I.
1) CoPa w/o foundation: We eliminate the use of founda-
tion vision-language models (GPT-4V). Specifically, we sub-
stitute grasping/task-relevant parts grounding module with an
open-vocabulary detector, Owl-ViT. Additionally, we remove
the constraint generation phase and instead compute post-
grasp poses in a predefined rule-based manner (detailed in
the Appendix). The results, as presented in Table I, reveal
that this approach encounters significant challenges, with
a success rate of merely 11% across all the tasks. This
underscores the crucial role of the common sense knowledge
embedded within VLMs. For example, in the Sweep nuts
task, it becomes challenging to determine which tool in the
scene is suitable for sweeping without the aid of VLMs.
2) CoPa w/o coarse-to-fine: We eliminate the coarse-
to-fine design in the grounding module, opting instead for
direct utilization of fine-grained SoM and GPT-4V to select
object parts within scenes. Experimental results indicate
that removing coarse-to-fine design leads to a performance
decline, especially in tasks where identifying important parts
accurately is challenging. For example, in the Hammer
nail tasks, the absence of the coarse-to-fine design makes
this variant impossible to accurately identify the hammer’s
striking surface, leading to zero success rate for this task.
3) CoPa w/o constraint: In this ablation study, we have
the VLMs directly output numerical values for the post-
grasp poses of the end-effector, instead of the constraints
that need to be satisfied by the object being manipulated.
Experiments demonstrate that, for most manipulation tasks,
directly deriving precise pose values from scene images is
extremely challenging. For instance, in the Pour water
task, it’s almost impossible for this variant to generate precise
pose values to tilt the kettle to the correct pose. In contrast,
utilizing constraints given by VLMs to solve for post-grasp
poses presents a more viable option.
E. Integration with High-Level Planning
High-level planning and low-level control are two critical
and decoupled aspects of robotic task execution. Our low-
level control framework can be seamlessly integrated with
high-level planning methods to accomplish complex long-
horizon tasks. We design two long-horizon tasks, Make
pour-over coffee and Set up romantic table,
to validate the effectiveness of this combination. Not only
do these two tasks need to be accurately decomposed into
reasonable and actionable steps, but the execution of each
step requires a profound understanding of the physical prop-
erties of the task-relevant objects. Specifically, we employ


“Put flowers into vase”
“Right fallen bottle”
“Place fork and knife”
“Pour red wine”
“Scoop beans into container”
“Put funnel onto carafe”
“Pour powder into funnel”
“Pour water to funnel”
Make pour-over coffee
Set up romantic table
Long-Horizon Tasks
Sequential Steps
Fig. 6: Intergration with High-Level Planning. We show the execution process of two long-horizon tasks: Make
pour-over coffee and Set up romantic table. We demonstrate that CoPa can be seamlessly integrated with
high-level planning methods to accomplish complex long-horizon tasks.
VILA [10] as the high-level planning method to decom-
pose the high-level instruction into a sequence of low-level
control tasks. Subsequently, these low-level control tasks
are executed sequentially using CoPa. Fig. 6 shows some
environment rollouts. Experiments demonstrate that CoPa,
combined with high-level planning methods, can effectively
complete long-horizon tasks, showcasing the potential of this
combination for real-world applications.
V. DISCUSSION & LIMITATIONS
In this work, we present CoPa, a novel framework that
leverages the common sense knowledge of foundation vision-
language models to generate pose sequences for robotic
manipulation tasks. CoPa operates effectively with simple
prompt engineering without requiring any training. Boasting
a fine-grained physical understanding of scenes, CoPa can
generalize to open-world scenarios, handling open-set in-
structions and objects. Moreover, CoPa can be naturally
combined with high-level planning algorithms to accomplish
complex, long-horizon tasks.
CoPa has a few limitations that future work can improve.
First, CoPa’s capability to process complex objects is con-
strained by its reliance on simplistic geometric elements
such as surfaces and vectors. This can be improved by
incorporating more geometric elements into our modeling
process. Second, the VLMs currently in use are pre-trained
on large-scale 2D images and lack a genuine grounding in
the 3D physical world. This limitation hampers their ability
to perform accurate spatial reasoning. Integrating 3D inputs,
like point clouds, into the training phase of VLMs may alle-
viate this challenge. Lastly, the existing VLMs produce only
discrete textual outputs, whereas our framework essentially
necessitates continuous output values, like the coordinates
of object parts. The development of foundation models that
incorporate these capabilities remains a highly anticipated
advancement.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Cambon, R. Alami, and F. Gravot, “A hybrid approach to intricate
motion, manipulation and task planning,” The International Journal
of Robotics Research, vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 104–126, 2009.
[2] L. P. Kaelbling and T. Lozano-P´
erez, “Hierarchical task and motion
planning in the now,” in 2011 IEEE International Conference on
Robotics and Automation.
IEEE, 2011, pp. 1470–1477.
[3] R. Bommasani, D. A. Hudson, E. Adeli, R. Altman, S. Arora, S. von
Arx, M. S. Bernstein, J. Bohg, A. Bosselut, E. Brunskill, et al.,
“On the opportunities and risks of foundation models,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2108.07258, 2021.
[4] J. Achiam, S. Adler, S. Agarwal, L. Ahmad, I. Akkaya, F. L. Aleman,
D. Almeida, J. Altenschmidt, S. Altman, S. Anadkat, et al., “Gpt-4
technical report,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.
[5] Y. Hu, Q. Xie, V. Jain, J. Francis, J. Patrikar, N. Keetha, S. Kim,
Y. Xie, T. Zhang, Z. Zhao, et al., “Toward general-purpose robots
via foundation models: A survey and meta-analysis,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2312.08782, 2023.
[6] R. Firoozi, J. Tucker, S. Tian, A. Majumdar, J. Sun, W. Liu, Y. Zhu,
S. Song, A. Kapoor, K. Hausman, et al., “Foundation models in
robotics: Applications, challenges, and the future,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2312.07843, 2023.
[7] M. Ahn, A. Brohan, N. Brown, Y. Chebotar, O. Cortes, B. David,
C. Finn, C. Fu, K. Gopalakrishnan, K. Hausman, et al., “Do as i
can, not as i say: Grounding language in robotic affordances,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2204.01691, 2022.
[8] W. Huang, F. Xia, D. Shah, D. Driess, A. Zeng, Y. Lu, P. Florence,
I. Mordatch, S. Levine, K. Hausman, et al., “Grounded decoding:
Guiding text generation with grounded models for robot control,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.00855, 2023.
[9] W. Huang, F. Xia, T. Xiao, H. Chan, J. Liang, P. Florence, A. Zeng,
J. Tompson, I. Mordatch, Y. Chebotar, et al., “Inner monologue:
Embodied reasoning through planning with language models,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2207.05608, 2022.
[10] Y. Hu, F. Lin, T. Zhang, L. Yi, and Y. Gao, “Look before you leap:
Unveiling the power of gpt-4v in robotic vision-language planning,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.17842, 2023.
[11] A. Hussein, M. M. Gaber, E. Elyan, and C. Jayne, “Imitation learning:
A survey of learning methods,” ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR),
vol. 50, no. 2, pp. 1–35, 2017.
[12] R. S. Sutton and A. G. Barto, Reinforcement learning: An introduction.
MIT press, 2018.
[13] A. Xie, L. Lee, T. Xiao, and C. Finn, “Decomposing the generalization
gap in imitation learning for visual robotic manipulation,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2307.03659, 2023.
[14] A. Brohan, N. Brown, J. Carbajal, Y. Chebotar, J. Dabis, C. Finn,
K. Gopalakrishnan, K. Hausman, A. Herzog, J. Hsu, et al., “Rt-1:


Robotics transformer for real-world control at scale,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2212.06817, 2022.
[15] A. Brohan, N. Brown, J. Carbajal, Y. Chebotar, X. Chen, K. Choro-
manski, T. Ding, D. Driess, A. Dubey, C. Finn, et al., “Rt-2: Vision-
language-action models transfer web knowledge to robotic control,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.15818, 2023.
[16] W. Huang, C. Wang, R. Zhang, Y. Li, J. Wu, and L. Fei-Fei, “Voxposer:
Composable 3d value maps for robotic manipulation with language
models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.05973, 2023.
[17] J. Liang, W. Huang, F. Xia, P. Xu, K. Hausman, B. Ichter, P. Florence,
and A. Zeng, “Code as policies: Language model programs for em-
bodied control,” in 2023 IEEE International Conference on Robotics
and Automation (ICRA).
IEEE, 2023, pp. 9493–9500.
[18] M. Shridhar, L. Manuelli, and D. Fox, “Cliport: What and where
pathways for robotic manipulation,” in Conference on Robot Learning.
PMLR, 2022, pp. 894–906.
[19] ——, “Perceiver-actor: A multi-task transformer for robotic manipula-
tion,” in Conference on Robot Learning.
PMLR, 2023, pp. 785–799.
[20] T. Zhang, Y. Hu, H. Cui, H. Zhao, and Y. Gao, “A universal semantic-
geometric representation for robotic manipulation,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2306.10474, 2023.
[21] A. Padalkar, A. Pooley, A. Jain, A. Bewley, A. Herzog, A. Ir-
pan, A. Khazatsky, A. Rai, A. Singh, A. Brohan, et al., “Open
x-embodiment: Robotic learning datasets and rt-x models,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2310.08864, 2023.
[22] O. M. Team, D. Ghosh, H. Walke, K. Pertsch, K. Black, O. Mees,
S. Dasari, J. Hejna, C. Xu, J. Luo, et al., “Octo: An open-source
generalist robot policy,” 2023.
[23] Y. Liu, W. Dong, Y. Hu, C. Wen, Z.-H. Yin, C. Zhang, and Y. Gao,
“Imitation learning from observation with automatic discount schedul-
ing,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.07433, 2023.
[24] W. Ye, Y. Zhang, M. Wang, S. Wang, X. Gu, P. Abbeel, and
Y. Gao, “Foundation reinforcement learning: towards embodied
generalist agents with foundation prior assistance,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2310.02635, 2023.
[25] I. Akkaya, M. Andrychowicz, M. Chociej, M. Litwin, B. McGrew,
A. Petron, A. Paino, M. Plappert, G. Powell, R. Ribas, et al., “Solving
rubik’s cube with a robot hand,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.07113,
2019.
[26] S. Levine, C. Finn, T. Darrell, and P. Abbeel, “End-to-end training
of deep visuomotor policies,” The Journal of Machine Learning
Research, vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 1334–1373, 2016.
[27] Z. Xu, Z. Xian, X. Lin, C. Chi, Z. Huang, C. Gan, and S. Song,
“Roboninja: Learning an adaptive cutting policy for multi-material
objects,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.11553, 2023.
[28] J. Matas, S. James, and A. J. Davison, “Sim-to-real reinforcement
learning for deformable object manipulation,” in Conference on Robot
Learning.
PMLR, 2018, pp. 734–743.
[29] R. Jeong, Y. Aytar, D. Khosid, Y. Zhou, J. Kay, T. Lampe, K. Bous-
malis, and F. Nori, “Self-supervised sim-to-real adaptation for visual
robotic manipulation,” in 2020 IEEE international conference on
robotics and automation (ICRA).
IEEE, 2020, pp. 2718–2724.
[30] S. Parisi, A. Rajeswaran, S. Purushwalkam, and A. Gupta, “The
unsurprising effectiveness of pre-trained vision models for control,”
in International Conference on Machine Learning.
PMLR, 2022, pp.
17 359–17 371.
[31] S. Nair, A. Rajeswaran, V. Kumar, C. Finn, and A. Gupta, “R3m: A
universal visual representation for robot manipulation,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2203.12601, 2022.
[32] I. Radosavovic, T. Xiao, S. James, P. Abbeel, J. Malik, and T. Dar-
rell, “Real-world robot learning with masked visual pre-training,” in
Conference on Robot Learning.
PMLR, 2023, pp. 416–426.
[33] T. Xiao, I. Radosavovic, T. Darrell, and J. Malik, “Masked visual pre-
training for motor control,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.06173, 2022.
[34] A. Majumdar, K. Yadav, S. Arnaud, Y. J. Ma, C. Chen, S. Silwal,
A. Jain, V.-P. Berges, P. Abbeel, J. Malik, et al., “Where are we in
the search for an artificial visual cortex for embodied intelligence?”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.18240, 2023.
[35] Y. J. Ma, S. Sodhani, D. Jayaraman, O. Bastani, V. Kumar, and
A. Zhang, “Vip: Towards universal visual reward and representa-
tion via value-implicit pre-training,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.00030,
2022.
[36] Y. J. Ma, W. Liang, G. Wang, D.-A. Huang, O. Bastani, D. Ja-
yaraman, Y. Zhu, L. Fan, and A. Anandkumar, “Eureka: Human-
level reward design via coding large language models,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2310.12931, 2023.
[37] M. Alakuijala, G. Dulac-Arnold, J. Mairal, J. Ponce, and C. Schmid,
“Learning reward functions for robotic manipulation by observing
humans,” in 2023 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation (ICRA).
IEEE, 2023, pp. 5006–5012.
[38] P. Mahmoudieh, D. Pathak, and T. Darrell, “Zero-shot reward speci-
fication via grounded natural language,” in International Conference
on Machine Learning.
PMLR, 2022, pp. 14 743–14 752.
[39] Y. Cui, S. Niekum, A. Gupta, V. Kumar, and A. Rajeswaran, “Can
foundation models perform zero-shot task specification for robot
manipulation?” in Learning for Dynamics and Control Conference.
PMLR, 2022, pp. 893–905.
[40] Y. J. Ma, W. Liang, V. Som, V. Kumar, A. Zhang, O. Bastani, and
D. Jayaraman, “Liv: Language-image representations and rewards for
robotic control,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.00958, 2023.
[41] I. Singh, V. Blukis, A. Mousavian, A. Goyal, D. Xu, J. Tremblay,
D. Fox, J. Thomason, and A. Garg, “Progprompt: Generating situated
robot task plans using large language models,” in 2023 IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA).
IEEE, 2023,
pp. 11 523–11 530.
[42] J. Gao, B. Sarkar, F. Xia, T. Xiao, J. Wu, B. Ichter, A. Majumdar, and
D. Sadigh, “Physically grounded vision-language models for robotic
manipulation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.02561, 2023.
[43] Y. Ding, X. Zhang, C. Paxton, and S. Zhang, “Task and motion
planning with large language models for object rearrangement,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2303.06247, 2023.
[44] W. Huang, P. Abbeel, D. Pathak, and I. Mordatch, “Language models
as zero-shot planners: Extracting actionable knowledge for embodied
agents,” in International Conference on Machine Learning.
PMLR,
2022, pp. 9118–9147.
[45] K. Lin, C. Agia, T. Migimatsu, M. Pavone, and J. Bohg, “Text2motion:
From natural language instructions to feasible plans,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2303.12153, 2023.
[46] B. Liu, Y. Jiang, X. Zhang, Q. Liu, S. Zhang, J. Biswas, and P. Stone,
“Llm+ p: Empowering large language models with optimal planning
proficiency,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.11477, 2023.
[47] A. Z. Ren, A. Dixit, A. Bodrova, S. Singh, S. Tu, N. Brown, P. Xu,
L. Takayama, F. Xia, J. Varley, et al., “Robots that ask for help:
Uncertainty alignment for large language model planners,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2307.01928, 2023.
[48] C. H. Song, J. Wu, C. Washington, B. M. Sadler, W.-L. Chao,
and Y. Su, “Llm-planner: Few-shot grounded planning for embodied
agents with large language models,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
International Conference on Computer Vision, 2023, pp. 2998–3009.
[49] J. Wu, R. Antonova, A. Kan, M. Lepert, A. Zeng, S. Song,
J. Bohg, S. Rusinkiewicz, and T. Funkhouser, “Tidybot: Personal-
ized robot assistance with large language models,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2305.05658, 2023.
[50] S. Karaman and E. Frazzoli, “Sampling-based algorithms for optimal
motion planning,” The international journal of robotics research,
vol. 30, no. 7, pp. 846–894, 2011.
[51] L. Gang and J. Wang, “Prm path planning optimization algorithm
research,” Wseas Transactions on Systems and control, vol. 11, pp.
81–86, 2016.
[52] H.-S. Fang, C. Wang, M. Gou, and C. Lu, “Graspnet-1billion: A large-
scale benchmark for general object grasping,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
2020, pp. 11 444–11 453.
[53] OpenAI, “Gpt-4v(ision) system card,” https://cdn.openai.com/papers/
GPTV System Card.pdf, 2023.
[54] H. Geng, S. Wei, C. Deng, B. Shen, H. Wang, and L. Guibas,
“Sage: Bridging semantic and actionable parts for generalizable
articulated-object manipulation under language instructions,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2312.01307, 2023.
[55] J. Yang, H. Zhang, F. Li, X. Zou, C. Li, and J. Gao, “Set-of-mark
prompting unleashes extraordinary visual grounding in gpt-4v,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2310.11441, 2023.
[56] J. Wei, X. Wang, D. Schuurmans, M. Bosma, F. Xia, E. Chi, Q. V.
Le, D. Zhou, et al., “Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in
large language models,” Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, vol. 35, pp. 24 824–24 837, 2022.
[57] M. Minderer, A. Gritsenko, A. Stone, M. Neumann, D. Weissenborn,
A. Dosovitskiy, A. Mahendran, A. Arnab, M. Dehghani, Z. Shen, et al.,
“Simple open-vocabulary object detection with vision transformers.
arxiv 2022,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.06230.
[58] A. Kirillov, E. Mintun, N. Ravi, H. Mao, C. Rolland, L. Gustafson,
T. Xiao, S. Whitehead, A. C. Berg, W.-Y. Lo, et al., “Segment
anything,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.02643, 2023.


APPENDIX
A. Hardware Setup
We set up a real-world tabletop environment. We use a Franka Emika Panda robot (a 7-DoF arm) and a 1-DoF parallel jaw
gripper. We use Franka ROS and MoveIt1 to control the robot, which by default uses an RRT-Connect planner for motion
planning. For perception, we mount two RGB-D cameras (Intel RealSense D435) at two opposite ends (left and right from
the top-down view) of the table and calibrate them.
B. Tasks and Evaluations.
We design 10 real-world manipulation tasks, each demanding a comprehensive understanding of the physical properties
of objects. We provide a detailed description of these tasks in Table II. For each task, we evaluate all methods across 10
different variations of the environment, which encompass alterations in object types and their arrangements.
Hammer nail
Instruction: “Hammer the nail.”
Description: This task requires the robot to first grasp the handle of the hammer, then rotate it
until its striking surface aligns with the surface of the nail, and finally hammer downwards. To
accomplish this task, it is essential to accurately identify and model the hammer’s striking surface,
handle and the nail’s surface.
Find scissors
Instruction: “Find scissors for me.”
Description: In this task, the scissors may be partially obscured by other objects, such as books.
The robot is required to first locate the scissors and then grasp its handle.
Press button
Instruction: “Press the button with the stick.”
Description: This task necessitates initially grasping the stick, then rotating it until its axis is
directly aligned with the button, and finally pressing it. To accomplish this task, it is imperative
to accurately identify and model the stick and the button.
Open drawer
Instruction: “Open the drawer.”
Description: This task requires the initial grasping of the drawer handle, followed by a linear pull
along the handle’s normal vector.
Pour water
Instruction: “Pour water from kettle to funnel/cup.”
Description: This task requires that the spout needs to be moved directly above the funnel, and
the kettle needs to be rotated at a certain angle so that the water can flow out. This task imposes
stringent demands on the robot’s control over its rotation DoF.
Put eraser into drawer
Instruction: “Put eraser into the drawer.”
Description: In this task, a portion of the eraser is encapsulated by a protective cover, necessitating
that the robot exclusively grasps this protective cover.
Insert flower into vase
Instruction: “Put flowers into the vase.”
Description: This task requires first grasping the flower by its stem (not the petals), then moving
the flower directly above the vase while rotating the flower to an upright position, and finally
inserting it straight down into the vase.
Put glasses onto shelf
Instruction: “Put glasses onto the shelf.”
Description: In this task, We need to utilize common sense knowledge to determine that, when
picking up glasses, one should grasp the frame rather than the lenses.
Put spoon into cup
Instruction: “Put spoon into the cup.”
Description: This task requires first grasping the spoon’s handle, then rotating it to the vertical
direction, moving it directly above the cup, and finally inserting it vertically down into the cup.
Sweep nuts
Instruction: “Select a tool to sweep nuts aside.”
Description: This task requires the robot to first identify a tool (e.g. rasp) suitable for sweeping
nuts through common sense knowledge, and then to grasp the handle of the selected tool.
TABLE II: A List of 10 Real-World Manipulation Tasks. These tasks require a profound physical understanding of the
scene. We provide the instructions used in our experiments and detailed descriptions for each task.
C. VLMs and Prompting.
We employ GPT-4V from OpenAI API as the VLM. CoPa involves minimal few-shot prompts to aid VLMs in
comprehending their roles. Additionally, the chain-of-thought technique [56] is utilized to facilitate a deeper understanding
of the scene by VLMs. Prompts used in Section III-B and Section III-C can be found as follows:
Coarse-Grained Grasping Object Grounding: copa-2024.github.io/prompts/coarse grained grasping object grounding.pdf
1http://docs.ros.org/en/kinetic/api/moveit tutorials/html/


Fine-Grained Grasping Part Grounding: copa-2024.github.io/prompts/fine grained grasping part grounding.pdf
Coarse-Grained Task-Relevant Object Grounding: copa-2024.github.io/prompts/coarse grained relevant object grounding.pdf
Fine-Grained Task-Relevant Part Grounding: copa-2024.github.io/prompts/fine grained relevant part grounding.pdf
Constraint Generation: copa-2024.github.io/prompts/constraint generation.pdf
D. Baselines.
We compare with Voxposer [16], a method capable of synthesizing closed-loop robot trajectories without necessitating
additional training through the utilization of a series of foundational models. Following Huang et al [16], we employ GPT-4
from OpenAI API as the LLM, and utilize the open-vocabulary detector Owl-ViT [57] and Segment Anything [58] for
perception. Additionally, we adopt their real-world prompt as the prompt for Voxposer in our experiments.
E. Robotic Arm Filtering.
Based on the camera’s extrinsic parameters, we render the robot’s URDF model onto the camera plane, thereby obtaining
the robot’s mask.
F. Part Modeling and Annotation.
In the task-aware motion planning phase (Section III-C), we need to model task-relevant parts selected by the grounding
module and annotate them in the scene image. We complete this through the following stages:
Part Modeling. We model identified task-relevant parts as vectors or surfaces. Specifically, we commence by obtaining the
minimum bounding rectangle for each part. Parts with an aspect ratio exceeding a predetermined threshold are considered
slender and are modeled as vectors. The remaining parts are modeled as surfaces.
Part Formulation. We need to obtain the mathematical representation of each part on the 2D image in this stage. For parts
modeled as vectors, we first perform linear regression to fit a line that best corresponds to their 2D masks, then identify the
intersection points of the line with the boundaries of the parts, which serve as the endpoints of the vector. For parts modeled
as surfaces, we first employ the RANSAC algorithm to determine their 3D center points and normal vectors, which are then
projected onto the 2D image.
Part Annotation. Now we need to annotate the parts according to their formulation on the scene image. First, each part is
masked with color and translucency on the image. Then for the parts modeled as vectors, we connect the two endpoints and
put a numerical label adjacent to the endpoint farther from the robot arm. For parts modeled as faces, we mark the center
point and normal vector, and label adjacent to the center point.
G. Details of Constraints.
For each task, we obtain a set of constraints through vision-language models. We then utilize optimization algorithms
(e.g., the BFGS algorithm or Trust-Region Constrained Optimization) to solve for an SE(3) matrix that minimizes the
cumulative loss associated with these constraints. In Table III, we provide a detailed description of the constraints used in
our experiments, along with their corresponding loss calculation methods. In the descriptions of these constraints, Point
A and Vector A are located on the object being manipulated, and thus require an SE(3) transformation when calculating
loss. Other points and vectors are considered static and do not require SE(3) transformation.
We define the SE(3) matrix we need to solve as follows:
T =
 R
t
0T
1

∈SE(3),
(1)
where Euclidean group SE(3) := {R, t | R ∈SO(3), t ∈R3}. We denote the points as p ∈R3, and the normalized vectors
as V ∈R3. Furthermore, we denote T as the SE(3) transformation, which can be applied to both points and vectors:
T (p) = Rp + t,
T (V ) = RV,
(2)
H. Details of Subsequent Actions.
In Table IV, we provide a detailed description of the subsequent actions utilized in our experiments, along with their
corresponding methodologies for calculating new poses.
I. Predefined Rule-Based Post-Grasp Pose Generation.
We design a rule-based method to replace the constraint generation module within our framework to generate post-grasp
poses. This method entails a prescribed pose calculation protocol specific to each format of instruction. The formats of the
instructions along with their corresponding post-grasp poses calculation methodologies are detailed in Table V.
J. More Visualization.
Additional visualization for grounding module are presented in Fig. 7, for task-oriented grasping in Fig. 8, and for
task-relevant motion planning in Fig. 9.


Descriptions of Constraints
Loss Calculation
Vector A and Vector B are on the same line,
with the opposite direction.
loss = ∥T (VA) × VB∥+ ∥(T (pA) −pB) × VB∥+ ∥T (VA) + VB∥
The target position of Point A is x cm along
Vector B from Point C’s current position.
loss = |(T (pA) −pC) · VB −x| + ∥(T (pA) −pC) × VB∥
Vector A is parallel to the table surface.
loss = |T (VA) · Vtable|
Point A is x cm above the table surface.
loss = |(T (pA) −ptable) · Vtable −x|
Vector A is perpendicular to the table surface.
loss = ∥T (VA) × Vtable∥
TABLE III: Desciptions of Constraints and Their Corresponding Loss Calculation Methods. ∥·∥represents l2-norm.
The variables ptable and Vtable respectively denote the coordinate and the normal vector of the table, with their values being
(0.5, 0, 0.07) and (0, 0, 1) respectively. Each Vector corresponds to a Point. The normal vector of the part modeled as
the surface corresponds to the center point of the surface, while the point corresponding to the part modeled as the vector
is the point farther away from the robotic arm among its two endpoints.
Descriptions of Subsequent Actions
New Pose Calculation
Move vertically down x cm.
Subtract x cm from the current pose on the z-axis.
Move forward x cm.
Move x cm along the current orientation of the end-effector.
Open the gripper.
Open the gripper.
End-effector rotates 180 degrees.
Rotate the joint corresponding to the end-effector (the 7th
joint for Franka Emika Panda robot) by 180 degrees.
TABLE IV: Desciptions of subsequent actions and their corresponding new pose calculation methods.
Instruction Format
Post-Grasp Pose Calculation
Hammer A.
1. Move hammer to 5 cm above A.
2. Move vertically down 6 cm.
Press A with B.
1. Move B to 5 cm above A.
2. Move vertically down 6 cm.
Open A.
1. Move backward 10 cm.
Pour water from A to B.
1. Move A to 5 cm above B.
2. End-effector rotates 180 degrees.
Put A into B.
1. Move A to 5 cm above B.
2. Open the gripper.
TABLE V: Predefined rule-based pose calculation methods. A and B in the instruction can refer to any object.


Environment Image
Coarse-Grained SoM
Fine-Grained SoM
Grasping Part
“Put eraser into drawer”
“Open drawer”
“Insert flower into vase”
Fig. 7: Visualization for Grounding Module.
Environment Image
Pose Candidates
Grasp Filtering
Final Grasp
“Put glasses onto shelf”
“Find scissors for me”
“Sweep nuts”
Fig. 8: Visualization for Task-Oriented Grasping.


Environment Image
Task-Relevant 3D Components
Constraints
Post-Grasp Poses Execution
Spatial Constraints:
1. Vector 1 and Vector 2 are 
colinear with opposite direction.
2. Point 1 is 5 cm along Vector 
2 from Point 2.
Subsequent Actions:
1. Move forward 6 cm.
Spatial Constraints:
1. Vector 2 and Vector 1 are 
colinear with opposite direction.
2. Vector 2 is 3 cm Vector 1 
along from Point 1.
Subsequent Actions:
None
Spatial Constraints:
1. Vector 2 and Vector 1 are 
colinear with opposite direction.
2. Point 2 is 2 cm along Vector 1
from Point 1.
Subsequent Actions:
1. Move vertically down 6 cm.
2. Open the gripper.
“Pour water”
“Press button”
“Put spoon into cup”
Fig. 9: Visualization for Task-Aware Motion Planning.