1
Report on the Work of the Government
Gong Zheng
Mayor of Shanghai
at the Second Session
of the Sixteenth Shanghai Municipal People’s Congress
on January 23, 2024


2
Fellow deputies,
On behalf of the Shanghai Municipal People’s Government, I now present a report to
the Congress on the work of the Government for your deliberation and for comments
from members of the Shanghai Municipal Committee of the Chinese People’s
Political Consultative Conference (CPPCC) and other non-voting delegates.
I. Review of the Government’s Work in 2023
Over the past year, following the guidance of Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with
Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, we have fully implemented the key message of
the 20th National Congress of the Communist Party of China (CPC) and the Second
Plenary Session of the 20th CPC Central Committee, earnestly delivered on the
guiding principles of General Secretary Xi Jinping’s important remarks made on his
inspection tours in Shanghai, and resolutely acted on the decisions and plans made by
the CPC Central Committee and the State Council. Under the strong leadership of the
CPC Shanghai Municipal Committee, we have adhered to the general principle of
seeking progress while maintaining stability, deepened high-standard reform and
opening-up, and promoted high-quality development with a focus on enhancing the
city’s capacity and core competitiveness, achieving on the whole the targets for the
year set out by the First Session of the 16th Shanghai Municipal People’s Congress.
Over the past year, Shanghai’s economic and social development has made progress
and moved towards a positive direction while maintaining stability. First, the
economic performance has recovered steadily. The municipal GDP reached around
4.72 trillion yuan, a growth of 5%. The general public budget revenue went up by
9.3%. The CPI rose by 0.3%. The surveyed urban unemployment rate averaged 4.5%.


3
Second, new growth drivers have been steadily developed. The total output from
strategic emerging industries accounted for 43.9% of that from industrial enterprises
above designated size. The output of the three leading industries, namely integrated
circuit (IC), biomedicine and artificial intelligence (AI), totaled 1.6 trillion yuan. Total
R&D expenditure reached around 4.4% of the city’s GDP. The number of high-value
invention patents per 10,000 people rose to 50.2. Third, the dividends of reform
and opening-up have been unleashed steadily. The value of international trade
stood at 4.2 trillion yuan, registering an increase of 0.7%. Paid-in FDI reached a new
historical record of 24.09 billion US dollars. The turnover of financial markets grew
by 15% to 3,373.6 trillion yuan. 65 regional headquarters of multinational
corporations and 30 foreign-invested R&D centers were added, bringing the totals to
956 and 561 respectively. Shanghai has certified the first 40 headquarters of
companies designated as innovation leaders in their respective industries. Fourth,
people’s well-being has been steadily improved. Per capita disposable income
amounted to 85,000 yuan, increasing by 6.6%, faster than GDP growth. 87.7% of the
days throughout the year were rated either excellent or good on the air quality index
(AQI), up by 0.6 percentage points. The number of parks increased by 162 to 832 last
year.
Over the past year, we have carried out our work in the following areas:
1. We have remained steadfast in deepening reform and opening-up, and made
solid progress in major national strategies and tasks.
Upgraded version of the “Five Centers” Initiative: The overall strength of
Shanghai as an international economic center has been bolstered. We have
accelerated the development of a modern industrial system underpinned by the real
economy, and drawn up policy measures to foster the R&D industry, and to promote
the high-quality development of the manufacturing sector and specialized industrial
parks. Policies in support of innovation have been put into effect in such areas as
vehicle chips, synthetic biology, large AI models, intelligent robots, shipbuilding and


4
marine engineering equipment, commercial spaceflight and online new economy. The
construction of 58 major industrial projects each worth more than one billion yuan
kicked off. C919, China’s first homegrown large passenger jet, started its commercial
flight, while the first made-in-China cruise ship also set sail on its commercial voyage.
Shanghai has been further opened up as an international financial center.
Another 47 licensed financial institutions were added, making the total to 1,771. The
Shanghai International Reinsurance Exchange and the Swap Connect were officially
launched. The Shanghai Equity Exchange was given the green light to pilot
subscription right services. A number of new financial products including 30-year
China government bond futures, freight index futures, alumina futures, SSE STAR
Market 50 ETF options started their trading. The city’s outstanding deposits and loans
exceeded 20 trillion yuan and 11 trillion yuan respectively. Shanghai’s global
connectivity
as
an
international
trade
center
has
been
reinforced.
The
establishment of China’s first Silk Road E-commerce Pilot Zone got the go-ahead. We
have intensified our efforts in integrating domestic and foreign trade. The National
Commodity Warrant Registration Center launched online registration in Shanghai.
China’s first yuan-settled LNG trade and digital yuan-settled crude oil transaction
were completed with success. Shanghai’s status as an international shipping
center has been fortified. We started the construction of the north port operation area
of Xiaoyangshan and the Shanghai East Railway Station known as the Oriental Hub.
More function institutions including the new representative office of the International
Chamber of Shipping were opened in Shanghai. Shanghai Port’s container throughput
reached 49.158 million TEUs, ranking the first globally for 14 consecutive years.
Shanghai’s capacity in nurturing original innovation as an international sci-tech
innovation center has
become
more
prominent.
We have
completed
the
construction of and put into operation Shanghai Synchrotron Radiation Facility Phase
II and the Live Cell Imaging Facility, and began the construction of the
magneto-inertial fusion energy project. National labs and bases in Shanghai have
received better services and stronger support. High-level research institutes such as
Shanghai Institute for Mathematics and Interdisciplinary Sciences and Shanghai AI


5
for Science (SAIS) were inaugurated. We have initiated campaigns aiming for
breakthroughs in key technologies of metaverse, blockchain, and high temperature
superconductivity. Seven high-quality incubators were unveiled. We have refined the
intellectual property pledge financing mechanism. Technology contracts reached
485.02 billion yuan in value, and the number of high-tech companies exceeded 24,000.
The “Five Centers” Initiative has been empowered by the city’s efforts in
attracting and retaining talents. The Talent Peak Project and the special program to
attract and nurture talents in key industries continued to make headway. We have
driven forward the pilot reform on the evaluation of scientists and researchers. The
Shanghai Global Talents Innovation and Entrepreneurship Competition was held with
success. Foreign talents have found it increasingly convenient to get their residence
permits and are more and more satisfied with their life in the city.
Deepened development of Pudong as a leading area of socialist modernization:
After a thorough review of the development experience over the past decade, we have
implemented the strategy to upgrade the China (Shanghai) Pilot Free Trade Zone
(FTZ). The General Plan for Advancing Institutional Opening-up of China (Shanghai)
Pilot Free Trade Zone in Alignment with High-standard International Economic and
Trade Rules, which includes 80 policy measures, was promulgated. The Pudong
comprehensive pilot reform plan and the list of the first batch of authorized items
have been approved and put into effect. We have implemented the 33 national pilot
measures for FTZ institutional opening-up. A number of major opening-up measures
have been adopted in an accelerated manner, including expanding the use of digital
yuan, facilitating cross-border corporate financing, and completing China’s first
ship-to-ship bonded LNG bunkering. We have improved the public service platform
for the open competition mechanism to select the best candidates among other
collaborative innovation mechanisms. We have moved faster to explore granting
temporary licenses to overseas practitioners. 126 new headquarters of various types
and 25 open innovation centers of large-scale enterprises have been set up. 18


6
regulations and 22 management measures have been promulgated for the Pudong
New Area.
Continuous implementation of the “three major tasks”: We have announced a new
round of municipal level supporting policies for the Lingang Special Area. The
expansion of the Yangshan Special Comprehensive Bonded Zone Phase III was
approved. We have carried out over 100 major industrial projects with a total
investment of 100 billion yuan. The total output of industrial enterprises above
designated size and fixed asset investment grew by 22.5% and 10.3% respectively.
The STAR Market has seen its functions enhanced, and Shanghai-based companies,
compared with those from other parts of China, boast the largest amount of funds
raised through initial public offering (IPO) and market capitalization. We have
undertaken 21 key cooperation initiatives for the integrated development of the
Yangtze River Delta (YRD), as well as 28 joint sci-tech innovation and research
projects. The Yangtze River Delta Science and Technology Innovation Equity
Investment Fund backed by the National Social Security Fund was launched. We have
sped up the construction of major projects such as the Shanghai section of the
Shanghai-Chongqing-Chengdu Railway. 152 cross-jurisdiction service items have
been incorporated into the one-stop government service portal of the YRD. We have
made solid progress in counterpart assistance as well as cooperation and exchange
within the YRD.
The role of the “three platforms” has become more prominent. The 6th China
International Import Expo (CIIE) was concluded successfully with a cumulative
intended transaction value of 78.41 billion US dollars on an annual basis, up by 6.7%.
The influence of the Shanghai City Promotion Convention as well as the Pudong and
Hongqiao parallel sessions of the Hongqiao International Economic Forum was
further enhanced. The CIIE has fully showcased its role as a major platform for
international procurement, investment promotion, cultural exchange, openness and


7
cooperation. In the Demonstration Zone of the Integrated Green Development of
the Yangtze River Delta, 24 institutional innovations such as the inter-provincial
project approval mechanism and cross-jurisdiction water joint protection plan were
spearheaded. The overall land-use planning for the Demonstration Zone has been
approved for implementation. The Shanghai section of the ecological shoreline of
Yuandang has been fully connected. The development of the Xicen Sci-tech
Innovation Park was accelerated. The key tasks outlined in the overall development
plan of Hongqiao International Hub for Opening-up were implemented. The
spillover effect of the Hongqiao International Central Business District has become
more manifest, as exemplified by upgraded headquarters capacity and expanded trade
functions. Work concerning Hong Kong and Macao special administrative regions,
Taiwan, foreign affairs and overseas Chinese made steady headway. International
Services Shanghai, a multilingual international service portal, was launched, pressing
the “acceleration button” for international exchanges.
Reforms in key areas have been deepened consistently. The reform of SOAs and
SOEs picked up pace. The six plans to develop world-class enterprises were carried
out across the board. The Shanghai Exchange Group was established. Investment
funds for the activation of SOAs and the high-quality development of SOEs were
launched. In order to promote the high-quality development of the private economy,
we have expedited the implementation of policy measures of the central government
to facilitate the growth of the private sector, supported the sound development of
private investment, formulated and implemented the “28 measures” to empower
micro, small and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs), and advanced the innovative
pilot projects for MSME financing and credit services. 97 new headquarters of private
enterprises were added in the city. The four-party cooperation involving government,
industry associations, banks and businesses was carried out on a higher level. We
pressed ahead with the reform of the single web portal for public resource trading and
put in place unified institutional, market, and management systems. The Shanghai


8
implementation plan for the Outline for Building China into a Strong Nation in
Quality was carried out in a steady manner, with the addition of 10 Shanghai
Standards and 37 Shanghai Brands respectively.
2. We have taken multiple measures to expand domestic demand and stabilize
external demand, and achieved significant results in high-quality economic
development.
Coordinated policies to stabilize growth have achieved synergy. Ten major actions
were undertaken to boost confidence, expand demand, stabilize growth, and promote
development. Such policy measures as the “15 measures” to boost consumption, the
“24 measures” to promote investment, the “21 measures” to stabilize foreign trade,
and the “20 measures” to attract foreign investment were introduced. We hosted major
consumption promotion events such as the Double Five Shopping Festival and six
themed consumption seasons and facilitated convenient payments for inbound
individuals. Another 1,215 first stores were set up and the total retail sales of
consumer goods grew by 12.6%. The “Ride the Wave of Rising Shanghai” event
series was successfully hosted. We started the construction of the eastern extension of
Metro Line 13, Metro Line 19 and Nanhui-Fengjing Line Phase I as well as the
western ring of the raw water pipeline system. S3 highway among other key
infrastructure projects was put to use. With an investment of 225.74 billion yuan
completed in key projects, the total fixed asset investment exceeded one trillion yuan,
up by 13.8%. We developed a comprehensive performance evaluation system for
industrial land, promoted the practice of smart manufacturing activities in high-rise
industrial properties and fostered smart maker spaces. A pilot on the flexible planning
and multi-function use of industrial land was launched. The area of inefficiently-used
construction land was reduced by 15.1 square kilometers. The comprehensive pilot
zone for cross-border e-commerce made steady headway. The pilot for the import of
remanufactured products was rolled out. Demonstration enterprises for international
trade distribution centers and certified Authorized Economic Operators (AEOs)
totaled 116 and 517 respectively. China-Europe freight train “Shanghai Express”


9
made 100 trips throughout the year. Exports of electric passenger vehicles, lithium
batteries and solar cells, the “three new segments” grew by 43.9%, 50.9%, and 0.9%
respectively.
Integration of the digital economy with the real economy has accelerated. We
formulated and implemented an action plan for the innovation-driven development of
the data industry. The digital transformation of the manufacturing industry was
expedited, with the establishment of three national benchmark smart factories, 19
demonstration factories, and 111 excellent application scenarios as well as the
cultivation of 25 leading companies with dominant role in their supply chains, and 34
industrial internet platforms cumulatively. A new round of action for the development
of new types of infrastructure kicked off with the launch of public AI computing
platforms and deployment of over 370 million IoT terminals and more than 77,000 5G
base stations across the city.
The urban layout has been further optimized. A comprehensive evaluation of the
implementation of the Shanghai Master Plan 2035 was carried out. The development
of the five new towns progressed smoothly. We introduced the second batch of 30
major functions, and started the construction of 117 major projects with a total
investment of 193.57 billion yuan as well as all five planned municipal general
hospitals. Transformation of the functions of Baoshan District in the north and Jinshan
District in the south (North-South Transformation) was accelerated in key areas with
such projects as the Wusong Campus of the Shanghai Academy of Fine Arts and the
Jinshan Campus of the Ruijin Hospital breaking ground.
We have pressed ahead with rural revitalization across the board. Policy
measures to accelerate agricultural technological innovation were formulated and
implemented, and efforts to build seed industry incubation bases picked up speed.
Planning and construction of Shanghai Modern Agricultural Industry Park (Hengsha
Xinzhou) moved on smoothly. We stepped up our efforts to attract investment to the


10
agricultural sector with actual paid-in capital exceeding 20 billion yuan for the first
time. 24 model villages for rural revitalization and 101,000 “beautiful courtyards”
were built. 210 kilometers of rural roads were upgraded, and 16,000 rural households
moved into new homes in relatively clustered settlements.
3. We have been fully dedicated to ensuring and improving people's well-being,
bringing a better life to our people.
We have worked harder and more effectively to address people's problems and
bring tangible benefits to them. We added 5,510 elderly care beds and 41
community canteens for seniors. We renovated 2,598 care beds for the cognitively
impaired and 7,715 homes to make them senior-friendly. 579 summer care classes for
primary school students were provided and an additional 5,308 places were added to
community childcare programs. We completed the renovation of 123,000 square
meters of scattered dilapidated housing in the downtown area, retrofitted 296,000
square meters of weak-framed houses and other old housing units, and started 10
urban village transformation projects. 3,001 elevators were installed in existing
multi-storey residential buildings. We also provided 81,000 units (rooms) of
subsidized rental housing and 11,000 beds in the “New Era Urban Builders and
Managers Homes”. 51,000 new electric vehicle public charging piles were installed.
31 community fitness centers, 80 fitness walkways and 671 exercise corners were
built or renovated. 25 demonstration smart wet markets were established.
We have steadily improved social security programs. We have accelerated policy
implementation to boost employment, such as stabilizing and expanding employment
opportunities, supporting entrepreneurship and offering skills training. A new public
website for job search and posting was launched. 606,000 new jobs were created and
227 community employment service centers were built. We have continuously
improved the employment support system for college graduates and other key groups.
Social security benefits such as pensions, medical insurance, and subsistence
allowances have continued to increase. We have extended social security coverage to


11
all those in flexible employment in Shanghai, and provided temporary price subsidies
and other support to those in need. The social security system and supporting system
for people with disabilities have been further improved.
Social programs have kept improving steadily. To accelerate the development of a
high-quality education system, we unveiled and implemented the new five standards
for compulsory education, deepened the pilot program of comprehensive higher
education reform, and restructured vocational education. UNESCO International
Institute for STEM Education, a UNESCO Category I Institute, was established in
Shanghai. We have achieved a smooth transition in Covid-19 response, and made
fresh progress in the Healthy Shanghai initiative. We have constantly improved the
healthcare referral system, accelerated the pilot program of high-quality development
of public hospitals, and ramped up community-based general practice service, family
doctor contract service and drug supplies. The reform on outpatient expenses
reimbursement through collective pooling has been completed for employment-based
healthcare insurance, and the diversified payment mechanisms for innovative drugs
and medical devices have been refined. New progress has been made in the work
related to women and children and work on ethnic and religious affairs.
We have strengthened the cultural soft power of Shanghai. The WorldSkills
Museum was completed and open to the public. A number of cultural and sports
events have returned with renewed vigor, including Shanghai International Film
Festival, Shanghai International Arts Festival, Shanghai Tourism Festival, Shanghai
International Art Fair, and the Shanghai Masters. We have completed the national
pilot reform on the management of cultural relics in private possession and the
construction of demonstration zones of culture relics preservation and utilization.
Shanghai athletes achieved outstanding results in major events such as the Asian
Games.
Solidarity has been strengthened between the military and the government as


12
well as between the military and the people. Coordination between the military and
the local communities has been further improved. Technologies and industry for
national defense have been bolstered with breakthroughs achieved in key areas. We
have completed the reform of the national defense mobilization system, pressed ahead
with the Double Support Model City campaign to solidify military-civilian unity, and
made concerted efforts to advance the “three jointly and three solidify”1 campaign.
Fresh progress has been achieved in national defense education, reserve forces
buildup, and veteran affairs.
4. As new headway has been made in urban governance, our city has become
more livable, resilient and intelligent.
We have achieved finer granularity in urban management. We have made solid
progress in urban renewal, exploring sustainable development models and improving
the systems, mechanisms and policies for urban renewal. The construction of the city's
digital foundation has picked up speed, new achievements have been made in the
demonstration zones of digital transformation, and the city's digital “vital signs”
system of urban operation has been iterated. Another eight kilometers of public
waterfront areas were linked up and open to the public, and the quality of the
waterfronts of the Huangpu River and Suzhou Creek has improved steadily. A total of
112 kilometers of overhead cables were moved underground, while the associated
electricity distribution facilities like poles, transformers and cabinets were renovated
along the routes. Landscape lighting of Xujiahui and other shopping districts was
upgraded, and 103 “beautiful street blocks” were built. Affiliated space of 59
government agencies, public service institutions and enterprises have been open to the
public. The inaugural Global Award for Sustainable Development in Cities (Shanghai
Award) was presented in Shanghai.
We have achieved notable advances in social governance innovation. We have
1 (Translator’s note): “three jointly and three solidify” refers to jointly study and innovate in theories to solidify
beliefs and convictions, jointly develop grassroots organizations to solidify frontline fortresses, and jointly foster
new civility practices to solidify military-civilian unity


13
further empowered governments at the sub-district/town level, while easing their
administrative burdens. We have improved the long-term mechanism of “one rule,
two lists2” in neighborhood and village committees, optimized the basic units of
social governance and reinforced the community worker teams. We have strived to
tackle the root causes of citizens’ complaints, and boosted the quality and efficiency
of the 12345 hotline service and the work of collecting people’s suggestions. “Lijian”
and other law and order campaigns have made sustained progress. We have rolled out
a tripartite alternative dispute resolution mechanism involving police stations, judicial
offices and law firms. The campaign to screen and rectify major hazards and that to
improve urban gas safety have progressed steadily. These combined efforts have
yielded 11 consecutive years of rising public sense of safety and satisfaction and
maintained overall social stability.
Solid progress has been made in environmental protection. Shanghai ranked the
first in the performance evaluation of the nationwide campaign to combat pollution.
We launched the third round of the Clean Air Plan of Action and phased out 11,000
China III diesel vehicles. We carried out a new round of survey and correction of
combined sewer systems and rectified sewage discharge outlets along the trunk of the
Yangtze River. Construction of the northern section of Luowen River of the Wusong
River Project and 52 rainwater storage tanks started. Phase IV of Zhuyuan wastewater
treatment plant was completed and put into operation. We have redoubled efforts in
domestic waste sorting, bringing up the recycling rate and moving closer towards the
“waste-free city” goal. We have implemented ten major actions for carbon peaking.
An additional 946,000 kilowatts of photovoltaic power were installed. With another
354,000 new energy vehicles (NEVs) sold, the NEV stock in Shanghai grew to 1.288
2 (Translator’s note): “one rule, two lists” refers to three documents that clarify the roles and responsibilities of
neighborhood and village committees: "Rules for the Management of Mandated Responsibilities of Neighborhood
and Village Committees in Shanghai (Trial)", "List of Items that Neighborhood and Village Committees are Legally
Required to Perform", and "List of Items that Neighborhood and Village Committees are Legally Required to Assist
with".


14
million, the highest among all the cities in the world. We successfully hosted the first
China Carbon Market Conference and the first Shanghai International Carbon
Neutrality Expo. We have added over 67,000 mu of forestland, 1,044 hectares of
green space, 231 kilometers of urban green paths, and 430,000 square meters of
vertical green landscaping.
5. We have driven government reform and innovation, and made new progress in
government administration.
The business environment in Shanghai has kept improving. Benchmarking against
the World Bank’s latest evaluation matrix, we have deepened our reform and fulfilled
208 tasks outlined in the sixth version of the business environment improvement
policies. On average, 1,904 new businesses were set up daily, up by 28.1%. The
existing stock of 2.892 million businesses accounts for 85% of the total business
players in Shanghai. The number of businesses per thousand people increased to 116.8,
topping the chart in the country. We have introduced service packages for key
businesses to compile related policies together, feed targeted information and provide
easy access to government services. The total amount of newly added tax cuts, fee
reductions, tax refunds, and fee deferrals exceeded 110 billion yuan.
We have strengthened law-based administration. The mid-term review of the
implementation progress of the 14th Five-year Plan was completed. We supported the
Municipal People’s Congress and its Standing Committee in issuing 13 local laws,
and formulated, amended and abolished 40 government regulations. We handled 778
proposals from deputies to the Municipal People’s Congress and 927 proposals of the
CPPCC Municipal Committee. We have driven ahead demonstration programs of
law-based administration. We have promoted the use of special credit reports in lieu
of records of violations. We have launched a pilot program of using an "inspection
code" for business-related administrative law enforcement, and have put in place a
comprehensive administrative law enforcement system at the sub-district and town


15
level. We have further engaged government counselors and culture and history
researchers in decision making.
We have bolstered the functions of the Government Online-Offline Shanghai
Portal and the Single Platform for Urban Management. Considerable progress has
been made in priority initiatives such as on-chain data storage, government service
blockchain development, urban information access QR code, and integrated
government administration. On the Government Online-Offline Shanghai Portal, We
have cumulatively introduced 41 items into the “One Service” initiative, provided 200
frequently used government services in a smart and convenient way, and unveiled 296
application-free services. The Single Platform for Urban Management has integrated
1,466 applications of various types. The functions of Suishenma, a government-issued
QR code for service provision and administration, have kept expanding and
improving. We have introduced a number of innovative features, such as “Single
Compliance QR Code” and “Easy Pass” for smart traffic management. We have
refined mechanisms for convenient sharing of public data, and made sure that requests
for data in key scenarios must be responded to.
The government’s conduct has been continuously improved. We acted in strict
accordance with the central Party leadership’s eight-point decision on improving
conduct, and continued to tackle pointless formalities, bureaucratism, over-indulgence
and extravagance. We conducted thorough studies to resolve effectively a batch of
pressing issues complained about by the public and enterprises. Acting on our
commitment to spending sparingly, we kept a tight control over general expenses,
comprehensively rolled out integrated budget management, and carried out a pilot
scheme on performance management based on cost budgeting, cutting over 10% of
cost. We improved the quality and efficiency of government audits, and coordinated
problem identification, rule-based management and reforms. Efforts to improve
integrity of Party members and combat corruption were further strengthened.
Fellow deputies, over the previous year, we carried out the themed education to study


16
and implement Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a
New Era, further aligned our thinking, will and action, and translated the success of
the themed education into higher quality of economic growth, higher living standards
of the people, and greater efficiency and effectiveness in governance, so that our
various undertakings scaled new heights and presented a new look. The achievements
we have made over the past year would not have been possible without the strong
leadership of Comrade Xi Jinping as the core of the Party Central Committee, the
sound guidance of Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for
a New Era, and the arduous endeavors made in solidarity by the people of Shanghai
under the leadership of the CPC Shanghai Municipal Committee. Hereby, on behalf of
the Shanghai Municipal People’s Government, I wish to express our heartfelt
gratitude to all fellow citizens for your hard work, to all the deputies to the Municipal
People’s Congress and members of the CPPCC Shanghai Municipal Committee for
your strong support to the work of the Government, to all other political parties,
industry and commerce federations, people’s organizations and public personages
from all sectors of society, to all departments of the Central Government, our fellow
provinces, autonomous regions and municipalities, the People’s Liberation Army and
the People’s Armed Police stationed in Shanghai, as well as to our fellow compatriots
in the Hong Kong and Macao special administrative regions, Taiwan and overseas,
and all our friends around the world for your interest in and support for Shanghai’s
development!
We are keenly aware of the many difficulties and challenges lying on the journey
ahead, as well as the shortcomings in our work. In particular, the external
environment remains complex and severe, geopolitical conflicts persist, and the global
economic recovery lacks momentum. There are bottlenecks in the domestic
circulation, insufficient effective demand, and weak overall expectations. Being a
highly externally-oriented economy, Shanghai is affected earlier, more significantly
and more directly by these factors. Therefore, we are under considerable pressure to
maintain our city’s steady economic operation, and we need to make greater efforts to
achieve all the objectives of the 14th Five-Year Plan. We will strive for further
breakthroughs in some core technologies in key fields, and we need to move obstacles
so that basic and applied research and industries can better feed into each other. New


17
growth drivers need to be bolstered, and smart, green and integrated development of
industries should be accelerated. Some enterprises, MSMEs in particular, are beset by
difficulties in their operation, and market confidence needs to be further improved.
There is still imbalance and insufficiency in urban and rural development, as well as
weakness in public welfare programs including employment, education, healthcare,
and elderly care. Ecological and environmental protection remains an arduous task,
and our governance of this megacity needs to be further strengthened. We must make
our services and management more effective, and further improve the conduct of
government. We must always face difficulties head-on and maintain firm resolve,
address problems and perform our duties to the best of our capacity, so that we can
deliver on our commitments to meet our citizens’ new expectations.
II. Major Tasks in 2024
This year marks the 75th anniversary of the founding of the People’s Republic of
China and it is a critical year in achieving the objectives set by the 14th Five-Year
Plan. We must act on, in all respects, the key message of the important remarks made
by General Secretary Xi Jinping, and focus on the new positioning, new propositions,
new requirements and new tasks he put forward during his inspection tours in
Shanghai. We shall take on the toughest issues with an enterprising spirit and a strong
sense of responsibilities, and continue to strive as a pioneer for national reform and
opening-up and a forerunner in innovation-driven development, so as to better
contribute to the national development.
In order to fulfill this year’s tasks, we must follow the guidance of Xi Jinping Thought
on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, fully internalize the spirit of
the 20th CPC National Congress, the second plenary session of the 20th CPC Central
Committee and the Central Economic Work Conference, and act on the key message
of the important remarks made by General Secretary Xi Jinping. It is imperative for us
to implement the plans made at the third and the fourth plenary sessions of the 12th
CPC Shanghai Municipal Committee, stay committed to the overarching guideline of
seeking progress while ensuring stability, fully and faithfully apply the new


18
development philosophy on all fronts, and focus on the primary task of pursuing
high-quality development as well as the strategic mission of forming a new
development pattern. We must concentrate our efforts on the “Five Centers” Initiative,
with sci-tech innovation as the leading force, reform and opening-up as the driving
force, national strategic tasks as the guidance, and urban governance modernization as
the guarantee. We will strike a better balance between domestic demand stimulation
and supply-side structural reform, between new urbanization and rural revitalization,
and between high-quality development and high-level security. We should effectively
enhance economic vitality, prevent and mitigate risks, improve expectations of the
society, consolidate and enhance the positive trend of economic recovery, continue to
promote effective qualitative development and reasonable quantitative growth,
improve people’s well-being, and maintain social stability. We will accelerate our
efforts to establish Shanghai as a socialist, modern and international metropolis with
global influence, and fully leverage our city’s leading and exemplary role in pursuing
Chinese modernization.
Taking all factors into consideration, we propose the following main targets for social
and economic development this year:

GDP growth rate of around 5%

An increase of 5% in the revenue of the general budget

Overall R&D expenditure making up about 4.5% of the city’s GDP

Surveyed urban unemployment rate kept within 5%

Household income increase in keeping with GDP growth

A target CPI of about 3%

Further reduction in energy intensity and CO2 intensity,

Reduction in major pollutants from key projects reaching national targets
This year, we will focus on the following areas.
1. We will build up the city’s capabilities and core competences by speeding up
the “Five Centers” development. We will stay committed to a concerted and holistic
approach to planning, and make breakthroughs in key areas to drive forward
development on all fronts. We will put more emphasis on sci-tech innovation,
continue to strengthen the core urban functions and hub-and-spoke role of Shanghai,


19
and better represent our country in the international cooperation and competition.
Accelerating the development of Shanghai as an international economic center.
We will continue to modernize the industrial system through sci-tech innovation,
focus on intelligent, green and integrated development, move faster to establish a
modern industrial system featuring “(2+2)+(3+6)+(4+5)”3, so as to generate new and
high-quality productive forces. We will drive forward new industrialization, increase
the share of the industrial economy, and pursue high-quality development of key
industrial chains. We will spare no effort to advance the new round of “Shanghai
Plans” regarding IC, biomedicine and AI industries. We will create and upgrade
high-end industrial clusters of NEVs, high-end equipment, advanced materials, civil
aviation and spatial information, and move faster to develop a pioneering zone for
industries of the future. We will empower high-quality development of the
manufacturing sector with the industrial internet, implement the “Intelligent Robot+”
initiative, and take the lead in the national pilot program for the approval and road
trials of intelligent connected vehicles. We will develop green manufacturing
standards and green and low-carbon supply chains, and build green industrial parks
and green factories. We will encourage providers of producer services, such as R&D
and design, supply chain management, inspection and testing, as well as intellectual
property services, to be more specialized and move up the value chain, and drive deep
integration of the modern service industry with the advanced manufacturing industry.
In the meantime, we will optimize and expand the space for industrial development
and promote new models of mixed land use such as multiple uses of industrial land.
3 (Translator’s note) 2+2：driving forward integration of the advanced manufacturing industry with the modern
service industry, and promoting digital transformation of traditional industries and green and low-carbon transition.
3+6: accelerating the development of the three leading industries of IC, biomedicine and AI, and the six key
industries of electronics and information, life and health, automobiles, high-end equipment, advanced materials
and fashionable consumer goods.
4+5: taking the lead in the four new arenas of digital economy, green and low-carbon, metaverse, and intelligent
terminals, and the five industries of the future, i.e., future health, future intelligence, future energy, future space
and future materials.


20
10 million square meters of space will be created for smart manufacturing activities in
high-rise industrial properties, and 13 square kilometers of inefficiently-used
construction land will be cut.
Accelerating the development of Shanghai as an international financial center.
We will work with the national financial authorities to pursue high-standard financial
opening-up and increase the city’s competitiveness and influence. On financial
markets, we will build up an international financial asset exchange at a faster speed,
press ahead with the development of the international reinsurance center with high
standards and optimize cross-border finance and offshore finance, so as to make the
financial markets more international. On financial products, we will introduce more
commodity and financial futures and options products to the market, continue to
develop more use cases for digital yuan and bolster fintech, green finance, inclusive
finance, pension finance and digital finance, so as to better serve the real economy,
boost sci-tech innovation and participate in the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI). On
financial institutions, we will attract impactful financial institutions and long-term
capital to the city and press ahead with the pilot programs of Qualified Foreign
Limited Partnership (QFLP) and Qualified Domestic Limited Partner (QDLP). On
financial infrastructure, we will step up cross-border connectivity and cooperation and
upgrade features and functions of the Cross-border Interbank Payment System. At the
same time, we will strengthen financial regulation across the board, enhance the
capacity to ensure that the markets are safe and under control, and fend off systemic
financial risks.
Accelerating the development of Shanghai as an international trade center. We
will build up Shanghai as a trade hub, further drive forward liberalization and
facilitation of trade and investment, forge a great synergy between international and
domestic trade, and put in place internationally competitive policies and mechanisms.
We will take an active part in the joint pursuit of the high-quality development of the
BRI. For instance, we will advance the high-standard development of the Silk Road


21
E-commerce Pilot Zone as part of our efforts to expand opening-up of e-commerce.
We will launch the comprehensive service platform to provide BRI-related services in
the YRD while boosting the capacity of local accounting, law and other professional
firms to serve international clients. To facilitate cross-border flow of people, we will
accelerate the development of an international business cooperation zone in the
Oriental Hub. In addition, Shanghai will further build up demonstration zones for the
innovative development of trade in services, enhance the functions of specialized
service export bases, and foster new business formats and models of trade in services.
We will also step up the development of import trade promotion and innovation
demonstration zones with a view to integrating import trade with industries and
consumption. The initiative to upgrade the capacity of headquarters economy and the
Global Operation Program will be carried out. We will also speed up the development
of commodity trading platforms with a turnover above 100 billion yuan as well as
those above one trillion yuan, attract more international economic organizations and
first-class traders, and boost the development of online service platforms for
producers.
Accelerating the development of Shanghai as an international shipping center.
With the focus on enhancing the capacity of allocating shipping resources globally,
Shanghai will redouble its efforts to develop high-end shipping services, upgrade the
shipping insurance underwriting and service capacity, innovate maritime arbitration
models, grow international ship management business and advance the reform of the
Shanghai Shipping Exchange in a proper and orderly manner. The functions of
Shanghai as a shipping hub will be further expanded. We will speed up the
development of seaports, airports, cruise ports and the collection and distribution
system. Major infrastructure projects such as the north port operation area of
Xiaoyangshan, the Oriental Hub East Railway Station, Phase IV of the Pudong
International Airport and Youdungang navigation channel upgrade. Luojing Port Area
Renovation Phase I will be put into operation. We will boost the development of
multimodal transport, promote container inland water transport in the YRD, support


22
hub carriers in Shanghai to build themselves into mega-carriers, and vigorously
develop the industry chain of the cruise economy. To support the digital, intelligent
and green transition of the shipping industry, Shanghai will further upgrade its
Mobility-as-a-Service platform for international container transport services, build a
pilot demonstration platform of digital shipping trade, accelerate the development of
supply chains for green methanol, LNG and other clean fuels and promote green
transportation means including battery-electric ships. Shanghai will lend a big boost
to marine economy and turn itself into a modern marine city.
Accelerating the development of Shanghai as an international sci-tech innovation
center. We will render stronger support to high-quality operation and development of
Shanghai-based national laboratories and bases, drive forward restructuring and
development of national key laboratories in the city, build up centers for basic
research and frontier science, and increase the accessibility and sharing of major
sci-tech infrastructure, instruments, equipment as well as data. We will build a
research pilot area dedicated to high-risk yet high-value basic research in advanced
interdisciplinary
areas.
We
will
explore
new
organizational
structures
for
breakthroughs in key and core technologies, invest in cutting-edge technologies for
industries of the future, vigorously develop indigenous and controllable core
industrial software and industrial control systems, and advance projects aimed at
seeking breakthroughs in major technological equipment and reshaping the industrial
foundation. New types of R&D institutions and high-level industrial innovation
platforms will be established. At the same time, we will reinforce the principal role of
enterprises in innovation, and encourage leading high-tech enterprises to become the
fount of original technologies. We will deepen the reform of the property rights
system for scientific achievements, optimize the valuation and pricing mechanisms
for technological factors and move faster to develop hi-tech services. We will support
the improvement of the IPO system of high-tech companies in the STAR market and
accelerate the establishment of a guiding fund for sci-tech innovations so as to
encourage long-term and patient capital to invest in early-stage, small companies and


23
hard and core technologies. We will develop the Zhangjiang Hi-Tech Park into a
world-leading hi-tech park, build up the functions of high-quality incubators, drive the
development of the neoBay Global Innovation and Entrepreneurship Community as a
functional area of original sci-tech innovations, and continue to implement the action
plan on reform and development of university hi-tech parks. We will also step up
protection of intellectual property rights, carry out the campaign of patent application
and commercialization, and forge ahead with the pilot program on intellectual
property rights of data. We will boost sci-tech exchanges and cooperation, and strive
to build up a globally competitive ecosystem for open innovation.
We will foster integrated development of education, science and technology, and
talent. We will persist in cultivating moral character and strengthen the broad
ideological and political curriculum. In our effort to improve the quality of basic
education, we will actively develop a national zone of quality and equitable
compulsory education. As we continue the comprehensive reform of higher education,
we will further implement the programs for developing first-class universities and
disciplines, disciplines with domestic and international recognition, and high-standard
local universities. New hubs for basic research will be built with the support of
leading research universities, and different types of platforms will be established to
integrate vocational education with industry. By leveraging the foundational role of
education in fostering innovative minds, we will enhance science education, refine
mechanisms for cultivating top-tier innovative talent in basic subjects, and optimize
development models of in-demand talent in key industries. Focusing on national
priorities and the city’s major tasks, we will increasingly cluster strategic science and
technology professionals, high-caliber talent from overseas and top-tier teams,
cultivate
young
science
and
technology
talent,
outstanding
engineers
and
highly-skilled workers, expand the scope when recruiting high-end professional
service talent, and turn Shanghai into a major hub for high-caliber talent. We will
promote the pilot program of comprehensive reform of the talent development
framework, adopt new approaches to evaluating science and technology talent, and


24
deepen the reform of professional title evaluations, utilization of scientific and
technological achievements, and R&D expenditure management. To create an
enabling innovation ecosystem, we will provide premium services to global talents,
advance reform to offer one-stop, full-cycle support, and improve policies on housing,
entry and exit, as well as stay and residence. In addition, we will strive to turn
Shanghai into a more inviting city for young professionals, and create a world-class
talent development environment.
2. Driving steady and healthy economic development and improving its quality
and efficiency. Balancing short-term and long-term as well as domestic and
international considerations, we will strengthen the foundational role of consumption,
the key role of investment and the underpinning role of foreign trade, and work
towards a lasting economic recovery.
We will unleash the full potential of consumption. In our effort to become a global
consumption hub, we will host the fifth “Double Five Shopping Festival” and other
major promotional activities, attract more global product launches to Shanghai, and
improve the vitality of commercial districts. We will foster new forms of consumption,
promote innovative patterns of cultural and tourism consumption, and create synergy
projects such as “exhibition plus commerce”, “culture and tourism plus commerce”
and “sports plus commerce”. We will also develop new highlights in digital, big-ticket,
service, green, and urban fashion consumption, and expand consumption in key areas
such as automobiles, smart home appliances, trendy products designed and made in
China, and catering. To further enhance the consumer experience, we will continue to
diversify payment options for inbound visitors, and set world-leading standards for
products, services and industry practices.
We will increase effective investment. We will accelerate the construction of major
projects with investments of 230 billion yuan this year. We will break ground on the
eastern section of Line 20 Phase I and the eastern extension of Shanghai


25
Demonstration Zone Railway, expedite the construction of Chongming Line and
Jiading-Minhang Line, and complete the line connecting Hongqiao and Pudong
airports, as well as the western extension of Line 17. Additionally, we will advance
the construction of major infrastructure projects, such as the Shanghai Section of
Shanghai-Nantong
Railway
Phase
II
and
the
Shanghai
section
of
Shanghai-Chongqing-Chengdu High-Speed Railway, complete such major projects as
the Shanghai section of Shanghai-Suzhou-Huzhou Railway and the eastern section of
Beiheng Corridor. We will introduce more landmark industrial projects, and foster
new infrastructure such as intelligent computing clusters, the urban blockchain of
Pujiang Digital Chain, and data transaction chains. We will also implement a new
round of high-level technological transformation at enterprises, and create 100
demonstration projects for technological transformation.
We will stabilize the overall performance of foreign trade and foreign investment.
We will ignite new momentum for foreign trade development, refine and implement
policies to stabilize foreign trade, and support enterprises in exploring diverse
overseas markets. We will also promote high-quality development of Special Customs
Supervision Zones, enhance customs clearance, logistics, insurance, payment and
settlement functions of the single window platforms for international trade, and
champion new types of international trade such as offshore trade, cross-border
e-commerce and bonded maintenance. We will help stabilize existing foreign
investment and attract additional foreign investment, expand new fields of foreign
investment, and further open up the manufacturing sector. Additionally, we will
spearhead the national comprehensive pilot program of expanded service sector
opening-up, and advance the Global Partner Program to promote foreign investment
and the program for upgrading foreign-funded R&D centers.
We are committed to creating a first-class business environment. Focused on
being market-oriented, law-based and internationalized, we will implement another
150 tasks and measures in business environment reform to comprehensively enhance


26
the experience of enterprises. We will build up communication mechanisms, including
four-party cooperation involving the government, industry associations, banks and
businesses, as well as business round-tables. We will enhance the “service package”
mechanism for key enterprises, better help enterprises reduce burdens and increase
efficiency, and respond to their needs with greater speed. We will thoroughly remove
hidden criteria and barriers that hinder market-driven allocation of factors of
production, and refine the relevant institutional system. In areas such as bankruptcy
and foreign-related commercial dispute resolution, we will explore innovative
measures that are aligned with international norms, and strengthen the overall
advantages of our business environment.
We will stimulate the vitality of all business entities. We will firmly promote a new
round of SOE reform and enhancement, further optimize classified supervision, and
deepen the reform of state-owned capital investment and operation companies. We
will also increase investment in strategic emerging industries and industries of the
future, and effectively leverage the assets of SOEs such as land and industrial parks.
In addition, we will promote better SOE governance and the development quality of
state-owned listed companies. We will work unswervingly both to consolidate and
develop the public sector and to encourage, support and guide the development of the
private sector. We will bolster the development and growth of the private sector,
optimize the legal environment for its development, and give greater support to its
investment and development. We will improve the government-supported financing
guarantee system and credit award and subsidy policies for micro, small and
medium-sized enterprises. We will also strengthen the cultivation of small and
medium-sized specialized and sophisticated enterprises that produce new and unique
products, and help them to scale up. We will deepen collaboration between the central
and local governments, attract more headquarters of central SOEs and their core
functions to Shanghai, and jointly develop industrial and supply chains. We will
accelerate the establishment of a comprehensive and market-oriented trading platform
covering all factors of production, and continue to deepen the reform of the single


27
web portal for public resource trading. We will also build a pilot zone for market
supervision digitization, launch a new quality improvement program, and publish a
new batch of “Shanghai Standards” and “Shanghai Brands”.
3. Promoting high-standard reform and opening-up, and enhancing development
momentum and competitiveness. We will pursue systematic integration and
efficiency through collaboration, double down on trailblazing reforms and opening-up
across the board, and take the lead in comprehensive reform and high-standard
opening-up.
We will further drive integrated development of the Yangtze River Delta. We will
fully implement the policies and measures of the central government, formulate and
implement the third three-year action plan, and carry out key cooperation projects in
areas such as sci-tech innovation, industrial innovation, collaborative opening-up,
ecological and environmental protection, public services, and safety and security in
development. We will also press ahead with major cross-regional infrastructure
projects, such as electricity transmission from other regions into Shanghai, and
improve the system and mechanism for integrated development. We will accelerate
the development of the G60 Science and Technology Innovation Corridor and the
industrial innovation belt along Shanghai and Nanjing in the Yangtze River Delta, and
work together to build a YRD regional development community. We will carry out
study on the territorial spatial planning for the Yangtze River Delta, and initiate
formulation of the territorial spatial planning of Shanghai Metropolitan Area. We will
advance institutional innovations in the YRD Demonstration Zone of Ecological,
Green and Integrated Development, and promote their replication and promotion. We
will also accelerate the construction of key projects, such as Square Hall and Water
Courtyard,
and
the
Shanghai-Suzhou-Jiaxing
Intercity
Railway,
and
provide
supporting services for the completion and operation of Huawei’s R&D center in
Qingpu District. We will further implement policies and measures to enhance the
capacity of the Hongqiao International Hub for Opening-up, build and make good use


28
of important platforms such as the Hongqiao Overseas Trade Center and the Hongqiao
Import Commodity Exhibition and Trading Center, and strengthen international
aviation services. We will do our best to host the seventh China International Import
Expo with exceptional services, promote the introduction of more new products,
technologies and services, and continue to amplify the spillover effect. We will
actively implement the opinions on driving high-quality development of the Yangtze
River Economic Belt, and strive to achieve both high-level ecological protection and
green, innovative development.
We will build Pudong as a leading area of socialist modernization in an all-round
way. With a focus on key areas that have the best chance for success, we will
introduce more substantive measures to achieve breakthroughs at key links for
market-based allocation of factors of production. We will fully implement the
opinions of central authorities and 280 tasks stipulated in the action plans of Shanghai,
pilot the retail of imported non-prescription drugs and medical devices via
cross-border e-commerce, promote bonded maintenance, remanufacturing and bonded
R&D outside Special Customs Supervision Zones on an experimental basis, make
Pudong the most preferable destination for international talent, and assist the
Shanghai Municipal People’s Congress and its standing committee in making laws
and regulations for Pudong. We will carry out the pilot program on comprehensive
reform of Pudong at a quicker pace, amplifying the impact of the list for the first
batch of authorized items, making the customs clearance mechanism more and more
convenient, pioneering new frontiers in RMB-denominated offshore transaction and
international cooperation on standards, and enhancing the effectiveness of reforms in
synergistic innovations and the import of special goods for research and development.
We will expedite the development of FTZ and Lingang Special Area. We will
follow through with the 80 measures proposed in the general plan on alignment with
high-standard international economic and trade rules in an effort to steadfastly expand
institutional opening-up involving rules, regulations, management and standards. We


29
will advance the high-level opening-up for cross-border service trade and investment,
further open up such areas as telecom, finance and healthcare, and optimize the
operational mode of international transshipment and consolidation platforms. We will
accelerate the implementation of measures to better manage the cross-border flow of
data and speed up the construction of the international industrial park of data economy.
Reforms of behind-the-border rules will be first implemented in IPR protection,
government procurement, etc. Support will be rendered to the application of policies
designed for the Yangshan Comprehensive Special Bonded Zone to designated areas
within Pudong. The development of Shanghai Petroleum and Natural Gas Exchange
and other high-performance platforms will be boosted. We will further develop the
functionality of comprehensive service platforms, including “Cross-border Connect”,
“Shipping Connect” and “Legal Connect”. We will accelerate the planning for the
development of emerging industries like new types of energy storage and smart
wearables. Major construction projects such as Dishuihu School and Lingang Campus
of Pudong Hospital will be launched.
We will deepen cooperation and exchange. We will step up our assistance to and
collaboration and coordination with paired-up regions, assist them in solidifying and
expanding their poverty alleviation gains, and propel full revitalization of rural areas.
Exchange and cooperation with Hong Kong, Macao and Taiwan regions will be
carried out actively, and work concerning foreign affairs and overseas Chinese will be
delivered effectively. We will ramp up international communication and promotion to
better tell China’s stories in general and Shanghai’s stories in particular across the
world.
4. Further optimizing the spatial layout and fostering new growth drivers of the
city. Bearing in mind the characteristics of megacity development, we will allocate
resources in a more rational manner, highlight the supporting role of key projects, and
step on the gas to rework functions, modernize industries and enhance quality so as to
form
a
favorable
trajectory
of
differentiated,
complementary
and
concerted


30
development.
We will amplify the spillover effect of the central districts in an all-round way.
We will strive to attract more high-capacity resources and high-end events to the
central districts, promote the development of districts where the Middle Ring Road
runs through and improve the comprehensive service functionality of sub-centers of
Shanghai. We will continue to generate more business formats in iconic CBDs
renowned worldwide, inter alia, Nanjing Road, Lujiazui and Xujiahui, promote the
high-quality clustering of modern services in such areas as the North Bund and
Suhewan, and build up compounds for innovations in science and technology by high
standards, including Great Knowledge and Innovation Community, Silicon Alley
Shanghai and Universal Software Park.
We will bring the development of the five new towns to the next level. We will
continue to push forward major function projects: enterprise headquarters, R&D
innovations, platforms of production factors, to name a few. We aim to foster leading
and high-growth companies in advanced manufacturing and modern services to make
sure these sectors grow by high standards. Efforts will be made to build integrated
transportation hubs in new towns such as the Songjiang hub, the western extension of
Metro Line 12, the southern extension of Metro Line 15, Lianggang Express Line and
Nanhui-Fengjing Line. As for high-quality public amenities, we will build 26 new
elementary and middle schools and kindergartens, accelerate the construction of
branches of tertiary hospitals like Zhongshan and Xinhua Hospitals, and open to the
public the completed sections of new town green belts.
We will double down on the North-South Transformation. We will fast-track the
modernization and upgrading of steelmaking and chemical industrial bases, catalyze
the
development
of
specialized
industrial
parks
such
as
North
Shanghai
Biopharmaceutical Industrial Park and Carbon Valley Green Bay, and cultivate and
attract a batch of champions and leading companies along the industrial and supply


31
chains. We will put multiple functions in and ensure the high-standard development of
such critical transformation zones as Wusong Innovation City and Shanghai Bay Area
Science and Technology Innovation City to increase the supply of premium public
services. We will press ahead with the construction of the Legoland Park & Resort,
and turn the first shovel of soil for Shanghai Baoshan Railway Station and other
projects.
We will go all-out to further develop Chongming into a world-class eco-island.
We will put dedicated policies in place to develop ecological economy and improve
the ecosystem. To build Chongming, Changxing and Hengsha into zero-carbon,
low-carbon and carbon-negative islands respectively, we will proactively promote the
development of a carbon neutrality demonstration zone on the world-class ecological
island, boost the growth of the marine equipment industry cluster on Changxing
Island, and steadfastly push forward the construction of the Shanghai Modern
Agricultural Industrial Park (Hengsha Xinzhou).
5. Advancing the integrated development of urban and rural areas and boosting
rural revitalization across the board. Prioritizing agricultural and rural development,
we will draw inspiration from the “1,000 Model Villages and 10,000 Renovated
Villages Project” and tilt policies toward more effective two-way flow of urban and
rural resources with a view to improving the quality and productivity of agriculture,
making rural areas a better place for life and work, and raising the income and
well-being level of farmers in general.
We will give primacy to the development of modern urban agriculture. We will
ensure accountability for arable land conservation and food security, continue to
strengthen the sustained production and stable supply of grains and vegetables, and
construct 40,000 mu of new high-standard farmland. We will bolster innovation in
agricultural technologies including biomanufacturing and plant factories, vigorously
develop agricultural seed breeding, and propel the cultivation of modern seed


32
companies. We will kick off the planning and construction of 12 agricultural zones
equipped with cutting-edge facilities, and build 30,000 mu of new unmanned farms
for grain production to set an example for the high-quality development of
agriculture.
We will conduct the campaign on rural development to a greater extent. We will
advance the development of 28 villages exemplary of rural revitalization and continue
to promote the relatively clustered settlements of rural households. We will inaugurate
pilot projects in 5 villages to make the rural area a harmonious and beautiful place
featuring well-conserved local culture with a pleasant living and working environment
through
sound
planning,
construction,
environmental
protection,
as
well
as
management and maintenance. In the process of the rural habitat improvement
campaign, we will revamp 300 kilometers of rural roads. Moreover, we will make
headway with the campaign for rural landscape conservation and development,
encourage the growth of agritourism, cultural and creative business facilities, as well
as healthcare and elderly care and other new industries and business formats, and
create distinctive, vibrant and beautiful villages.
We will expand the sources of income for farmers. We will deepen land reforms in
rural areas and roll out holistic land management across the city. The development of
the transfer and transaction market of rural property rights will gather pace. Multiple
approaches will be adopted to better mobilize collective resources and assets so that
the collective economy grows more robustly. We will put in place rural talent
development programs. As we continue to improve the comprehensive rural
assistance mechanism, we will follow through on aid projects till the livelihood of the
rural households in difficulties gets better in real terms.
6. Advancing further towards becoming an international cultural metropolis and
enhancing the city’s cultural soft power. Based on the fusion of red culture,
Shanghai culture and Jiangnan culture, we will accelerate the creation of a Shanghai


33
model for enhancing cultural self-confidence and self-reliance, and strive to take the
lead on the path to modernization which is characterized by the harmony of material
and cultural-ethical advancement.
We will strengthen and celebrate the cultural character of the city. We will apply
the core socialist values extensively, take concrete steps to promote cultural and
ethical progress among our people, and further the building of New Era Civilization
Practice Centers. We will establish a reading service system for all residents and
continue to implement the “Read in Shanghai” campaign. A strong boost will be given
to philosophy and social science studies with Chinese characteristics. We will
strengthen the city's capacity for international communication and create impactful
city branding showcases that have a broad international influence.
We will improve institutions to enhance historical legacy protection and maintain
cultural continuity. As Shanghai holds the esteemed status as the birthplace of the
Party, we will further amplify its red legacy, bolstering the protection and optimizing
the utilization of “red sites”, revolutionary relics, and historic zones. Preparations will
be made for the establishment of a Shanghai revolution and military museum. We will
further implement the Urban Memory Project, safeguarding the city's intangible
cultural heritage expressed in various forms such as opera, folk art, and handicraft,
deepening research on the local history of Shanghai, and preserving and respecting
the historical heritage of the city.
We will promote cultural undertakings and the prosperity of cultural industries
in the city. We will further implement inclusive cultural infrastructure projects, open
Shanghai Museum East in Pudong to the public, get ready to build a Shanghai
Industrial Museum, accelerate the development of major cultural facilities such as
Shanghai Grand Opera House, optimize the distribution and functions of public
cultural facilities at the community level, create a number of new public cultural
spaces, and encourage public cultural facilities to offer night-time services. We will


34
further implement the Shanghai Literature and Art Scaling New Heights Project, and
optimize incentives for arts troupes to develop talents and programs and launch more
original works special of Shanghai. We will implement major cultural projects to spur
the development of the cultural and creative industries, foster leading enterprises and
new business models in this industry, stimulate the fashion and art market, give a
strong boost to film and television creation, art trading, performing arts, e-sports,
tourism, sports, online culture, and creative design, promote cultural products and
services to overseas markets, and cultivate Shanghai-based cultural brands with global
influence.
We will drive further the integrated development of culture and tourism. We will
implement the preservation and development plan for the Shanghai section of the
national parks with Yangtze River culture as their theme, take bigger steps to boost the
development of key areas in the Shanghai International Resort, promote the north and
south extensions of the Huangpu River cruise sightseeing route, and upgrade the
cultural and tourism functions of the Suzhou Creek. We will accelerate the
development of “red tourism”, industrial tourism and rural tourism, maximize
inbound tourist flow, and resume the operation of international cruise lines. We will
harness the spillover effects of major exhibitions and festive celebrations, and
organize high-quality cultural and tourist activities. We will explore new forms of
cultural tourism, such as immersive experiences and the combination of virtual and
physical tours.
We
will
promote
the
development
of
both
non-competitive
sports
and
competitive sports. We will further implement the public sports and fitness resource
expansion initiative, speed up the construction of sports parks, and carry out a wide
range of public fitness activities such as citizens’ games. We will host international
sports events such as Formula 1 Chinese Grand Prix, the Olympic Qualifier Series for
Paris 2024, and the ISU Four Continents Figure Skating Championships (4CC), while
developing and organizing Shanghai's own brand events such as Shanghai Sailing


35
Open. We will give support in various forms to Shanghai athletes and help them
achieve good results in major competitions such as the Olympics.
7. Further promoting green and low-carbon transformation and making
Shanghai a beautiful city. Guided by the conviction that lush mountains and lucid
waters are invaluable assets, we will increase environmental investment and engage
actively in collaborations to achieve carbon reduction, pollution reduction, greenery
expansion and economic growth all at the same time, in order to make the city
greener.
We will continue to make solid gains in the battle against pollution. A new
three-year action plan to build a Beautiful Shanghai will be initiated. We will
strengthen the prevention and control of ozone pollution, strengthen the control over
diesel truck pollution, and encourage key enterprises to achieve extra reduction of
nitrogen oxide emission. We will start to build 26 rainwater storage tanks; the
construction of the Bailong Port Phase III and the parallel system of the Combined
Sewer Phase I will speed up; Taihe Sewage Plant's expansion project will be
completed; the investigation and remediation of unwanted sewage discharge outlets
into rivers and the sea will continue; and the survey of combined sewer systems will
be fully completed. We will optimize the full-cycle domestic waste sorting system,
build 300 community recycling service points, and accelerate the construction of
kitchen waste recycling facilities such as the Bioenergy Reuse Center Phase III, thus
marching toward the goal of a waste-free city. We will implement action plans to
prevent and control noise pollution. We will push forward the correction of issues
found through national-level audit on environmental protection.
We will actively and steadily promote progress towards carbon peaking and
carbon neutrality. We will promote the transition from capping the total amount and
intensity of energy consumption to capping the total amount and intensity of carbon


36
emissions, speed up the upgrade of coal power plants to further improve energy
efficiency and reduce carbon emissions, implement deep-sea wind power projects,
and install 10,000 new public charging piles for electric vehicles. We will actively
promote the development of virtual power plants and work to reduce the load
peak-to-valley difference of the city's power grid. Two million square meters of
buildings with ultra-low energy consumption will be built, and four million square
meters of public buildings will be renovated to increase energy efficiency. We will
support key industries in exploring carbon emission accounting, carbon footprint
certification and evaluation, and shut down 450 backward production facilities. We
will actively promote green travel, the Clean Plate Campaign, and promote green and
low-carbon living.
We will scale up efforts to build green public spaces. To further improve the
banks of the Huangpu River and the Suzhou Creek as well as the park belt encircling
the city, we will promote the opening of waterfront spaces such as the north-central
section of the Yangpu Riverside and the south extension of the Xuhui Riverside along
the Huangpu River, accelerate the development of the belt of eco-parks, and achieve
connectivity at 17 points on the outer ring road green belt. We will accelerate the
march toward a Park City by opening the southern zone of Shanghai Expo Culture
Park, building 120 new parks, getting 30 urban parks to be open 24 hours a day, and
developing an additional 31,000 mu of forestland, 1,000 hectares of green spaces, 200
kilometers of urban greenway, and 400,000 square meters of vertical green
landscaping.
8. Further enhancing the resilience of Shanghai and modernizing its urban
governance. Firmly committed to the goal of building a People's City, we will drive
greater granularity in urban governance to achieve a better balance between
development and safety. In so doing, we will strive to build a new governance model
with Chinese characteristics that is suitable for a magacity like Shanghai.


37
We will further implement the action plan for urban renewal. We will create an
innovative urban renewal model through conceptual and methodological innovation,
strengthen the control of renewal costs, coordinate the use of resources, and refine
policies concerning the architect-planner-appraiser joint responsibility, land planning,
standards and regulations, as well as taxation and financial matters. With regard to the
renovation of old neighborhoods, dilapidated houses and remaining urban villages, we
will complete the renovation and refurbishment of 120,000 square meters of scattering
dilapidated houses and 310,000 square meters of weak-framed old houses in the main
urban districts, and start ten urban village renovation projects. We will mobilize
various actors to promote the renewal of a number of old industrial zones, commercial
areas, business districts, historic zones, and municipal infrastructure facilities, and
accelerate some major urban renewal projects such as the Second Façade of the Bund.
The effectiveness and efficiency of social governance will be improved. We will
continue to empower governments at the subdistrict/town level and ease their
administrative burdens, optimize education and training for community workers,
strengthen the building of platforms for collaborative and participatory governance,
and improve community services. We will leverage the role of trade unions, the
Communist Youth League, the Women's Federation and other social organizations as a
bridge between our people and government, and at the same time promote the healthy
growth of social organizations. We will properly handle ethnic and religious affairs.
We will apply and scale up the Fengqiao Experience and Pujiang Experience in the
new era, address the concerns and complaints of citizens at their doorsteps,
proactively collect their opinions and suggestions, improve the “12345” hotline
service, improve the existing conflict management mechanisms, enhance the city's
safety risk prevention and control capabilities, and thus make Shanghai a safer city.
We will further refine urban governance. We will accelerate the building of
15-minute life circles, strengthen the development of embedded community service


38
facilities, and promote the opening and sharing of spaces within 40 affiliated spaces of
government agencies, public service institutions, and corporate entities. A total of 130
kilometers of overhead cables will be placed underground, while the associated
electricity distribution facilities like poles, transformers, and cabinets will be
renovated along the routes. We will upgrade the riverbank landscape lighting along
the Suzhou Creek in the main urban area and along the elevated inner ring road, and
build 100 beautiful street blocks. We will promote the implementation of the Sponge
City project and speed up efforts to revamp areas prone to flooding.
We will build a strong and solid guarantee for urban safety. Focusing on key
industries, key fields, and key areas such as hazardous chemicals, transportation,
construction, fire prevention, gas supply, special equipment, large events, and
crowded places, we will take proactive and resolute actions to address the root causes
of hazards in production, take concrete steps to improve preparedness for flood and
typhoon, and strengthen efforts to detect and remove hidden risks. In so doing, we
hope to become a model city of safe development, create national-level demonstration
communities for comprehensive disaster mitigation, and build 150 miniature fire
stations in neighborhoods, all with the aim of fundamentally raising the safety level of
the city. We will carry out special campaigns and initiatives to ensure food safety, and
take further actions to consolidate achievements in drug safety. We will optimize the
city's emergency response system, strengthen the reserve of emergency materials, and
actively and steadily advance the development of public infrastructure for both
regular and emergency uses.
9. Taking further measures to substantially improve people's living conditions
and life quality. Following the principle of safeguarding and improving people’s
well-being through development, we will take more measures to bring tangible
benefits to people, including the implementation of 34 government projects to
improve people's living conditions, address their concerns and needs, especially


39
immediate and pressing ones, improve their well-being, and ultimately realize
common prosperity.
We will provide better employment services and build a stronger social security
system. Priority will be given to employment promotion, while startup support
policies such as guarantee for borrowing and vocational training subsidies will be
optimized. Our goal is to create more than 550,000 new urban jobs. We will provide
targeted employment assistance to key groups such as recent college and university
graduates and people with difficulty in finding employment, and offer necessary
services for people with flexible employment arrangements. We will make
coordinated adjustments to the criteria and levels of livelihood security benefits such
as pensions, medical insurance and subsistence allowances. We will pay close
attention to the low-income population and offer them tiered and classified social
assistance.
Elderly and child care services will be improved. We will optimize the network of
elderly care facilities, add 4,000 beds in elderly care institutions and 30 community
seniors canteens, adapt 3,000 beds to the needs of the cognitively impaired, strengthen
training and incentive mechanisms for care workers, strengthen the development and
application of geriatric technology and products, and take actions to empower the
elderly to access and embrace advanced information technologies. We will add 3,000
daycare seats in public kindergartens and 7,000 in community childcare centers. We
will optimize population-related services, strengthen the protection of women and
children's rights and interests, strive to become a child-friendly city, and promote the
adaptation of public spaces to the needs of young kids. We will create a barrier-free
environment for the disabled and improve disability prevention and rehabilitation
services.
We will deepen the building of a Healthy Shanghai. We will expand the availability
of quality medical resources, and optimize such measures as giving priority to


40
community health centers in the allocation of tertiary hospital specialist appointments,
thus continuing to strengthen the capacity and capabilities of community health
services. We will implement pilot projects for building tight-knit urban medical
groups. We will deepen the reform of public hospitals and advance the building of
their clinical research system and capacity. We will improve the multi-tiered
well-connected medical insurance system, deepen the reform of payment methods,
and deepen the reform of procurement mechanisms for drugs and medical
consumables. We will continue to develop effective mechanisms for the prevention
and control of major infectious diseases. We will enhance the preservation and
accelerate the innovative development of traditional Chinese medicine (TCM).
We will work steadily to improve the housing conditions of citizens. Through the
combination of rental and purchase, we will improve the city's affordable housing
program, offer 70,000 units (rooms) of subsidized rental housing, offer 30,000 beds in
the “New Era Urban Builders and Managers Homes”, and build and source over
10,000 units of government-subsidized housing. We will install 3,000 elevators in
existing multi-storey residences, and improve the long-term management mechanism
for elevators installed in such buildings. Closely following the principle that “houses
are for living in, not for speculation”, we will work to keep land costs, housing prices
and market expectations stable, meet the rigid demand for housing and the need to
improve living conditions, and maintain the steady and healthy development of the
real estate market.
Fellow deputies:
It is an excellent Chinese tradition that the army cherishes the people and the people
support the army. Having a big picture in mind, we will play an active part in China's
efforts to consolidate and enhance its integrated national strategic system and
capabilities. We will strengthen the alignment of military and civilian policies and
rules, promote military-civilian resource sharing and two-way demand matching,


41
promote
public
education
on
national
defense,
strengthen
national
defense
mobilization and defense reserve force buildup, and promote mutual support between
the military and civilian sectors. In this way, we will further enhance collaboration
between the military and the government, as well as between the military and
civilians.
We believe that practical work is critical. As a saying goes, actions speak louder than
words. As a pioneer and forerunner, we will take bold and effective steps to overcome
difficulties, break new ground, and score more substantial development results. We
will thus translate the work plans into a tangible reality!
III. Building a Better Government in All Aspects
To fulfill our tasks prioritized for this year, it is essential that the government
strengthen its self-improvement. We must always be aware of our mission and
responsibilities and speed up the realization of a law-abiding, innovative, clean and
service-oriented government that satisfies the needs of the people. It is our hope to
achieve
sustainable
and
healthy
socioeconomic
development
through
the
modernization of government governance.
1. Keeping strong political commitment and loyalty. We will firmly support and
uphold Comrade Xi Jinping’s core position on the Party Central Committee and in the
Party as a whole and the guiding role of Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with
Chinese Characteristics for a New Era and uphold the Central Committee’s authority
and its centralized and unified leadership. We will consolidate and scale up the
achievements of theoretical study and awareness education of the Party's mission, and
transform the Party's innovative theories, including Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism
with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, into a powerful force for strengthening


42
ideals, enhancing Party character, guiding practice, and advancing our work. We will
continue to improve our political judgment, thinking and execution capability,
comprehensively and thoroughly implement the decisions and arrangements of the
CPC Central Committee, and always closely follow the CPC Central Committee with
Comrade Xi Jinping at its core in thinking, stance, and action.
2. Staying steadfastly committed to reform and innovation, and making greater
efforts to improve government efficiency. We will complete the reform of
government institutions. We will harness the power of data to improve efficiency and
service, promote the iterative upgrading of the online government services and online
government governance portals, enrich the application scenarios of integrated office
platforms, to basically form a digital government and accelerate the elimination of the
digital divide. We will coordinate and push data generation, utilization and protection,
work towards establishing systems and standards for data circulation and transactions,
and promote authorized operation of public data. We will establish a closed-loop
integrated mechanism consisting of “review, approval, supervision, enforcement, and
credit” for notification-and-commitment-based administrative approval, strengthen
comprehensive supervision in key areas, and deepen inclusive and prudential
supervision. We will implement across-the-board cost and budget performance
management, strengthen the life-cycle management of government procurement
chains and public assets, and deepen taxation reform. We will complete the fifth
economic survey with high quality.
3. Adhering to the rule of law and steadily and comprehensively promoting
law-based government administration. We will listen more widely and carefully to
the public, gather people's wisdom and strengths, and create best practices of
whole-process people's democracy. We will strengthen government legislation for key
areas and emerging fields, and strengthen the governance of government regulations
and administrative normative documents. We will deepen the implementation of
major administrative decision-making procedures. We will work to ensure fair and


43
just law enforcement, improve the quality of administrative law enforcement, and
basically form an administrative law enforcement coordination and supervision
system across the municipal, district and sub-district/town levels. We will continue to
increase the transparency of government affairs, aiming to improve implementation,
service, and supervision through greater openness. We will further enhance
government integrity and improve mechanisms for the government to keep its
promises and enhance its trustworthiness. We will implement the newly amended
Administrative Reconsideration Law so that administrative reconsideration will be the
main channel for resolving administrative disputes. We will accept, as required by law,
the oversight of the Municipal People’s Congress and its standing committee, and
readily subject ourselves to the democratic oversight of Shanghai Municipal
Committee of the CPPCC, public oversight, and oversight through public opinion.
Government auditing and statistical and financial supervision will be strengthened
across the board. We in the government will readily accept the oversight of the law,
supervisory bodies, and the people.
4. Taking strict measures to ensure government integrity. We will strictly comply
with the central Party leadership’s eight-point decision on improving conduct, and
keep up our efforts to tackle formalism, bureaucratism, hedonism and extravagance,
with a particular focus on the first two problems. We must strictly follow the
requirement of leading a thrift life. We will continue to take firm steps to ensure that
officials do not have the audacity, opportunity, or desire to become corrupt. We will
enhance the prevention and control of integrity risks in key spheres such as the
financial sector, SOEs, and infrastructure construction projects, resolutely rectify
corrupt practices that harm people's interests, strengthen the development of a clean
culture in the government for the new era, and push governments at all levels in
Shanghai to practice integrity and self-discipline more conscientiously.
5. Taking more solid steps to further stimulate the enterprising spirit of officials.


44
We will strengthen the management of civil servants, bolster professional training,
and improve their creative service capabilities. We will improve the combination of
incentives and disincentives, support and encourage those who take charge, and
further foster the culture of striving for advancement and pursuit of excellence. Each
and every one in the government must have a correct understanding of what
excellence means for civil service, and champion the spirit that “not claiming credit
but always making sure to contribute their share to the success of the cause”. We must
shoulder our responsibilities, meet challenges head-on, and fulfill our initial
aspirations and missions with determination and through firm concrete actions, thus
meeting the expectations of both the Party and the people.
Fellow deputies:
The journey may be long, but as long as we keep moving forward with determination,
we are surely capable of reaching our destination. Let's rally more closely around the
CPC Central Committee with Comrade Xi Jinping at its core, and forge ahead
together under the strong leadership of the CPC Shanghai Municipal Committee to
make new progress in the "Five Centers” Initiative, accelerate the building of a
modern socialist international metropolis with global influence, and make new
contributions to the great cause of Chinese modernization!