Fellow Deputies,

On behalf of the People’s Government of Beijing Municipality, I will now report to you on the work of the government for your deliberation and approval. I also invite comments from members of the Beijing Municipal Committee of the Chinese People’s Political Consultative Conference (CPPCC).



I. Review of Work During 2023



The year 2023 was the first to see the implementation of the guiding principles of the 20th CPC National Congress on all fronts and a year for economic recovery following three years of COVID-19 control. During 2023, General Secretary Xi Jinping visited the people affected by the July flash flood in Mentougou District and gave instructions on post-disaster reconstruction. He presided over the Meeting on Promoting the Coordinated Development of the Beijing-Tianjin-Hebei Region and made important observations. Additionally, he delivered a video message at the China International Fair for Trade in Services (CIFTIS) and sent congratulatory messages to the Zhongguancun Forum and the Beijing Culture Forum. His instructions and comments have provided a clear direction for the development of Beijing, especially in its role as China’s capital in the new era, and have established the fundamental principles that must be respected. His guidance has greatly motivated all of us in Beijing, creating a resolute force propelling us forward on this new journey and empowering us to achieve even greater success in the new era.

Over the past year, we have been working under the strong leadership of the CPC Central Committee with Comrade Xi Jinping at its core, and the direct leadership of the CPC Beijing Municipal Committee. We have also received support and supervision from the Beijing Municipal People’s Congress and its Standing Committee. Guided by Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, we have based all our actions on the guiding principles established at the 20th CPC National Congress and the Second Plenary Session of the 20th CPC Central Committee. In line with General Secretary Xi Jinping’s instructions on Beijing’s development, we have thoroughly implemented the CPC Central Committee’s decisions and plans. With a focus on strengthening Beijing’s position as the “four centers” and improving our ability to deliver “four services”, we have incorporated the Five Key Initiatives into the new development dynamic and ensured both development and security. We have worked hard to boost confidence, foster innovation, optimize functions, and improve coordination to provide our citizens with better governance and a higher quality of life. These efforts have led to a sound economic recovery and social stability in spite of the multiple challenges we faced. We have made further progress in the city’s endeavors on all fronts and fulfilled the objectives outlined at the first session of the 16th Municipal People’s Congress. In 2023, the city’s Gross Regional Product (GRP) grew by 5.2% from the previous year to around 4.4 trillion yuan. General public budget revenue increased by 8.2%, exceeding 600 billion yuan. Surveyed urban unemployment rate was 4.4% and overall consumer prices remained stable. Personal incomes grew in step with economic growth. Per capita GRP and labor productivity measured by output per worker were the highest among provincial-level jurisdictions in China, while energy and water consumption per 10,000 yuan of GRP were the lowest.



In 2023, we accomplished the following tasks.

First, leveraging Beijing’s strategic status as the capital of China, we achieved more substantive progress in the coordinated development of Beijing-Tianjin-Hebei Region.

We reinforced Beijing’s role as the national capital, upholding the principle that the authority of capital planning lies with the Party Central Leadership. We refined our work mechanism for the Capital Planning and Development Commission and accelerated the development of the capital’s planning system. We rectified problems in planning and natural resources, and ensured the strict enforcement of the plans. We launched the new three-year action plan of the Development Control Plan for the Core Zone Serving Capital Functions and improved the urban environment in key areas to support the functions of the central authorities.

We strengthened Beijing’s role as the national center for international exchanges. The Beijing Yanqi Lake International Conference Resort was upgraded and expanded. Construction of the Fourth Embassy Area and other planned projects progressed in an orderly manner. The number of international organizations opting to establish and register their offices in Beijing increased to 115. The work mechanism for providing services for major state events was improved, as exemplified by our provision of quality services during the third Belt and Road Forum for International Cooperation.

We continued the special program of upgrading urban management. We demolished 23.15 million square meters of illegal structures and vacated 2,282 hectares of land. We launched a dedicated program and a five-year work plan aimed at enhancing the second greenbelt area by minimizing the amount of land used for construction purposes. Land used for urban and rural construction dropped by around eight square kilometers. Improvements were made to the environment of 183 spaces under overpasses and more than 10,000 street furniture items. We removed 900 kilometers of road guardrails and lane dividers of all kinds and carried out precision environmental improvement for 1,730 backstreets and alleys. A total of 183 run-down residential compounds were upgraded. The renovation of old and dilapidated buildings and clearance of sub-standard housing on a total scale of 204,000 square meters were completed.

We vigorously pursued high-quality development of the Beijing Municipal Administrative Center (BMC). Construction of Phase II of the BMC administrative office area was completed, and the second group of municipal-level government bodies started to move in. The Beijing Performing Arts Centre, the Beijing Library, and the Grand Canal Museum of Beijing entered service. The planning of the East Sixth Ring Road High Line Park was well underway. A national certified emissions reduction trading center obtained approval for launch in Beijing. New progress was made in the integrated development of Tongzhou District and its three neighboring counties in Hebei Province.

We stepped up efforts to pursue coordinated development of the Beijing-Tianjin-Hebei region. We established a collaborative working mechanism among our three authorities and drafted a three-year action plan for deeper integration of the region. The Beijing-Xiong’an Expressway was open to traffic, and the intercity railway linking Tianjin with Beijing Daxing International Airport was put into service. In the Xiong’an New Area, a sub-park of Zhongguancun Science Park was opened, and the contractual value of technology transfers from Beijing to Tianjin and Hebei reached 74.87 billion yuan, representing a growth of 110%. We provided support for the opening and operation of the “Three Schools and One Hospital” turn-key projects in the Xiong’an New Area, and witnessed increased integration and sharing of public services across the three locations.

Second, we harnessed the power of technological innovation to cultivate a stronger driving force for high-quality development.

We stepped up the pace of building Beijing into an international innovation center. Emphasis was placed on developing and attracting top-tier scientists, especially among the young generation. Action plans were rolled out to secure the city’s leading position in basic research and achieve breakthroughs in core technologies in key fields. We helped to ensure that Beijing-based national laboratories operate at high standards, and supported new R&D institutes in their organized research endeavors. Business-led collaboration that bridges industries, universities, and research institutes was promoted.

We boosted the development of the “three science cities and one demonstration area”. In Zhongguancun Science City, ground-breaking technologies were developed at a faster pace. Newly piloted reform measures were extended to all parts of the Zhongguancun National Demonstration Zone. The launch of an experimental reform area dedicated to funding innovation was approved. The total revenues of large-scale businesses in Zhongguancun surged over 30%. Huairou Science City intensified efforts to develop the Comprehensive National Science Center, with 16 facilities and platforms in active use for research. Beijing Future Science Park strengthened collaboration with central state-owned enterprises and local universities. A number of projects, including a research hospital, were put into operation. The Demonstration Area for Innovation-based Industrial Clusters commercialized more than 270 research outcomes from the three science cities.

We bolstered our strengths in high-end, precision and advanced technology sectors. Over 30 support policies were implemented for niche sectors such as artificial general intelligence (AGI) and humanoid robotics. In addition, we rolled out another four government funds dedicated to these high-tech sectors. Our efforts to grow integrated circuit businesses across the entire value chain yielded solid progress. A number of innovative medicines and medical devices obtained approval for market release. Xiaomi’s new fully-automated smartphone factory and Li Auto’s flagship plant started production ahead of schedule.

We dedicated meticulous efforts to position Beijing as a global pacesetter in the digital economy. Beijing led China in launching world-leading blockchain infrastructure. A total of 30,000 5G base stations were added. Generative AI and large language model products approved for public use in Beijing accounted for nearly half of the national total. The Jingtong, Jingban and Jingzhi mobile terminals, as part of Beijing’s smart city endeavors, were upgraded and widely adopted. The High-Level Autonomous Driving Demonstration Zone achieved seamless and integrated operation over an area of 160 square kilometers. We initiated China’s first pilot zone for developing basic data systems. The added value generated from the digital economy now comprises 42.9% of Beijing’s GRP.

We created and stimulated new demand through supply-side structural reform. Steady progress was made toward building a global consumption center. We upgraded 15 key commercial areas, each with a tailored plan. Almost 2.4 million square meters of new large-scale shopping facilities were opened. The Liangma River waterfront, renowned for its international appeal, has been instrumental in revitalizing the city’s nighttime economy. Cultural and tourism-related consumption bounced back to pre-pandemic levels. We rolled out incentive schemes to stimulate effective investments. New policies were introduced to secure investment for major projects, with investment invitations of over 320 billion yuan extended to private investors.

We promoted high-level opening up. The State Council approved version 2.0 of our work plan for opening up the service sector, and more than 170 new pilot measures were rolled out. Beijing emerged as one of China’s first pilots for institutional opening up. Approval was received for the establishment of Zhongguancun Integrated Bonded Area, the first of its kind focusing on R&D and innovation. The Financial Street Forum was a great success. We supported the expansion and quality upgrade of the Beijing Stock Exchange, which saw the number of companies listed on it nearly triple since it began trading. Beijing’s very first China-Europe Railway Express freight train service directly destined to Europe was successfully launched.

We made diligent efforts to cultivate a business environment that provided tangible benefits for businesses. With tasks set out in version 6.0 of the business environment reform completed, we devised and implemented guidelines to improve the government’s services to foster a more favorable business climate, and formulated an action plan to invigorate the private sector. The scope of “All-in-One-Go” government services was expanded to include 23 additional items, such as applications for organizing large-scale public events. We continued to advance the reform consolidating the various permits previously required of each business into one comprehensive license in 40 sectors, such as restaurants and supermarkets. The number of integrated oversight reform pilots increased to 50. We also improved the “service packages” and “steward services” for businesses. Through these efforts, Beijing has seen a remarkable 20.3% surge in new business registrations, pushing the total number of registered businesses in the city to over 2.11 million, setting a new record.

Third, we stepped up protection of the historic and cultural sites in Beijing, and cultural programs of the capital continued to flourish.

We strengthened protection of the entire old town by seeking UNESCO World Heritage status for the Central Axis. We believe that historical remains and heritage sites must be cherished and treated with reverence. A total of 48 key projects were completed, including the clearance and restoration of the Qingcheng Palace Complex within the Altar of the God of Agriculture, revitalizing 15 heritage sites including the Altar of Land and Grain. We renovated and reopened a series of revolutionary heritage sites that reflect the route taken by the Party’s central leadership from Xibaipo to Beijing back in 1949, and opened the site of the National Mongolian and Tibetan School to the public. Moshikou Historical and Cultural Block is brimming with vitality. A number of hutongs were renovated while preserving their authentic structure, enabling more residents in these traditional courtyards to enjoy modern amenities.

We made significant strides in the development of the three cultural belts. The first phase of the Grand Canal Fountainhead Park is now open to visitors. The construction of the heritage site park at the ancient government seat of Luxian County was expedited. The main stretch of the Jingji Great Wall National Scenic Drive, spanning 445 kilometers, was unveiled. We successfully turned the “three hills and five gardens” into a demonstration area of cultural heritage protection and utilization. Through these endeavors, the city has taken on a new look that seamlessly blends history and culture, natural landscapes, and modern facilities.

We carried out extensive public cultural programs, and launched a three-year plan to establish Beijing as a capital of performing arts. A total of 17,000 events under the “Capital Civic Life” series were held, and the number of commercial performances surpassed 40,000. Another 11 museums were registered, and 27 quasi-museums were opened. In addition, we improved the ticket reservation system for tourist attractions. The first Beijing International Week of Intangible Cultural Heritage was a big success. These efforts have brought more and more Beijing’s valuable cultural heritage to life.

We advanced cultural-ethical development of the capital. A total of 11 literary and artistic creations won the national Best Works Awards, leading the country for three consecutive editions. We endeavored to make Beijing Role Models program a well-recognized brand name. We combated illegal ticket scalping in the commercial performance market, strengthened efforts to rectify 12 types of traffic violations, and continued our initiative to build districts with a high level of public civility. A total of 4.61 million volunteers tirelessly navigated the streets and alleys to offer their services. Through these efforts, the core socialist values have gained broader public acceptance and support.

Fourth, we increased inputs in ensuring the wellbeing of our citizens, leading to a steady improvement in their quality of life.

We used every possible means to boost employment, including the adoption of 15 measures to stabilize employment. We intensified efforts to ensure employment of key groups and in key areas. As a result, over 281,000 urban jobs were created. Furthermore, we extended assistance to 197,000 individuals facing difficulties in finding employment.

We worked hard to develop education that meets the people’s expectations. We introduced policies to deliver public-interest nursery care. Over 6,000 nursery slots were added in kindergartens, raising the coverage of affordable kindergartens to 93%. We also added another 38,000 places at primary and middle schools, and ensured that the paired partnership program extended to all compulsory education schools. We rolled out a new round of reforms in the senior middle school entrance examinations. Category-based specialization of Beijing affiliated universities was expedited.

We went all out to safeguard the health of our people, and efficiently responded to multiple episodes of epidemic resurgence and the heightened incidence of respiratory infections during autumn and winter. A citywide platform for hospital outpatient appointments was established, and mobile payment using medical insurance reimbursement accounts is now accepted at 110 hospitals across Beijing. We further facilitated the post-Olympic use of the facilities and venues. The newly upgraded Beijing Workers’ Stadium was brought into use. We retrofitted or expanded a number of sports parks and fitness facilities, and organized 33,000 public fitness initiatives and sports events of all kinds.

We made significant improvements in eldercare services, with a focus on establishing a comprehensive eldercare service network. This network is anchored by service centers located in sub-districts/townships and supplemented by community-based service stations. We explored innovative approaches to improve home-based eldercare, and added 6,232 eldercare beds tailored to diverse needs, 232 rural neighborhood eldercare sites, and 243 catering service stations for seniors. In addition, 822 elevators were installed in old residential buildings.

We exerted ourselves to ensure stability in the real estate market. With measures ensuring the completion and delivery of overdue housing projects, we saw the overall risk in Beijing’s property projects substantially reduced. We also refined policies for homebuyers, delivered 82,000 units of subsidized rental housing, and completed the construction of 93,000 units of subsidized housing of all types.

We made efforts to strengthen social security. We raised the baseline benefit levels of social security, social assistance, and children’s welfare. Women and children now enjoy a more enabling environment for their development. The social security and service systems for people with disabilities were improved. We adopted targeted measures to address salient issues in funeral services.

We stepped up comprehensive management of the city’s transport system. The completion of the last section of Subway Line 16 and the north section of Subway Line 17 in 2023 extended the total length of in-service urban rail transit lines to over 1,200 kilometers. To optimize road capacity, we rescheduled restrictive hours for 656 kilometers of bus-only lanes, finetuned 144 bus routes, and introduced 50 customized school-only bus service routes. By strategically optimizing the locations of bus stops and rail transit stations, we have ensured that 86% of bus-to-subway transfers are now within a 50-meter distance. As a result, there has been a significant improvement in traffic flow around Beijing’s seven railway stations, two airports, and other key areas. We fully phased out non-compliant electric tricycles and quadricycles, and enforced stricter parking regulation for shared bikes.

We furthered reform to deliver swift response to public complaints. We adopted a proactive approach to address problems by focusing on one topical issue per month, and addressed 95.5% of all the calls made by the public with a satisfaction rate of 96.1%. We consistently prioritized two crucial “minor” details, namely waste sorting and property management. A total of 2,800 residential communities and villages became role models of waste sorting and the coverage of property services in residential housing reached 97%.

Fifth, we strengthened eco-environmental conservation and achieved new progress in Beijing’s green development.

We fought continuously to keep our skies blue. To this end, we took coordinated steps to control both volatile organic compounds (VOCs) and nitrogen oxides (NOx), and launched a dedicated program to control dust. We reinforced our early-warning systems for heavy air pollution and strengthened regional joint pollution prevention and control. Despite challenges such as sandy and dusty weather conditions and the post-pandemic resumption of social activities, we maintained the annual average concentration of fine particulate matter (PM2.5) at 32 μg/m3, the second-best record since monitoring began.

We improved the water environment in both urban and rural areas. We refined the compensation mechanism for the environmental protection of water sources at Miyun Reservoir and Guanting Reservoir, and increased the strategic reserve of water resources. As a result, the groundwater table in the flatlands has been rising for eight consecutive years. The city’s sewage disposal rate climbed to 97.3%, and the quality of surface water met national standards. In addition, the Yanqi Lake was recognized as an exemplary case of China’s beautiful rivers and lakes, and the Yeya Lake Wetlands was registered on the List of Wetlands of International Importance.

We expedited the creation of large-scale green spaces. The city of Beijing as a whole met the national forest city standards, with its forest coverage reaching 44.9%. The opening of suburban green spaces such as the Nanyuan Forest Wetland Park increased the total number of parks in Beijing to 1,065. Furthermore, 62% of these parks were transformed into open parks without fences, enhancing the green landscape of a city that already boasts over a thousand parks.

We continued to advance all-round rural revitalization. In total, over 2,800 villages met the basic standards under the beautiful countryside program, and clean heating solutions were extended to 93% of villages and 96% of rural households. We strictly respected the red line of farmland protection and developed 58,000 mu (3,867 hectares) of high-standard cropland. As a result, the overall framework for the High-Tech Agricultural Z-Park has taken shape. The production of grain and vegetables increased for four consecutive years. Drawing inspiration from the Green Rural Revival Program, we launched a program to turn 100 villages into exemplary models and revitalize another 1,000. The income growth rate of rural residents surpassed that of urban citizens by two percentage points. We expanded east-west collaboration and paired-up assistance, and helped locations that received our assistance to consolidate the gains they made in poverty alleviation.

Sixth, we stayed committed to ensuring both development and security, providing an increasingly robust safeguard for the capital.

We strengthened efforts to secure workplace safety on all fronts. Taking lessons from the major fire incident at Changfeng Hospital on April 18, we swiftly conducted comprehensive inspections to identify and forestall workplace safety hazards and fire risks, and rolled out ten strict measures to strengthen workplace safety. Targeted efforts were made to tackle safety hazards associated with gas, electric bikes, and self-built houses in rural areas. We also launched Qi’an’an, a safety management information system for businesses to self-check, report and address their potential hazards. We earnestly implemented the “three musts” principle in safety management, and ensured accountability down to the frontline production staff. As a result, workplace-related fatal accidents and deaths fell by 4.8% and 1.8% compared with 2019.

We took decisive steps to prevent and defuse financial risks. We improved the local financial regulatory system, and completed China’s inaugural pilot program for early redemption of local government special-purpose bonds. Significant progress was made in preventing and defusing risks. This includes mitigating risks in key enterprises, strengthening regulation of consumer prepaid funds and taking decisive action against illegal fundraising.

We maintained law and order. We implemented a three-year action plan to address public complaints at source. We improved the multi-dimensional and IT-supported crime prevention and control system, and fought telecom and cyber frauds, contributing to the harmony and security of our capital city. We supported the building of additional capacity in national defense and the armed forces, and further strengthened the civil air defense system. A promising start was made in the modernization of national defense mobilization, and the service and support system for veterans realized progress from basic to top quality provisions. Notable progress was made in relation to the interests of ethnic minorities, religion, and overseas Chinese.

Seventh, we devoted our utmost efforts to respond to the flash flood in July, which resulted in significant achievements in flood prevention, mitigation, and disaster relief.

We implemented preventive measures with meticulous attention to detail. Early assessments and readiness preparations were made. We took decisive action by issuing a red alert for rainstorms in advance and activating the highest level of emergency response to prepare for potential flooding. We promptly implemented the protocols of “shutting down venues, halting activities, closing spaces, and evacuating people”, and successfully evacuated 542,000 construction workers and residents from the affected areas. We activated the military-civilian collaboration mechanism, and put in place command mechanisms for emergency flood response at the frontline. A flood response and rescue team consisting of over 200,000 members was deployed.

We made an all-out effort to provide disaster relief. We mobilized support from diverse sectors in response to the situation and leveraged water conservancy facilities such as Da’ning Reservoir for flood mitigation. We provided immediate assistance to 2,831 passengers and crew members on three Beijing-bound trains stranded by the flood, all of whom were safely rescued. We worked around the clock to ensure an unobstructed path for life-saving efforts, conducting search and rescue operations for those missing or trapped. Road access to 256 villages was restored at the earliest possible moment, along with water supply for 507 villages, electricity for 273 villages and telecommunication services for 342 villages. These efforts succeeded in minimizing the loss of life and property for our people.

We swiftly launched post-disaster recovery and reconstruction efforts. We ensured proper care and arrangements for 344,000 disaster victims. All 759 affected schools reopened as scheduled. Repair work on more than 10,000 units of damaged rural residential homes and 167 damaged roads was completed, with water, electricity, gas, and heating services restored to their pre-disaster levels. The autumn grain harvest was successfully secured, and the cultivation of winter wheat was maximized to the greatest feasible extent. Almost 70% of rural homestays affected reopened. With the goal of achieving basic recovery in one year, comprehensive improvement within three years, and high-quality development in the long term, we have developed a planning system to reinforce the city’s disaster prevention and mitigation capabilities. Furthermore, we have actively sought support from government bond funds, and engaged help from districts in the city’s flatlands through a paired assistance mechanism to pool synergy for rebuilding our beautiful home.

In the face of a disaster on a scale rarely seen in a century, General Secretary Xi Jinping showed his concern for the people and situation in the affected area by taking personal charge of the response efforts. Central government departments, central SOEs, and other municipalities, provinces, and autonomous regions quickly provided emergency assistance to Beijing. Members of the People’s Liberation Army, the People’s Armed Police Force, and the fire and rescue services reacted promptly to commands and flawlessly executed all their assigned missions. Party organizations and officials at all levels showed immense dedication and unflinching courage in performing their duties. The people affected by the disaster showed great resilience, ensuring their own safety and providing mutual assistance. Our citizens complied with the flood prevention measures with exceptional dedication and responsibility, extending support to those affected. In combating this formidable flood, all looked out for each other with consideration and compassion, showcasing the strength of China’s socialist system in pooling resources during trying times and the solidarity and unyielding spirit of our people.

Eighth, we earnestly carried out theoretical study programs for Party members and continued to raise the efficiency and effectiveness of government services.

Following the general requirement to study Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, strengthen Party consciousness, prioritize practical efforts, and achieve substantive results, we engaged in extensive research and fact-finding activities and advanced inspection and rectification with a pragmatic approach. As a result, a number of issues were effectively addressed, meeting people’s expectations and development needs.

We advanced law-based government administration on all fronts. In 2023, a total of six local regulations were submitted to Beijing Municipal People’s Congress for deliberation, and eight regulations were formulated, revised or abolished. We processed 692 motions and suggestions raised by deputies to Beijing Municipal People’s Congress and 1,054 proposals made by CPPCC Beijing Municipal Committee members.

Legislative efforts were intensified in such areas as innovation, rural revitalization, and foreign investment. We completed tasks as required by the Eighth Five-Year Plan (2021-2025) for raising public awareness of the law. We launched paired assistance programs to help districts that are relatively backward in law-based governance. We also conducted specialized training programs for personnel engaged in law-based administrative work, equipping them with greater clarity and knowledge. This has resulted in more competent and standardized law enforcement at the grassroots level.

We made consistent efforts to improve official conduct. The government continued to practice economy by cutting general, non-essential and non-obligatory expenditures by 2.39 billion yuan and reducing spending on official overseas visits, vehicles, and hospitality by 5%. The total-cost and performance-based budgeting reform were extended and cost-performance analysis was applied extensively to governments at municipal, district, and sub-district levels. All for-profit state assets are now under centralized and unified supervision and management. With a focus on tackling pointless formalities and bureaucratism, we made steady progress in further reducing the number of meetings convened and documents issued, and in easing the administrative burden on those working at the grassroots. We strengthened auditing-based oversight and oversight on fiscal and accounting operations, and completed the first round of inspections on statistical work. The government took stringent measures to improve conduct, enforce discipline, and combat corruption, with integrity and practicality as the overarching goals in its work.





Fellow Deputies,

Over the past year, confronted with a multitude of domestic and international risks and challenges, we have successfully navigated through disasters, maintained security, defused risks, ensured economic stability, pressed ahead with development, and improved people’s lives. Our journey, marked by one challenge after another, has led to hard-won achievements. These are attributable to the strong leadership of the CPC Central Committee with Comrade Xi Jinping at its core, and the guidance of Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era. They are also attributable to the CPC Beijing Municipal Committee and all citizens of Beijing, who have worked in unity and with tenacity.

Here, on behalf of the People’s Government of Beijing Municipality, I would like to express our heartfelt thanks to all the people of Beijing, to the deputies to the Municipal People’s Congress and members of the Municipal CPPCC Committee, to the other political parties, people’s organizations, and individuals from all sectors of society, to all CPC central organs and central government departments, to other municipalities, provinces and autonomous regions, to officers and rank-and-file members of the Chinese People’s Liberation Army and the People’s Armed Police Force based in Beijing, to our fellow countrymen and women in Hong Kong, Macao and Taiwan, and to overseas Chinese and foreign friends who have taken an active interest in and given support to the capital’s development.

However, we are acutely aware that the road ahead is strewn with difficulties and challenges, and there are certain areas in our work that still need to be improved. These areas include:

The resources and environmental capacity available are still not adequate to support our large population, and significant efforts are still needed to strengthen Beijing’s capacity to serve as the capital.

The foundations for sustaining economic recovery need further strengthening as market sentiment remains subdued, businesses continue to encounter production and operational difficulties, and the confidence of consumers and private investors has yet to fully recover.

The window of opportunity for achieving breakthroughs in core technologies in key fields has narrowed. The resilience and competitiveness of our industrial and supply chains are to be further reinforced.

Our ability to deliver meticulous governance still falls short of people’s expectations, and problems inherent in managing a megacity remain formidable.

The disparity in development between urban and rural areas and among different regions of the city is still pronounced. Further efforts must be made to shore up weak links in education, healthcare, and eldercare, among other areas essential for the people’s wellbeing.

There is a pressing need to build up stronger capacity for disaster prevention, mitigation, and relief in extreme circumstances, and workplace safety, fire prevention and control, and emergency management remain critical challenges.

The competence and conduct of government officials and associated personnel needs to be further improved.

We will take these issues head-on, adopt concrete measures to improve our performance, and work diligently to meet the expectations of our people.



II. Major Tasks for 2024

As the year 2024 marks the 75th anniversary of the People’s Republic of China and the 10th anniversary of advancing Beijing-Tianjin-Hebei coordinated development, and is critical for achieving the goals set in the 14th Five-Year Plan, it is vital that we succeed in completing all the tasks assigned to the capital city.

To achieve this, we must:

  Follow the guidance of Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era;

 Follow the visions outlined at the 20th CPC National Congress and the Second Plenary Session of the 20th Party Central Committee；

  Follow the visions outlined at the Central Economic Work Conference;

  Follow the instructions of General Secretary Xi Jinping on Beijing;

  Continue to make progress while ensuring steady performance, and implement the new development philosophy fully, accurately, and comprehensively;

  Pursue the development of Beijing as the capital in the new era, advance cultural, technological and green development in Beijing, and promote Beijing-Tianjin-Hebei coordinated development;

  Incorporate the Five Key Initiatives into the new development dynamic, and promote high-quality development;

  Expand all-round reform and opening up, boost economic vitality, prevent and mitigate risks, improve social expectations, improve the people’s wellbeing, and maintain social stability;

  Exercise full and rigorous self-governance of the Party and contribute to Chinese modernization.

With the above and the 14th Five-Year Plan in mind and in light of domestic and international developments, we have set the main targets for economic and social development this year as follows:

  Grow the GRP by around 5%;

  Increase the general public budget revenue by 5%;

  Maintain the surveyed urban unemployment rate below 5%;

  Keep the CPI increase around 3%；

  Ensure personal income grow in step with economic growth;

  Meet national targets in eco-environmental conservation, energy and water conservation.

Our journey toward these targets is underpinned by favorable conditions, yet it is equally marked by difficulties and challenges that we must address. We must remain confident, and rise to the occasion to open up new prospects for high-quality development of the capital.

We must prioritize work as follows:

First, we must take proactive measures to serve the overarching initiatives. Promoting Chinese modernization must be our principal political objective. We will keep in mind Beijing’s responsibilities as the capital city and harness the unique strengths that accompany that status. We will strengthen Beijing’s position as the “four centers”, and enlarge our capacity to deliver “four services”.

Second, we must balance progress with stability and implement policies in a systematic manner. We will focus more efforts on securing stable growth, effectively navigate uncertainties and changes, and adopt proactive measures and policies to bolster market confidence.

Third, we must harness growth to promote stability while increasing the quality and efficiency of our development. We will overcome obstacles on the way forward with development. Our consistent goal is to boost the city’s growth by upgrading traditional industries and positioning ourselves as leaders in emerging and future industries.

Fourth, we must establish new growth drivers before abolishing the old ones, and advance reform and innovation. We must ensure the new growth drivers are solidly established before replacing the old ones with the new ones. We should hold reform as the key to addressing difficulties and prioritize innovation as the primary force for exploring new opportunities, and thereby strengthen economic vitality for sustainable development.

Fifth, we must always have plans in place for worst-case scenarios and guard against risks. We must constantly strengthen our sense of responsibility in safeguarding the city’s security and stability, and be alert to potential “black swan” and “gray rhino” events. Achieving a dynamic equilibrium between development and security is essential.

Going forward, we will focus on the following 11 tasks.

First, we will systematically improve Beijing’s capacity to serve as the national capital and strive for greater progress in Beijing-Tianjin-Hebei coordinated development.

We will continue to relocate functions nonessential to Beijing’s role as the capital, promote the development of a modern national capital region composed of modern metropolises, and build Beijing-Tianjin-Hebei Region into a pilot and demonstration zone for Chinese modernization.

Further implement the Master Plan of Development for Beijing (2016-2035). We will strictly implement the system for requesting instructions from and submitting reports to the CPC Central Committee on major issues concerning Beijing’s planning. Control plans for key blocks will be rolled out at a faster pace. Beijing’s system of spatial planning for land use will be improved. We will continue to rectify problems in the field of planning and natural resources and ban the practice of using farmland for non-agriculture purposes. We will advance the three-year action plan for implementing the Development Control Plan for the Core Zone Serving Capital Functions and deliver tangible results. Further steps will be taken to improve the city’s development quality and services for the central Party and government bodies.

Strengthen Beijing’s role as the national center for international exchanges. We will complete Phase II of the China International Exhibition Center and increase the service capacity of the Beijing Yanqi Lake International Conference Resort and the central area of the Olympic Park. We will speed up the construction of the Fourth Embassy Area to enhance the city’s international profile. We will actively support and participate in the Belt and Road Initiative, and strengthen our ties with international sister cities. We will fully leverage national-level platforms for opening up, including the China International Fair for Trade in Services (CIFTIS), the Zhongguancun Forum, the Beijing Culture Forum, and the Financial Street Forum to attract more international organizations to establish their presence in Beijing.

Continue the special program for urban improvement. We will extend support for the major relocation projects initiated by central bodies. The moving of the second group of municipal-level government bodies to the BMC will be completed. We will improve the incentives and set mandatory targets for the relocation of non-capital functions. Urban and rural construction land will be reduced by another 6.5 square kilometers, and any illegal new buildings will be cleared on a regular basis. Efforts will be made to better allocate education and medical resources. Construction of the new campus of the Capital Medical University and the Tongzhou branch of the Children’s Hospital of Capital Institute of Pediatrics will be accelerated. We will make steady progress in special campaigns aimed at improving the environment along railway lines, enhancing landscapes and safety in peri-urban areas, and promoting the greening of pedestrian bridges and vacant land. Targeted environmental improvements in 1,650 backstreets and alleys will be made. We will upgrade and refine the functions of the vacated areas such as Dahongmen.

Speed up the development of the BMC and Xiong’an New Area. New strategic cooperation agreements between Beijing and Xiong’an will be implemented, which will include enabling equal access to government services in both Beijing and Xiong’an, expanding cooperation on running the “Three Schools and One Hospital”, and jointly developing the Zhongguancun Science Park Xiong’an sub-park. We will pursue high-quality development in the BMC by maintaining an annual investment of over 100 billion yuan. We will start to build the Sixth Ring Road High Line Park. The main component of the integrated transport hub at the BMC station and the underground construction of part of the east section of the Sixth Ring Road will be completed. We will construct major projects, including subway lines M101 and 22. The Dachang-Tongzhou Road will open to traffic. We will make Phase II development plans for the Universal Beijing Resort, accelerate the construction of the Chaobai River National Forest Park, and further develop the national demonstration zone for green development and the demonstration zone for quality-oriented growth encompassing Tongzhou District and its three neighboring counties in Hebei Province.

Strengthen collaborative innovation and industrial cooperation. We will facilitate the development of the Beijing-Tianjin-Hebei National Technology Innovation Center, and support innovators in the three regions in jointly building commercialization and pilot testing centers for research findings. We will work faster to form “six industrial chains and five industrial clusters”, and lay out dedicated plans for each industrial chain, with the aim of extending the industrial chains and fostering the development of related sectors. The Beijing-Hebei Collaborative Development Demonstration Zone in Caofeidian, the Beijing-Zhangjiakou culture and sports tourism belt, and the pilot demonstration city cluster that promotes fuel cell electric vehicles will be further developed. We will work in close collaboration with Tianjin in building the Binhai-Zhongguancun Science Park and other joint industrial parks.

Enhance collaboration in developing and sharing public services. We will ensure that Beijing, Tianjin and Hebei are better connected by rail. Construction of Phase I of the Intercity Railway Connecting Line will be completed. National Highway 109 will open to traffic. We will upgrade our emergency plan to better deal with serious air pollution, and implement eco-environmental conservation and restoration projects, such as the sandstorm prevention project in northern China. Efforts will be made to strengthen cooperation in the provision of public services, including education, healthcare, and elderly care. We will make more government service items related to employment, social security, and taxation accessible inter-provincially with harmonized procedures. This will contribute to the creation of a world-class business environment across the region.

Second, we will focus on turning Beijing into an international innovation center and establish new growth drivers and strengths.

We will tap into our strengths in education, science, technology, and talent, and accelerate our efforts to build an efficient, collaborative and open innovation system. In doing so, we aim to become a major contributor to China’s original innovation and proprietary technologies.

Intensify the reform and development of education. An additional 20,000 places at primary and middle schools will be added. We will continue to alleviate children’s dual burdens of excessive homework and supplementary off-campus tutoring. We will leverage artificial intelligence and big data technologies to improve the “smart education” digital curriculum system, which encompasses all subjects and students at all stages of schooling, and thus increase the education and teaching capacity of schools. We will diversify the development of general high schools, and optimize the structure of vocational education programs. We will give support to institutions of higher learning in Beijing that are on the two first-class lists to build them into world-class universities and develop first-class disciplines. We will promote high-quality development of Shahe and Liangxiang University Towns and put in place a system for cultivating top-notch innovators. We will fully leverage the best-in-class innovation centers in universities to strengthen collaboration between industries and academia and integrate research with education.

Boost the efficiency of the innovation system. We will implement the Regulations on Building Beijing into an International Innovation Center. Support for the development of basic science will continue to be increased. We will ensure the smooth operation and systematic development of national laboratories in Beijing, and reorganize key municipal laboratories. We will promote high-quality development of new R&D institutes in a well-planned manner, and support leading enterprises in establishing innovation consortia. We will further our action plan to achieve breakthroughs in core technologies in key fields, and address bottleneck issues in areas such as artificial intelligence and integrated circuits with targeted strategies. Efforts will be made to build Beijing into a national demonstration area for intellectual property protection and to improve the collaborative mechanism for rapid intellectual property protection. We will implement the national strategy of boosting product quality and the strategic program of standard setting for Beijing. We will encourage the development of incubators for sci-tech startups, and attract international technology organizations and foreign-funded R&D centers to open branches in Beijing, so as to create an open innovation ecosystem with global competitiveness.

Step up the building of world-leading science parks. We will further implement the pilot reform measures for the Zhongguancun Science Park and explore new pilot programs. We will expand the coordinated development of its sub-parks, advance their institutional reform with customized plans, and optimize their spatial layout. The Zhongguancun Science City will fully leverage its strengths in fostering original innovation. Faster steps will be taken to tap the potential of the major sci-tech infrastructure cluster in the Huairou Science City. We will improve the innovation capacity and institutional environment of the Future Science City, and support the Innovative Industrial Cluster Demonstration Zone in undertaking the commercialization of more research outcomes.

Build Beijing into a reservoir of best minds. We will launch a special program to recruit science strategists, and attract and cultivate more outstanding scientists, young scientists, and high-caliber young talent. We will support the building of collaboration platforms between enterprises and universities. We will continue the pilot reform in nurturing masters and doctors of engineering, and train professionals urgently needed in integrated circuits and other key industries, as well as multidisciplinary talent. We will refine policies to help talented individuals obtain permanent residency and housing in Beijing. We will make the city’s technology companies more attractive to top university graduates. We will further improve institutions and mechanisms for talent development, grant greater autonomy to researchers, and provide a stage for talent of all types to innovate and shine.

Third, we will provide support for the growth of the digital economy, and make it stronger, more efficient, and larger in scale to effectively empower the high-quality development of the capital city.

We will step up efforts to build Beijing into a global pacesetter in the digital economy, develop key areas of the digital economy, and transform way of business, life, and governance through digitalization.

Take coordinated moves to promote the development of the digital industry. We will build a pilot zone for basic data regulation, and carry out pilot reforms to include data assets in accounting statements and facilitate cross-border data flow. We will support the launch of a number of major projects, including computing centers, data training bases, and the national blockchain hub. Over 10,000 5G base stations will be built. We will improve regulations for data transactions, and increase the operational capacity of the Beijing International Big Data Exchange. The construction of Phase 4.0 of the High-Level Autonomous Driving Demonstration Zone will be launched, gradually covering more application scenarios such as airports, railway stations, and urban street-cleaning.

Support the transformation of traditional industries with digital technologies. We will implement the “New Smart Manufacturing 100” project, promote the digital transformation of manufacturers, and nurture more industrial leaders in digitization. We will promote orderly competition and innovation-driven development of the platform economy, and give more small and medium-sized enterprises access to advanced digital technology to create an innovation ecosystem that is open, dynamic, and shared by all. We will ensure that the underlying technology and foundations of AI are self-supporting and controllable. Efforts will be made to benchmark advanced AI models against global standards, promote AI applications in areas such as government services, medical care, education, industry, and life services, and maintain Beijing’s leading position in AI research, development and application.

Take solid steps in building a smart city. More efforts will be made in enhancing three systems, namely the planning and management system, the platform support system, and the data governance system, so as to improve the integrated networks of city operation and smart governance that offer access to all municipal and public services and information to facilitate decision-making. We will accelerate the construction of new-generation network infrastructure, such as the 10-Gigabit Optical Network and the Internet of Vehicles. We will promote joint efforts to build a network of sensing equipment and facilities that can be shared by all. We will strengthen data governance by ensuring that each item of data is collected by one designated authority following corresponding standards, and promote integrated data application in key areas. Data and cyber security will be guaranteed in all respects.

Fourth, we will place more emphasis on the development of the “two zones” and advance reform and opening-up on a stronger foundation.

As we pursue high-level opening up, we will focus on institutional innovation,  overall planning, and system integration in our reform, so as to raise the confidence and vitality of all types of business entities.

Steadily expand institutional opening up. We will expedite the implementation of the latest work plan for the Integrated National Demonstration Zone for Opening up the Services Sector and further develop the China (Beijing) Pilot Free Trade Zone. Efforts will be made to build high-quality comprehensive bonded zones, and refine relevant systems and mechanisms of the Daxing International Airport economic zone. The Capital International Airport economic zone will make further headway in its transformation and upgrading. The capacity of Beijing’s two aviation hubs will be expanded, and international flights will be resumed at a faster pace. We will strengthen cooperation with Hong Kong and Macao SARs in all areas, and engage in exchanges and cooperation with the Taiwan region. We will improve services for foreign investors to consolidate foreign trade and investment. We will promote pilot programs on integrating domestic and foreign trade, develop Beijing into a center for international commercial arbitration, and support businesses in establishing and expanding their overseas presence.

Improve Beijing’s government services to foster a more favorable business environment. We will implement the guidelines on improving business environment, and benchmark against the latest World Bank framework to foster a market-oriented, law-based, and accessible business climate in keeping with international standards. A municipal regulation on items requiring government approval will be formulated. We will extend the reform of consolidating the various permits required of a business into one comprehensive license and the “All-in-One-Go” service model. The integrated oversight will be further promoted, and off-site monitoring will account for a larger proportion of government supervision. We will promote the development of the national pilot zone that applies digital technologies to market regulation. We will improve the effectiveness of service packages at the municipal, district, and sub-district/township levels, provide targeted services for businesses via the platform “Jingce”, and keep our policies stable and consistent, so as to foster an enabling business environment that delivers real benefits to enterprises.

Expand reform of key areas and crucial links. By further reforming the approval system, we will remove hidden barriers and promote the orderly flow and efficient allocation of production factors, so as to support the development of a unified national market. Consistent efforts will be made to improve the institutions and mechanisms for consolidating and developing the public sector, and for encouraging, supporting and guiding the development of the non-public sector. We will expand and upgrade the reform of state-owned enterprises and facilitate the growth of the non-public sector. We will settle overdue payments to small and medium-sized enterprises at an early date, protect the property rights of private enterprises and the rights and interests of entrepreneurs in accordance with the law, and cultivate a cordial and clean relationship between the government and businesses.

Fifth, we will expand domestic demand in parallel with the supply-side structural reform and consolidate the positive trend in economic recovery.

We will meet and stimulate new demand with quality supply, and form a virtuous cycle where consumption and investment reinforce each other. We will build a modernized industrial system that is internationally competitive, and in doing so, we will effectively upgrade and expand economic output.

Redouble efforts to tap consumption potential. We will further build Beijing into a global consumption center, upgrade traditional commercial areas, and create four commercial districts, including Sanlitun, to attract international consumers. We will shift our focus for promoting consumption from post-pandemic recovery to sustained expansion, and boost spending on big-ticket items such as new energy vehicles and electronic products. We will promote the upgrading of equipment and the replacement of old consumer goods with new ones. Efforts will be made to foster and expand new types of consumption, develop digital, green and healthcare consumption, and nurture new consumption drivers such as China Chic products. We will encourage time-honored brands to adopt new business models and invite more international consumer brands to our market. Support will be given to service consumption in sectors such as catering, fashion, conferences and exhibitions, performances, winter sports, and beauty and health. We will improve the supporting facilities around places such as sports venues and museums, make payment easier for overseas tourists, and promote the growth of interconnected consumption in commerce, culture, tourism, and sports.

Expand effective investment. We will further implement 300 key municipal-level projects to ensure that overall investment is stable and structurally optimized. More investment will be made in new infrastructure, with a focus on the construction of affordable housing and public infrastructure for both normal and emergency use, as well as the renovation of villages-in-the-city. The construction of underground utility pipelines will be stepped up. We will expand investment in strategic emerging industries and accelerate work on projects such as robot industrial parks and standardized biomedicine factories. We will adopt new mechanisms for cooperation between the government and private capital, and stimulate private investment.

Move faster to cultivate new productive forces. We will promote the high-quality development of key industrial chains in the manufacturing sector, and make Beijing’s industrial and supply chains more resilient and secure. We will accelerate major projects in the integrated circuit industry and strive for greater breakthroughs in areas including optoelectronic integration and chiplet technology. More efforts will be made to promote the R&D of original drugs and high-end medical devices, and cultivate new drivers of growth in the medical and health sector, such as bio-manufacturing. We will expedite the high-quality development of the new energy vehicle industry, focusing on the supply chains of electric motors, batteries, electronic control systems, automotive-grade chips, and other key components. We will upgrade the entire value chain of the ultra-high resolution video sector, facilitate the growth of strategic emerging industries such as new energy, new materials, commercial spaceflight, and the low-altitude economy. Future-oriented industries such as quantum, life sciences and 6G will be further developed. We will improve the tiered support system for fostering specialized, high-end, and innovation-driven businesses that provide distinctive products or services, so that more companies can grow and thrive.

Deliver better fiscal and financial services. We will better leverage proactive fiscal policies and make good use of government investment funds to support major tasks of reform and development. Priority will be given to the development of technology finance, green finance, inclusive finance, pension finance, and digital finance. We will promote the development of the Zhongguancun Experimental Zone for Innovation Finance. We will encourage non-governmental capital to set up venture capital funds, and channel more financial resources to technology companies and the real economy. We will facilitate the reform and high-quality development of the Beijing Stock Exchange, and pursue coordinated reform of the regional equity market. The use of digital renminbi will be expanded to cover more scenarios.

Sixth, we will promote cultural prosperity and make new progress as the national cultural center.

We will leverage the role of culture in advocating lofty values and shaping the character of the city, promote cultural industries, and strive to turn Beijing into the capital of advanced socialist culture with Chinese characteristics.

Extensively apply the core socialist values. We will further develop the Beijing Research Center of Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, and pursue greater progress in philosophy and social sciences. More progress will be achieved in developing the area hosting revolutionary sites related to the War of Resistance against Japanese Aggression. Revolutionary sites will be used to host moral and political education activities. We will support the endeavors of districts to meet the national standard of public civility, continue the Clean-Your-Plate campaign, and promote responsible tourism, with a view to developing Beijing into a city renowned for its exemplary social conduct and public morality.

Protect and keep alive our historical and cultural heritage. We will take faster steps to vacate and renovate occupied cultural heritage sites, protect historical buildings, and better present our cultural heritage to the world. The Grand Canal culture will be preserved, inherited, and utilized. We will take phased measures to repair and renovate the Great Wall and relevant cultural heritage by category, and upgrade the Great Wall Museum of China. We will restore key cultural sites along the Yongding River, and consolidate the progress of turning the “three hills and five gardens” into a national demonstration area of cultural heritage protection and utilization. We will increase our efforts to support and motivate inheritors of intangible cultural heritage, ensuring that traditional crafts are better integrated into modern life.

Make Beijing a capital of performing arts. We will produce cultural masterpieces, foster multiple clusters of performing spaces, and explore more non-traditional venues for performing arts. We will advance the “Watch Outstanding Performances in Beijing” program and develop quality audiovisual programs to present our citizens with excellent cultural offerings. We will explore innovative approaches to promote traditional culture, and encourage more performing arts agencies and premium performances to go global and showcase Beijing’s culture to the world.

Ignite cultural creativity. We will fully leverage catalyst funds for the cultural sector to promote the reform and development of cultural enterprises and advance the upgrading of cultural industry parks. A wide range of local cultural activities, totaling 16,000, will be organized. Our aim is to establish Beijing as a “city of readers” and a “city of museums”. We will make more efforts to ensure the success of Beijing International Film Festival, Beijing Design Week, Beijing Music Festival and other cultural activities.

Seventh, we will focus on improving precision governance to make our city more livable.

We are committed to obtaining a deeper understanding of the development process of this super large city, and acting on the vision that a city should be built for the people. Through meticulous efforts, we aim to ensure good governance and enhance the beauty of our city.

Further advance urban renewal. We will actively explore innovative models and approaches to channel non-governmental funds into urban renewal efforts. By integrating the development of spaces above, on, and below the ground, we will improve and upgrade urban infrastructure in a comprehensive manner. We will launch the renovation of 300 run-down residential compounds and complete 200 of these projects, and begin the installation of 1,000 elevators in old residential buildings and complete 600 of these projects. We are motivating tenants of single-story residential courtyards in the city’s core zone to relocate. Our goal for each courtyard is to gain full agreement from all residents, ensuring a total rather than partial evacuation. This year, we plan to complete the relocation of 2,000 tenant households. A total of 200,000 square meters of old and dilapidated buildings will be retrofitted. Forty old factory workshops will be upgraded. We will carry out a host of regional renovation projects in an effort to reinvigorate the old town, revitalize residential communities, and enrich people’s lives.

Ensure comprehensive management of the city’s transport system. We will make the rail transit network safer. The construction of Subway Line 3 Phase I and others will be completed. Integration of multiple transit networks will be strengthened to facilitate transfers between urban and suburban rail lines and between urban rail lines and buses. We will make adjustments to bus routes, improve community minibus services, promote customized public transport options, and increase school-only and hospital-only bus services on a trial basis, ensuring convenient and efficient travel for the people. We will upgrade the quality of the non-motorized traffic system, optimize the supply of parking facilities for non-motorized vehicles, and improve the shared bike service. Transfer services to the capital’s seven main train stations and two airports will be upgraded, and traffic in areas around schools, hospitals, scenic spots and business districts will be better regulated. We will build more parking garages, create another 15,000 parking spaces on vacated land and civil air defense works, and add another 10,000 paid shared parking spaces. A total of 600 obsolete traffic signals will be retrofitted. To make transport management more intelligent, we will connect all traffic signals inside the Fifth Ring Road and the Beijing Municipal Administrative Center online, and expand smart control of traffic lights.

Improve the management of municipal services. We will guarantee critical government functions and services, such as the supply of water, electricity, gas, and heating. Street furniture, such as road guardrails, utility poles, and boxes will be managed with precision. We will make consistent efforts to address the two critical “minor details” by building a resource recycling system and 1,200 demonstration residential communities (villages) for waste sorting and completing 100 model projects providing satisfactory property management services. We will renew the action plan to improve public services and infrastructure in the Huilongguan and Tiantongyuan areas. We will advance the mechanism for swift response to public complaints, focusing on one topical issue per month. At the same time, we will take proactive measures to address complaints before they are raised. We will further strengthen the collaborative law enforcement at the primary level of administration, and further standardize primary-level law enforcement teams. We will ensure continued success of the public policy dialogue program “A Step Forward”.

Eighth, we will implement the program to turn 100 villages into exemplary models and revitalize 1,000 villages, and accelerate the integration of urban-rural development.

In our effort to build modern agriculture and rural communities in Beijing, we will advance new urbanization and rural revitalization across the board, and ensure that the urban areas of Beijing support the growth of the city’s suburban areas, which, in turn, will better serve the development of the former.

Foster new rural economic activities. We will upgrade the quality of arable land and increase the area of high-standard cropland by 120,000 mu (8,000 hectares). We will increase the per unit crop yield and advance the high-quality development of the vegetable farming industry. We will boost the development of modern protected agriculture and smart agriculture, and increase overall agricultural production capacity. We will build the High-Tech Agricultural Z-Park and demonstration zones for innovation in the seed industry in Pinggu, Tongzhou and Yanqing districts. We will make efforts to foster modern urban agriculture and rural industries with local features, and develop the agro-processing industry. New forms of business in rural areas, such as recreational agriculture, outdoor sports, and live-streaming e-commerce will be cultivated. The focus will be placed on developing towns with strong rural industries and clusters of competitive industries with distinctive features.

Build a beautiful and harmonious countryside. The plans for rural development and land use, among others, will be better integrated and implemented. We will establish demonstration villages and clusters for rural revitalization that are desirable to live, work in and visit. We will strengthen efforts to improve rural living environments and consolidate the gains in building a beautiful countryside. We will better preserve traditional villages and rural culture, build digital villages, provide more public cultural products and services, and advance rural-urban integration in education and medical insurance programs.

Create more channels for increasing rural incomes. We will extend reform in rural contracted land, rural homestead, and rural collective land earmarked for development purposes and for collective forest tenure. We will develop new rural collective economies, standardize the operations, management, and profit distribution of rural collective economic organizations, and support these organizations in generating higher incomes through various activities. A range of new policy measures will be formulated and implemented to create more jobs for rural residents, so as to increase their incomes through multiple channels.

Ensure more balanced development across different parts of the city. We will emphasize the development of southern Beijing and new towns in the flatlands, making them more appealing to both individuals and industries. The high-quality transformation of western Beijing will be advanced, with a focus on the sustainable use of industrial heritage and the Winter Olympic legacy of the new Shougang area. Infrastructure and public services in eco-conservation areas and the mechanism to realize the market value of ecosystem goods and services will be improved, to ensure that those who protect the environment are fairly rewarded. We will make sure that Beijing continues to rank among the highest performers in the national evaluation in terms of east-west collaboration and paired-up assistance.

Ninth, we will strengthen environmental protection and strive to become a model zone for building a Beautiful China.

Lucid waters and lush mountains are invaluable assets. We will build Beijing into a hub for green and low-carbon development, so as to embrace modernization featuring harmony between humanity and nature.

Continue the critical battle against pollution. We will step up efforts against air pollution by continuing to advance the “every microgram counts” initiative. We will strengthen the comprehensive control over volatile organic compounds (VOCs) and Nitrogen oxides (NOx), and improve the long-term mechanism for dust control. Joint prevention and control across regions and other effective measures will be adopted to further consolidate and expand gains in air quality improvement. Protection of the Miyun Reservoir will be strengthened. We will take more robust and comprehensive measures to improve key river basins, including the Yongding River and the Chaobai River. We will improve the sewage treatment capacity in both urban and rural areas, conduct cleaning and maintenance of drainage facilities of 10,000 kilometers, and encourage the utilization of recycled water. We will take prompt action to eliminate all black and malodorous water bodies and improve the water quality of those currently classified below Class V. Land pollution risk control will be strengthened.

Work actively and prudently toward the goals of reaching peak carbon emissions and carbon neutrality. A clean, low-carbon, safe and efficient energy system will be developed, and the share of renewable power will be increased by 0.5 percentage points. We will build more green buildings, advance the green transition in key industries, and boost green and low-carbon industries. We support the Beijing Green Exchange in hosting the national trading platform for China Certified Emission Reduction (CCER). We will promote green, low-carbon, and healthy consumption habits and lifestyles, urging our citizens to come together and create a green homeland which we all share.

Create an eco-city with lush greenery and clear water. We will see that all districts in Beijing meet the national forest city standards, and steadily elevate the quality of forest and grasslands. Efforts will be made to build Beijing into a garden city. We will expand the greenery in gardens and plant diverse flora to add vibrant hues. We will promote vertical planting, add an additional 150 kilometers of city greenways, and fully connect the Second Ring greenways. We will construct an additional 20 parks that seamlessly blend with their surroundings, while also promoting the creation of vibrant and flower-filled neighborhoods, communities, and workplaces. This will bring our people closer to rivers, lakes, vegetation and flowering plants, and increase their proximity to natural scenery.

Tenth, we will prioritize and intensify our efforts to ensure and increase the wellbeing of our citizens, fulfilling their aspirations for a better life.

We will improve the people’s wellbeing through better social services in seven aspects and meeting public expectations for a better life in five areas, and actively respond to public concerns. We will increase government spending to deliver on 34 practical concerns of our people with priorities given to the dependent elders and toddlers.

Promote high-quality and full employment. We will implement proactive employment policies, stabilize and expand employment, and create no fewer than 260,000 urban jobs. We will actively promote youth employment, including college graduates, and provide assistance to 120,000 urban individuals facing challenges in finding employment. We will extend employee insurance coverage to include an additional 40,000 farmer workers. We will help individuals with disabilities to secure job opportunities. Our aim is to help more people make use of their skills and abilities, and receive fair compensation for their work. We will strive to increase the incomes of both urban and rural residents and expand the middle-income group.

Advance the Healthy Beijing initiative. We will expand the joint reform of medical services, medical insurance, and the pharmaceutical sector, and promote quality-oriented development of public hospitals. Nine tightly-knit hospital networks will be formed to improve primary-level diagnosis and treatment and the training of general practitioners. We will upgrade pediatric services and build a robust team of professionals, thus ensuring that all comprehensive hospitals rated above Grade II provide pediatric outpatient care. We will build Beijing into a national medical research center, and implement a major project to revitalize traditional Chinese medicine. With the results of 180 test items and 300 examination items mutually recognized among hospitals, hospital experience for patients will become more convenient. Efforts will be accelerated to build a municipal health information platform. We will improve the management of prescriptions for chronic diseases by allowing the authorization of prescriptions for up to three months’ supply of medications at a time. Efforts will be made to refine support policies on childbirth, accelerate work on the public-interest nursery care system, and add 10,000 nursery slots. We will launch extensive public fitness initiatives and host major sports events of various types to high standards.

Improve the eldercare service system. We will expand the silver economy, establish more eldercare service centers in sub-districts and townships, optimize the functions of community-based eldercare service stations, and put in place a comprehensive home-based eldercare service network. We will provide support to households facing financial difficulties in renovating their homes to accommodate the needs of senior citizens. We will ensure that affordable nursing care services are available to elderly individuals with physical and mental challenges. We will facilitate the adaptation of 2,000 beds for home-based eldercare, establish 240 elderly-care sites in rural neighborhoods, and set up 300 meal service stations specifically catering to the needs of the elderly. We will see that caregivers in the eldercare industry deliver more professional services. These initiatives aim to ensure a dignified and comfortable life for the elderly.

Build a new development model for the real estate market. We will improve the housing system that encourages both renting and purchasing, offer support to first-home buyers and those seeking to improve their housing conditions, and help resolve the housing problems of new urban residents and young people. A total of 70,000 units of rental housing for low-income groups will be made available, and 80,000 units of government-subsidized housing will be delivered. Regulatory systems over the property market will be adjusted as appropriate and regulations on the home rental market will be strengthened to ensure stable and sound development of the real estate market.  

Build a solid social safety net. We will continue to promote the private pension scheme, adjust the list of medicines covered by the medical-insurance system, and advance the sustainable development of the supplementary health insurance program. We will upgrade the multi-tiered and categorized social assistance system, increase social security benefits, provide regular assistance to low-income groups, and facilitate the resettlement and re-employment of veterans. Beijing will strive to become a national model city for barrier-free environment, with plans to build another 50 service centers for people with disabilities. We will speed up efforts to become a child-friendly city as we are committed to protecting the lawful rights and interests of women and children.

Eleventh, we will accelerate the establishment of an overall safety and emergency response framework to ensure security and stability of the capital.

We will pursue a holistic approach to national security, build a strong line of defense to ensure security in the city, and promote high-quality development with high-level security.

Advance all-round post-disaster recovery and reconstruction. We will act quickly to complete the reconstruction of damaged homes and repair of damaged facilities. We will construct major water conservancy projects, keep flood control channels clear, and restore the city’s flood prevention capacity to the pre-disaster level and further upgrade it before flood season. We will expand flood control systems in the Beijing-Tianjin-Hebei region to bolster the flood-prevention capacity of the river basins. We will upgrade the road infrastructure in mountainous areas by improving road quality, increasing road density, and raising flood resistance standards. Three east-west and three north-south arterial roads will be built in the western mountainous areas. We will work to restore agricultural production, resume rural homestays and other rural industries, and upgrade tourism in the mountainous regions. We will strengthen the infrastructure in villages and towns to improve the delivery of services in energy supply, telecommunications, sanitation, and emergency response. We will improve the geographical spread of education, healthcare, eldercare, and other public services in areas affected by flooding.

Redouble efforts to make Beijing a more resilient city. We will increase our capacity for meteorological and geological monitoring and strengthen our preparedness for extreme weather conditions, including rainstorms, snowstorms, heatwaves, and cold spells. We will intensify efforts to forestall risks in subway operation and other key sectors, and rehabilitate 1,100 kilometers of aging pipelines for gas and heating. A special plan to transform Beijing into a resilient city will be developed. We will improve diversification in public facilities, and coordinate their centralized and distributed layout. Emergency response capabilities at the grassroots level will be strengthened. Our goal is to enhance the city’s ability to effectively respond to, adapt to, and swiftly recover from major risks and disasters, making Beijing safer in all respects.

Enforce strict standards for workplace safety and fire safety. We will prioritize prevention and see that all responsibilities for workplace safety are fully assumed. Problems reflected in major accidents will be rectified and preventive measures will be adopted. We will implement a three-year action plan to eliminate workplace and fire hazards, with special rectification campaigns launched in critical areas such as hot work on construction sites, gas safety in urban areas, battery charging, tourist facilities, and warehouses. Priority will be given to identifying and removing fire hazards in high-risk areas and key sectors. We will make better use of the Qi’an’an information system, provide frontline workers with training sessions and drills, and take resolute measures to prevent and curb serious and major accidents and those with a negative impact on society.

Better ensure safety and security in Beijing. We will fully implement the responsibility system for firmly establishing socialist values and principles, and safeguard the political security of the capital. Coordinated efforts will be made to ward off and defuse risks in local government debt and in key enterprise groups and areas. We will tighten whole-process supervision over food and drug safety. We will continue to apply the “Fengqiao model” for promoting community-level governance and build on it in the new era, provide law-based responses to public complaints and increase our capacity to avert and resolve social problems and public complaints. More “safe offices”, “safe hospitals” and “safe schools” will be created. We will take resolute action against illegal and criminal activities of all types to safeguard social stability and public safety in Beijing.

We will follow through on the Party’s policies and guidelines on ethnic and religious affairs, advance ethnic unity and progress with the goal of reinforcing the sense of the Chinese nation as one community. We will remain committed to the principle that religions in China must be Chinese in orientation, and deliver solid performance in our work on religious affairs in the new era. We will modernize the capital’s national defense mobilization, support national defense and military development, and extend military-civilian integration. Our districts are committed to being recognized as national-level models for promoting mutual support and collaboration between the military and civilian sectors in the upcoming evaluation. We will make continued progress in strengthening the unity between the military and the government, as well as between the military and the civilian population.



Fellow Deputies,

As we take on new tasks under new circumstances, it is crucial to strengthen government self-improvement even further. Bearing in mind the expectations placed upon us, we must stay true to our original aspiration and build a law-based, innovation-driven, service-oriented, and ethical government that meets people’s expectations.

Strengthen political commitment. We should gain a deeper understanding of the decisive significance of Comrade Xi Jinping’s core position on the Party Central Committee and in the Party as a whole and of the guiding role of Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, and strengthen our understanding of the need to maintain political integrity, think in terms of the broader picture, follow the leadership core, and keep in alignment with the central Party leadership. We should maintain our confidence in the path, theory, system, and culture of socialism with Chinese characteristics. We should uphold Comrade Xi Jinping’s core position on the Party Central Committee and in the Party as a whole and uphold the Central Committee’s authority and its centralized, unified leadership. Gains made in the theoretical study programs will be consolidated and expanded. We will rectify problems exposed in the inspections of the central inspection group and the central environmental protection inspection team, as well as by economic responsibility audits, and deliver solid outcomes in implementing the CPC Central Committee’s decisions and plans.

Advance the rule of law. We in the government, in compliance with the law, must subject ourselves to the oversight of Beijing Municipal People’s Congress and its standing committee, and readily submit to the democratic oversight of the CPPCC Beijing Municipal Committee. We will handle with careful attention motions and recommendations raised by deputies to Beijing Municipal People’s Congress and proposals made by CPPCC Beijing Municipal Committee members. We will capitalize in full on the advisory role of government counselors and members of the institute for culture and history. We are committed to upholding high standards in our participation in the national campaign to select the third group of exemplary law-based governments. We will work to advance legislation in key and emerging areas and ensure that law enforcement is strict and procedure-based. We will carry out extensive activities to raise public awareness of the law and foster a culture of rule of law at the primary level of administration.

Improve government performance. We will press forward with the institutional reform of the government, and speed up the transformation of government functions. We will enhance our work through direct engagement with people at the primary level, including spreading the Party’s guidelines, principles, and policies to them, conducting on-site investigations and research, addressing public complaints at their doorsteps and fulfilling our duty on the ground. We must always heed the call of the people, resolve their difficulties, and respond to their concerns. The performance assessment of the government will be carried out based on quantified criteria, with a focus on managing processes and achieving results. We will improve the mechanisms for offering incentives and imposing sanctions to ensure that officials are rewarded and punished as appropriate, and are motivated to deliver excellent performance in their work.

Keep improving official conduct. We in the government must have a correct understanding of what it means to perform well, and ensure that governments at every level make implementation of policies the focus of their work. We will earnestly implement the decisions adopted at the Third Plenary Session of the 20th CPC Central Commission for Discipline Inspection, continue to advance full and rigorous Party self-governance, and act in strict accordance with the central Party leadership’s eight-point decision on conduct. Guarding against pointless formalities and bureaucratism, we will further reduce burdens on officials working at the grassroots. The government will continue to tighten its belt by cutting general expenditures. Oversight based on audits and statistics, and supervision over fiscal and accounting operations, will be reinforced. We will strengthen the education, management, and supervision of officials to ensure their political integrity and that they have no opportunity, audacity or desire to be corrupt.



Fellow Deputies,

As we embark on this new journey, it is essential that we work together with unity and determination to create a remarkable new chapter. Let us unite more closely around the CPC Central Committee with Comrade Xi Jinping at its core, and under the guidance of Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era. We will follow the strong leadership of the CPC Beijing Municipal Committee, forge ahead with confidence, and intensify efforts to promote high-quality development, so as to make our contribution to advancing Chinese modernization.



注释：

[1]The "four centers" refers to the national political center, cultural center, center for international exchanges, and center for scientific discovery and technological innovation.

[2]The "four services" refers to services for the central authorities, for international exchanges, for science, technology and education, and for the betterment of people's lives.

[3]The "Five Key Initiatives" refers to building Beijing into an international center for innovation; making progress in building the "two zones"; developing the digital economy; stimulating and creating new demand through supply-side structural reform; and making greater headway with Beijing-Tianjin-Hebei coordinated development through relocation of functions non-essential to the role of the capital.

[4]The "Three Schools and One Hospital" turn-key projects refer to infrastructure projects financed and built by Beijing in Xiong'an New Area, including a kindergarten, a primary school, a secondary school and a general hospital. Upon completion, the facilities will be transferred to the jurisdiction of Xiong'an New Area, and managed by Beijing's top-tier education and medical groups as commissioned by the Xiong'an authorities.

[5]They refer to Zhongguancun Science City, Huairou Science City, Beijing Future Science Park and the Demonstration Area for Innovation-based Industrial Clusters. They serve as pivotal platforms for building Beijing into an international innovation center.

[6]"All-in-One-Go" means services are easily accessed on one website or at one service window, by filling in one form, and contacting one government representative all in a single visit.

[7]The "three cultural belts" refers to the Grand Canal Cultural Belt, the Great Wall Cultural Belt, and the Western Hill-Yongding River Cultural Belt.

[8]The park is built on the remains of the ancient government seat of Luxian County in West Han Dynasty, now part of Tongzhou District.

[9]The "three hills and five gardens" refers to a group of historical and cultural heritage sites in the northwest suburbs of Beijing, represented by imperial gardens of the Qing Dynasty (1644-1911).

[10]This refers to a principle stipulated by China's law on production safety, clarifying the safety production responsibilities of relevant parties. It mandates that government departments responsible for industry regulation must oversee safety production work within their respective sectors and fields. At the same time, enterprise decision-makers and managers in charge of business development must oversee safety, and those responsible for production and operations must also oversee safety.

[11]The "six industrial chains and five industrial clusters" refers to priority areas for collaborative innovation and industrial cooperation of Beijing, Tianjin and Hebei. The six key industrial chains include hydrogen energy, biomedicine, cyber security and industrial internet, high-end machine tools, new energy vehicles and intelligent connected vehicles, and robotics. The five industrial clusters include integrated circuits, cyber security, biomedicine, electrical equipment, and safety and emergency equipment.

[12]The "New Smart Manufacturing 100" project refers to creating 10 leading "smart factories" with an output value of over 10 billion yuan, building 100 "intelligent factories", promoting the intelligent transformation of 1,000 manufacturing enterprises above a designated size, developing trillion-yuan intelligent manufacturing industrial clusters, cultivating 10 system solution providers for smart manufacturing with a revenue of over two billion yuan, and fostering 30 single-product champions in smart manufacturing.

[13]The "two zones" refers to the Integrated National Demonstration Zone for Opening up the Services Sector and the China (Beijing) Pilot Free Trade Zone.

[14]The "Jingce" refers to a platform offering the public and businesses easy access to policy information and services.

[15]The "300 key municipal-level projects" refers to projects that are key to or weak links of Beijing's social and economic development, including 100 infrastructure projects, 100 projects to better people's lives, and 100 projects in high-end, precision and cutting-edge industries.

[16]This is a long-term initiative for controlling Beijing's air pollution.

[17]The seven aspects are childcare, education, employment, medical services, elderly care, housing and social assistance. In this context, a better life means one that is convenient and comfortable, with more choices, in a fair and safe society